
      
         
            
            
            AN Epitome of Froſſard: OR, A Summarie Collection of the moſt memorable Histories contained in his Chronicle, chiefly concerning the State of England and France.
            
            
               Wherin the famous Warres and Conqueſts of king Edward the third, with the honorable atchieuements of the Blacke Prince, and other his ſonnes, both in Fraunce, Spaine, and Portugall, are compendiouſly deſcribed.
            
            Entermixed with other hiſtoricall occurrents of thoſe times, very worthy, and profitable to be had in remembrance.
            
               Compiled in Latine by Iohn Sleydane, and tranſlated into Engliſh, By P. Golding.
            
            AT LONDON, ❧ Printed by Tho: Purfoot, for Per: Golding. 1608.
            ¶ Cum Priuilegio.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            An Epitome of Froſsard. OR, A ſummarie collection of the most memorable hiſtories contained in his Chronicle, chiefly concerning the state of England and Fraunce.
            
            
               The first Booke.
               
                  
                     PHillip, ſurnamed the faire, King of Fraunce, had three Sonnes, Lewis, Phillip, and Charles, and one daughter. The two eldeſt ſucceeding one another, and deceaſing without iſſue, left the kingdome by deſcent to their brother Charles. This Charles had a Sonne, but he dyed very young during the life of his Father. The daughter of Her name was Iſabell.
                   King Phillip and ſiſter to Charles, was married to Edward the ſecond King of England, who begat of her a Sonne named Edward, of whoſe moſt noble diſpoſition, ſtout courage, and princely vertues, honourable mention is made in many places of this worke.
               There is a ſaying in Homer, that Children for the moſt

part prooue, worſe then their parents, ſeldome any better, but in this King it fell out otherwiſe: For his father was a man of euill diſpoſition, much giuen to ryot and exceſſe, and greatly led by ſicophants and flatterers, of which ſort the principall were twoo Noble men of the houſe of the Spencers. Theſe ſo bewitched the Kings minde, that by their counſell and inſtigation hee put to death ſome twoo and twenty of the chiefeſt Barons of England, and not ſo contented, baniſhed alſo his Wife and her Son wholy out of the Realme. But the Queene at length, through the aſſiſtance of her faithfull friends beeing brought backe with her Sonne into England, not onlye exacted moſt ſeuere puniſhment vppon thoſe flatterers the Father and the Son, but further for diuers graue and weighty conſiderations, by authority of Parliament remooued her huſband from ruling the ſtate as a perſon vnfit for gouernment, and reſtrained him to ſafe cuſtodie. Which done, the worthy Prince Edward (a moſt vertuous Son of a moſt vitious Father) who before had liued in exile with his Mother, as is already declared, was crowned King of England at London by the name of Edward the Third, in the Sixteenth yeare of his age, and the yeare of our Lord 1326. He tooke to Wife 1326. 
                  Phillip the daughter of William Earle of Henault and Holland, whome he had formerly begun to fancy amongſt the reſt of her Siſters at ſuch time as he came with his mother as a baniſhed perſon out of England into Henault.
               
               But the Peeres of Fraunce after the death of King Charles, would in no wiſe admit his Siſter (matched to the King of England) to the ſucceſſion of the crowne, becauſe it was now of old receiued as a cuſtome in that country, not to leaue the charge of ſo great a Kingdome to bee mannaged by the diſcretion of women. Wherevppon they likewiſe renounced Edward the Third, her Sonne and Grand-childe to King Phillip as deſcending of the female line: and ſo with one conſent they gaue the ſcepter and ſoueraignty to Phillip of Valoys, couſen germain to King Phillip deceaſed.
               
                  
Vppon this occaſion enſued moſt cruell warres and bitter enmity, Edward the Third preſuming that he had more rightfull intereſt, and a better title to the kingdome of Fraunce, then Phillip of 
                     Ʋaloys.
               
               And to further this quarrell, it ſo fell out, that a certain Noble man of great account called Robert of Artoys, one 
                     Robert of Artoys commeth into England, and the occaſion of his cō
                     ming. who had been long of ſinguler reſpect and eſtimation with King Phillip, at length falling in his disfauor, was baniſhed the Court, and could be ſuffered to reſt in no place by reaſon of the kings diſpleaſure. This man after many wandrings, at laſt arriued in England where hee found quiet harbour and abiding: and being by the King entertained as a counſellor, ceaſed not by his perſwaſions to prouoke and ſtirre him vp to armes againſt the French King.
               King Edward purpoſing to warre vppon Phillip, ſollicited the frendſhippe of the Flemmings, at that time remaining ſcarce in due obedience of their Lord: whereof the French King hauing intelligence, by the helpe of the Earle of Flanders thē ſoiourning in his Court, he procured certain places of Flaunders to bee fortified, where the Engliſh men muſt of neceſſity paſſe when they ſhould come into Fraunce. The King of England ſent his forces againſt them and in a pitched field the Flemmings were ouer throwne and chaſed.
               And further for the better diſpatch of his affaires and to compaſſe the fauour of the Germaine Princes, the King of England came himſelfe to Antwerpe, where he entred into a league of amitie with the Dukes of Gelders, and Iuliers, the Archbiſhop of Colen, and diuers others. And that the Emperour ſhould take no offence thereat, it was concluded, the Duke of Iuliers ſhould be addreſſed vnto him in the name of the King of England and the reſt, to acquainte him with theſe proceedings. The Emperour was ſo farre from diſlike of the matter, that he alſo created the King of England Lievetenant Generall of the Romaine Empire.
               The chiefe cauſe why Lewis of Bauier the Emperour, ſo highly honoured the King of England, was for that he hoped

during the tumults of the warres, hee might happily take ſome opportunity to recouer againe the Citie of Cambray, which being indeed a Citie imperiall, was notwithſtanding with-holden from him by the French men.
               The French King in the meane while contracted a league with Dauid King of Scottes, who for the ſame purpoſe came with his Wife to Paris. Hee ſent alſo a power into Scotland to moleſt the Engliſh at home, that thereby their forces might be more weakened, and the King of Englands puiſſance abated.
               The King of England proceeding in his purpoſe, with the power of his confederates beſieged Cambray to recouer 
                     Cambray beſieged. it againe to the Empire. But the Citie was ſo well prouided both of munition and victuall, that hee attempted it in vaine: wherefore abandoning the ſiege, hee paſſed with his forces into Fraunce.
               
               Aſſoone as the Engliſh army was entred into Fraunce, the Earle of Henault, who of late ſucceeded in the roome of his deceaſed Father, and had been preſent at the ſiege of Cambray (as a matter of dutye in regard it concerned the Empire) refuſed now any longer to ſerue the King of England for feare of diſpleaſing the French King, becauſe hee thought that in this warre the King of England rather intended his own buſines then the affaires of the Empire.
               The French King at ſuch time as his enemies forces were aduanced againſt him, and that the armyes on both ſides ſtoode ready raunged in order of battell, albeit hee had a farre greater power then the King of England, (as hauing in his armye aboue an hundreth thouſand men,) yet notwithſtanding, partly perſwaded by his Lords, but principally terrifyed by the letters of Robert King of Sicill his neere kinſeman an excellent Aſtronomer, hee withdrew himſelfe and departed without giuing battell. And ſo the King of England returned into Braband, and the French King into his own Country, much diſpleaſed with himſelfe that he had refuſed to fight. The King of England ſhortly

after being well aſſured of the faithfulnes of his confederates, paſſed ouer into his own kingdome.
               About this time in the Citie of Gaunt, a certaine perſon of the baſer ſort named Jaques of Arteuill, purchaſed himſelfe ſuch eſtimation among the commons, that in continuance of time there was none able to withſtand his bold attempts, no not the Earle of Flaunders himſelfe. The King of England to procure the good will of the Flemmings, allyed this fellow vnto him, as one that might affoord him much helpe in his warres hereafter. Of this Iaques henceforth we ſhall often haue occaſion to make mention.
               The King of England before hee returned into his owne conntrey as is a little before declared, had obtained a grant of the Flemmings to ayde him in his warres, whereby himſelfe might not onely aſſayle his enemie with the greater force, but they alſo recouer their loſt towns, as Liſle, Tourney, and certaine others holden at that time by the French. But the Flemmings pretended great difficulty in the matter, before they would conclude this league with the Engliſh. For they had formerly couenanted with the French King, and bound themſelues vppon the forfeiture of twenty hundreth thouſand crownes, neuer to beare armes againſt the King of Fraunce, and theſe conditions were ratified by the Biſhop of Rome. Hereupon they perſwaded the King of England to take vpon him the armes and ſtile of the Realme of Fraunce, and in ſo doing they thought themſelues diſcharged of their oath. The King after much deliberation King Edward taketh vppon him the title of Fraunce.
                   condiſcended to their requeſts, and ſo the league was eſtabliſhed betweene them.
               The French King hauing intelligence of the matter, practiſed with the Flemmings by ſome friends of his, as it were in the name of the Pope, to forſake the King of England and adhere to him againe, adding large promiſes of great reward: all which notwithſtanding they refuſed, wherevppon preſently enſued the Popes thunderbolt. It made the Flemmings ſhrewdly affraid, but the King of England ſo encouraged

and hartened them by letters and meſſengers, that they brookt the matter with the better patience. Then beganne the warres to growe hot between the Flemmings and French men, and the King of Fraunce ſent his eldeſt Sonne as Generall, who with a puiſſant Armye marched through the country euen as farre as Henault.
               
               Whilſte William Earle of Henault for the eſtabliſhing of his affayres, trauailed firſt into England, and afterward to Lewis the Emperour, the French men in his abſence did meruaillouſly afflict his country by making continuall incurſions vpon it. But the Earle at his returne out of Germanie, hauing aſſociated himſelfe with the King of England, the Emperour, and diuers Princes of the Netherlands, rayſed a mighty power, and being alſo ayded by him, who in a manner had the hearts of the Flemmings at commaund, I meane Iaques of Artevile, enforced his enemies to retyre.
               So the Armyes on both ſides being prepared to fight, the Earle of Henault was very deſirous to come to the encounter: but the Duke of Braband was of another opinion, and with weightie reaſons diſſwaded him from hazarding the battaile till ſuch time as the King of England were returned, whome they accounted as Generall of this warre.
               Aſſoone as the French King vnderſtood the King of England was departed into his owne countrey, he gaue commaundement that a fleete of Shippes ſhould preſently bee rigged and put forth to Sea, to attend his comming backe, and then to aſſayle him with great violence, and bend all their forces to empeach his landing. But the King of England encountring them in his paſſage, put them valiantly to the worſe, and with fortunes fauourable aſſiſtance arriued ſafely in Flaunders.
               
               
                  Robert King of Sicill of whome wee haue formerly ſpoken, foreſeeing by the Art of Aſtrologie, that the kingdome of Fraunce ſhould ſuſtaine great dammage by the

                  Engliſh men, for the great affection he bare to that Realme, trauailed himſelfe to Auinion, and there made earneſt ſute to the Pope and Colledge of Cardinalls, that they would ſet an attonement betweene thoſe twoo puiſſant Princes. They promiſed to employ their endeuours, ſo the mindes of the kings were diſpoſed according.
               About this time the Brabanders, Flemmings, and Henowaies, entred into a moſt ſtrict league among themſelues, in ſuch ſort that if any of thoſe countryes ſhould happen to be moleſted with warre, or afflicted by any other meanes, the reſt were bound to ſuccour and aſſiſt them: And if any diſſention or variance chaunced, they ſhould arbitrate the matter among themſelues, or elſe if the caſe were ſuch that they could not decyde it, then it ſhould bee determined by the diſcretion of the King of England, into whoſe hands they were all ſworne to put the controuerſie and to abide by his arbitriment.
               The King of England aſſociated with the ayd of his confederates, beſieged Tourney with a ſtrong army. Many aſſaults 
                     Tournay beſieged. were giuen, but they preuailed not by reaſon of the valiant defence made by the Townſemen, who were furniſhed throughly aforehand, both with men and all thinges needefull to offend the enemye by commaundement from the French King, who was ptiuie to a great part of the deuiſes and conſultations among his enemies.
               During the ſiege before Tourney, the French King ſending certain companies into Scotland, erneſtly entreated the captains left there in Garriſon for the ſafty of their country by King Dauid, to make ſome invaſion vppon the Engliſh, that by this meanes his enemie might bee enforced to rayſe his ſiege and returne for the defence of his own country: promiſing moreouer that he would ſend them ſtore of ſouldiers whoſe ſeruice they might employ in that action. The Scots ſtoutly vndertaking the matter, wonne certain holdes and much endammaged their enemy.
               The French King in the meane while levied a great armye

to rayſe the ſiege before Tourney. There came to his ayde Charles King of Boheme, the Dukes of Burgoine, Britaine, Burbon, and Loraine, the Earles of Bar, Sauoy, Geneua, Alauſon, and Flaunders. And beſides theſe, the kings of Nauarre, and Scotland, the one as confederate, the other as feudarie to the crowne of Fraunce.
               
               That the Earle of Flaunders followed the French King as we haue declared, whilſte the Flemmings tooke part with the Engliſh, let it not ſeeme ſtraunge to any, for thus ſtandeth the caſe. This Iaques of Arteuill whome we ſpake of before, was become ſo popular and growne to ſuch authoritie amongſt the commons, that the Earle himſelfe could finde no ſafe abyding in his own country, but was conſtrained for that cauſe to commit himſelfe to the protection of the French King.
               The ſiege of Tourney continued ſome three moneths, A truce taken for twelue moneths. during which ſpace Iane oſ 
                     Ʋaloys the French kings ſiſter, and mother to the Earle of Henault, laboured very earneſtly to procure a compoſition. At length ſhee obtained thus much, that a day was appointed for a meeting to be had betweene the Lords of Fraunce and England, where they agreed vpon a truce for twelue months ſpace, with condition that each party ſhould hold whatſoeuer he had gotten by battell. Herevppon the armies were both diſmiſſed. And this further was concluded, that at a certain time prefixed within the yeare, another treatie ſhould be had at Arras, where commiſſioners from both Princes, and from Pope Clement ſhould meete together, and this likewiſe was performed. There the Engliſh men demaunded much, and the French men profered nothing, ſaue the Earledome of Ponthiew, which was giuen before in dowrie to King Edwards mother, when ſhee married into England. More Prolonged for twelue moneths more. then thus was nothing done in this treaty, onely another yeere added to the truce, and the King of England returned into his Country.
               When things were thus ſet at a ſtay, and that the Duke

of Britaine prepared to returne into his owne country, he The occaſion of the warres in Britaine.
                   was ſeiſed vppon in his iourney by a moſt violent ſicknes, whereof in ſhort ſpace he dyed, leauing behind no lawfull iſſue male to ſucceed him. He had two brothers, of whome the one which was Earle of Mountfort, was his brother onely by the fathers ſide, the other both by father and mother, but he died before him leauing iſſue one only daughter, whome the Duke of Britaine in his life time ioyned in marriage to Charles of Bloys ſiſters Son to Phillip the French Charles of Bloys. King. For the Duke fearing it might ſo fall out, that after his deceaſe his brother the Earle of Mountfort would ſeiſe the ſeigniory of Britaine into his owne handes, and by that meanes diſpoſſeſſe, and as it were diſinherite the lawfull daughter of his brother by the whole bloud, thought good to prouide a ſtay for the Lady by marriage, and therefore his deſire was the rather to match her to the kings nephew, becauſe if the other ſhould make any attēpt hereafter, he might the eaſilier be reſiſted. And ſo it came to paſſe. For the Earle of Mountfort had no ſooner vnderſtanding of his brothers death, but that partly by force, & partly by cō
                  poſition he poſſeſſed himſelfe of the greater part of Britane. And then the better to ſupporte his cauſe and ſtabliſh his eſtate, he went ouer to the King of England, where relating the whole diſcourſe of his proceedings, he receiued from him the inueſtiture of his dukedome. And the King of England conſidering that by this meanes he might haue a ready paſſage through Britaine into Fraunce, promiſed both his councell and furtherance to the newe Duke againſt his enemie, whether it were the French King or any other whoſoeuer. For he had loſt the French kings fauor before, euer ſince he brought in the Germaines to ſerue in his warres, vppon whome he had ſpent ſuch a huge maſſe of money, withou
                     •
                   accompliſhing any notable enterpriſe. And this is the true cauſe and originall ground of this warre.
               
                  Charles of Bloys being aduertiſed of the proceedings and

enterpriſes of Mountfort, made great complaint of him to the French King. After conſultation had, the King commaunded that the Earle ſhould be ſummoned to the Parliament of Paris. The Earle came, and after ſome debatings on both ſides, he was enioyned by the King not to depart the Citie for a certaine ſeaſon. Neuertheleſſe he conueyed himſelfe ſecretly away, and ſo ſentence was giuen with Charles. It was a great blot in Mountforts caſe that he had been inueſted in his Duchie by the King of England. And thervppon the French King denouncing Charles to be rightfull heyre, encouraged him with his own mouth to recouer by force of armes the ſeigniorie due vnto him both by iudgement of law and right of inheritance: promiſing not only his owne ayde, but procuring other Lords alſo to aſſiſt him in the maintenance of his rightful quarrell. The warre was vndertaken (in the behalfe of Charles) with the power of the Peeres of Fraunce his friendly aſſiſtants. Beſides other, at length the Citie of Nants (the principall in thoſe partes) was forced by aſſault. There Mountfort himſelfe was taken priſoner, and from thence conueyed to Paris to the King, by whoſe commaundement being caſt in priſon, he there ended his life. His Lady in the meane time bearing her fortune with a true manlike reſolution, encouraged the fainting hearts of her people, and both fortified with Garriſons and furniſhed with victuals; the reſt of the holdes yet vntaken by the enemie.
               Vppon concluſion of the truce between the kings of England and Fraunce, and diſſoluing the ſiege before Tournay, the King of England returning home, perceiued what great annoyance the Scottes had wrought to his country in the meane while: wherevppon he aſſembled an Armie. The Scottes being preſſed with great extremitie in the abſence of the King, purchaſed a truce of the Engliſh vppon condition, that if within foure moneths ſpace the King did not prouide for the reſcue, they ſhould yeeld. This was ſignified to the King of Scottes, who therevppon returned,

and being ayded with forraine power, wonne certaine holdes from the Engliſh. Amongſt other the Citie 
                     Durham take & ſacked by the Scottiſh. of Durham was one, where no mercy was ſhewen to no ſex, age, nor order whatſoeuer, but the very churches and all were conſumed with fire. Afterward perceiuing that by further proſecutiug his enterpriſe, he did but loſe his labour, and vnderſtanding moreouer that the King of England approached with a mightie power, vppon deliberation with his counſell, he retired: In the meane while miniſtring proffers of a truce which notwithſtanding he had no intention to admitte till he had firſt taken aduiſe of the French King with whome he was formerly confederate.
               The Lordes of Fraunce departing out of Britaine for no other reſpect but becauſe the winter whether compelled them, returned againe with their forces in the beginning 1342. of Sommer, purpoſing to bring the reſt of that Duchy in ſubiection. Whereof the Lady of Mountfort being aduertiſed, ſhee ſent ambaſſadours to the King of England, requiring ayde vppon this condition, that her Son whome ſhee had borne by the Earle of Mountfort, ſhould take to wife ſome one of the kings daughters. But the ſuccours which he ſent for, the ſpace of well nere twoo moneths together were toſt vppon the Seas with ſtormes and contrarie windes, in ſuch ſort as they could by no meanes attaine to their deſired porte, ſo that in the meane ſeaſon certaine places were recoured by the French men. But it is admirable to relate with what courrage and ſtowtneſſe the Lady Mountfort demeaned her ſelfe: Fot ſhee was not only content to fortifie ſtronge holdes, and encourage her followers The gallant carriage and warlike behauiour of the Lady Mountfort.
                   with comfortable ſpeeches, but ſhee alſo put on armor herſelfe, and attended with a troupe of horſe, came into the open field and prouoked her enemie. Moreouer being beſieged in a certaine Caſtle and put to great diſtreſſe, when for the moſt part all that were about her perſwaded to yeeld, ſhee alone (amongſt men) perſiſted in opinion to the contrarie, and with this reſolution held it

out ſo long till at laſt the Engliſh forces which had wandred a great while vppon the Seas, arriued to her reſcue.
               A certaine French captaine called Lewis of Spaine, tooke the Citie of Dinant in Britaine by compoſition, the Citizens hauing ſlaine their gouernour in the market place, becauſe he refuſed to yeeld it. Another Citie neere adioyning named Gerand, was taken by the ſame Captaine by force; where not ſo much as Children and little infants, nor the Temples conſecrated to Gods ſeruice, could eſcape the vttermoſt rigour of warre, but were all deſtroyed with fire and Sword. The Duke was much diſpleaſed with this impious cruelty, and worthylie cauſed the authors of ſuch wickedneſſe to be hanged. He alſo receiued the citie of 
                     Ʋannes vppon compoſition without conſent of the captaine, and many other places beſides. To be ſhort, diuerſe encounters paſſed both by Sea and Land with variable fortune on both ſides. A towne and Caſtle in thoſe partes called Hamibout, was aſſaulted with great violence, but defended with more valour, for therin at that time remayned the Ducheſſe of Britaine whome wee ſpake of before. The French men perceiuing they ſpent their time in vaine, and that Winter began to approach, perſwaded Charles of Bloys to diſmiſſe his Armie, and withall to take a truce, and place his ſouldiers in Garriſon. It was ſo done, and the Ducheſſe ſayled ouer to the King of England, who ſent an Armie into Britaine againſt the French men.
               About this time, the noble men of England counſelled their King to take a ſtedfaſt truce with the Scottes for three yeeres ſpace if it might be: ſhewing how great a burthen it would be to him to ſupporte ſo huge a charged of wars round about him, in Scotland on the one ſide, in Fraunce on the other. Herevppon Ambaſſadours were ſent to the Scottiſh King, but nothing could be effected, for he would determine vppon nothing without the French kings counſell. The King of England mooued therewithall, rayſed a

mightie power in purpoſe to bring the Scottes to vtter ſubuerſion. But in the meane time, by the mediation of good men a truce was obtained & ſtabliſhed. The Engliſh Armie which we ſpake of erewhile, met with the French kings fleete well appointed, vppon the coaſt of Britaine. There they encountred one another and continued in fight till within the euening. Somewhat before midnight there aroſe a very dangerous tempeſt, which ſcattered them in ſuch ſort, that they were ſeparated more then an hundreth miles aſunder. In this conflict alſo, the Counteſſe of Mountfort her ſelfe performed knightly ſeruice. At length the Engliſh men recouered a hauen not farre from the City of 
                     Ʋannes, at that time in poſſeſſion of the French men, where putting on land their forces, they valiantly approched the Citie. And in concluſion diuiding their army into three partes, with two of them they fiercely aſſaulted the town in two ſeuerall places in the night ſeaſon, and whilſte al men reſorted thither to make reſiſtance, they brought the reſt of their forces to a place vnfortified and ſo entred the 
                     Vannes wone by the Engliſh. towne, putting all that were in it eyther to the Sword or to flight.
               There were two French Lords which had the cuſtody of this towne, whome it full ſorely greeued to ſee the Citie thus taken. Therefore aſſembling ſuch forces as they could Recouered againe by the French. rayſe vppon the ſuddaine, they gaue a freſh aſſault to the towne and ſo ſurpriſed it agine from the enemy. In theſe conflicts Robert of Artoys admirall of the Engliſh fleete, and Generall of the warre, was wounded: who being conueyed to London for the cure of his hurts, in ſhort ſpace after there ended his life. Whereat the king of England conceiued The death of Robert of Artoys.
                   ſo great greefe and diſpleaſure, that of purpoſe to reuenge the death of ſo worthy a man, ſo deerely eſteemed, he himſelſe ſailed ouer with a mighty power of ſhipping into Britaine.
               
               So great was the number of the Engliſh forces, that at one inſtant they beſieged three of the moſt puiſſant Cities

in all that countrey Renes, Ʋannes, and Nants, where Charles of Bloys with his wife at the ſame time remained: beſides the towne of Dinant which they tooke by force.
               
                  Charles of Bloys wrote to the French King concerning the ſtate of his affaires, the arriuall of the Engliſh, the beſieging of his townes: earneſtly requiring that he would ſuccour him in this great diſtreſſe. The French King ſent 1343. his ſonne the Duke of Normandy: who with an Armie of ſome forty thouſand, tooke his way directly towardes 
                     Ʋannes at that time very ſtreytly beſieged by the Engliſh. And had not the winter ſeaſon brought great impediment to their purpoſe, it had ſurelie come to a field battell. But at length through the interceſſion of twoo Cardinals ſent from Pope Clement, a truce was agreed vppon for three yeares, and a ſolemne o the taken of the Princes for the due A truce for three yeares. obſeruation thereof in the meane ſpace. So the King of England returned into his owne countrey.
               Whilſte the warres were yet open, the Engliſhmen had laid ſiege to the Citie of 
                     Ʋannes latelie before recouered by the French: and it was ſtoutly defended by twoo noble men, the one called Lord Cliſſon, the other Henrie of Lyon. It was theſe mens fortune in a certaine light skirmiſh to be taken priſoners by the Engliſh: and becauſe there was a Lord of England alſo remaining among the French, vpon concluſion of the truce, communication was had for the exchange of priſoners. The King of England for the redeeming of his, deliuered to the French men the Lord Cliſſon, detayning the other ſtill priſoner. Herevppon as is moſt likely, ſome emulous obſeruers of Cliſſons cariage, rayſed a ſuſpition that he ſhould be ſecretly affected to the Engliſh, and that for this reſpect, he rather then the other obtained his libertie. To be ſhort, this iealouſie encreaſed ſo farre, that he loſt his head for it at Paris. And for the like cauſe diuers other noble men ſuffered the like puniſhment. Sure it was a lamentable ſpectacle, eſpecially conſidering that Cliſſon in the recouerie of 
                     Ʋannes
                  
from the Engliſh, had ſo honourablie performed the office both of an excellent Captaine and valiant ſouldier.
               This act of the French kings was taken in ſo ill part by the King of England (eſteeming it done in his reproch) that he commaunded Henrie of Lyon to be preſently ſet at libertie, and freely forgaue him his raunſome: onelie enioyning him at his returne to ſignifie to the French King, how he interpreted theſe proceedings no otherwiſe then as intended to his diſhonour, and that thereby he held the late truce to be violated: wherefore he ſhould expect no other from him but as an enemy. This meſſage was deliuered to the French King, and the King of England ſent an armie into Aquitane, with certaine other forces to ſuccour the Lady Mountfort.
               
               The Engliſhmen were entertained with great applauſe 
                     Bayon & Burdeaux receaue the Engliſh. at Bayon and Burdeaux. Afterward laying ſiege to Bergerat, a towne neere the riuer Gerond, they receiued the townſemen to mercy, the Engliſh Captaine taking their othe of fidelitie in the name of the King his Maſter. They tooke many other places alſo partly by compoſition, partlie by force of armes. Amongſt other they wonne the Caſtle of Auberoch, a place notably fortified, and leauing there a Garriſon to defend it, the Engliſh Captaine returned againe with the reſt of his army to Burdeaux. In the meane while the French men to the number of twelue thouſand, beſieged the ſame Caſtle againe verie ſtreytly and put the ſouldiers there in Garriſon to great diſtreſſe. But the Engliſh Captaine at Burdeaux hauing intelligence thereof, aſſembled ſome nine hundreth men, and in an euening, when the French men were to ſupperward, brake ſuddainelie out of a wood and charged ſo reſolutely vppon them, that he put them to diſcomfiture, and in the chace tooke diuers priſoners, their Captaine for one, being ſore wounded, whome the people in thoſe partes had in ſuch eſtimation, as if he had beene a Prince.
               As the Engliſh men lay in leaguer before a certaine Caſtle,

the ſouldiers put their Captaine in holde becauſe he refuſed to yeeld it vp to the enemy, and would by no meanes graunt his liberty, but vppon conſent to their requeſt. In the end he conſented, and afterward comming to Tholouſe, was there arrained of treaſon, and hanged vppon a gibbet for his labour. The towne of Rioll was likewiſe rendered into the Engliſhmens handes, but the Caſtle was ſtill maintained by the Captaine. The Engliſhmen therefore drew a mine, & ouerthrew a great part of it to the ground: then the captaine conſidering his imminent perill, abandoned the place and left the Caſtle to the Engliſh. They alſo receiued Angoleſme by compoſition, after a moneths reſpit which the townſemen had requeſted vppon hope to be releeued in the meane time by the French King.
               It is formerly tolde you of Iaques de Arteuill how he was growne ſo great among the Flemmings, that the Earle himſelfe could haue no ſafe recourſe into his own country. But at length hee receiued the iuſte reward of a ſeditious rebell. He had giuen great hope to the King of England, that hee would procure the whole countrey of Flaunders by generall conſent to accept him for their ſoueraigne. And for accompliſhment hereof the King of England with a well furniſhed nauie arriued in the hauen of Flaunders. The matter was propounded to the commons, and all for the moſt part ſeemed well affected to the King of England. But the Gauntoys tooke this practiſe in meruailous ill part, and when Iaques returned into the Citle, they entertained him nothing ſo kindly as they were wont, but beſetting the houſe where he was, brake open the dores vppon him, and ſlew him as he thought to haue eſcaped at a poſterne. Amongſt other Articles wherewith The death of Iaques de Arteuill.
                   they charged him, this alſo was a principall point, that he had priuately conueyed all the common treaſure ouer to the King of England. The Earle of Flaunders moreouer had but one onelie ſonne.
               About the ſame time, William Earle of Henault ſayling

with great aſſiſtance into Friſeland (pretending himſelfe to be rightfull Lord of that country) was himſelfe there ſlaine in battell with diuers of his nobilitie. After his death, Margaret Princeſſe of Henault and wife to Lewis of Bavier the Emperour, tooke poſſeſſion of this Earledome. The French King was very deſirous to draw vnto his partie one Sir Iohn of Henault, a worthy Gentleman and a gallant ſouldier, who had formerly done great ſeruice to the King of England. The matter was attempted by diuers meanes, and when no other would take effect, this deviſe was put in practiſe: to inſinuate into his conceit, that the King of England had a purpoſe to withdrawe from him, his penſions and yeerely entertainments. He gaue ſuch credit to this report, that forthwith he wholy eſtranged himſelfe from the King of England, and yeelded his ſeruice to the French King.
               When the French King vnderſtood that the Engliſhmen waſted Aquitaine, and had wonne many townes and fortreſſes there, he levied his forces, amounting to the number of an hundreth thouſand men. Ouer this armie he appointed his Sonne John Duke of Normandy to be Lievetenant Generall. To the French kings ayde came Odet Duke of Burgundy, with his Sonne Phillip Earle of Artoys and Boloine, both of them excellently well accompliſhed for the warr. They recouered the towne of Angoleſme, & laid ſiege to the caſtle of Aguillion, gotten before by the Engliſhmen vppon compoſition, then which there was not a ſtronger nor better fortified in thoſe quarters. The winning thereof was by ſundry meanes attempted. But it is Valiant reſiſtance made by the Engliſh in the Caſtle of Aguillion.
                   incredible to beleeue, with what courage and reſolution the Engliſhmen that laye there in Garriſon defended themſelues. The French King being aduertiſed thereof, and demaunded what his pleaſure was to be done in the matter, returned anſwere to his Sonne that he ſhould continue his ſiege till neceſſitie of hunger conſtrained them to yeeld.
               
                  
The King of England vnderſtanding in what diſtreſſe his men were, rayſed in continently a power of fourteen thouſand ſouldiers. He was accompained amongſt other with his Son Edward Prince of Wales, and a certain French Gentleman called Godfrey of Harecourt, who being expulſed his country by the French King, fled to the King of England for ſafegard of himſelfe, and reuenge of his iniuries: for the French King had ſeized vppon all his poſſeſſions. This Godfrey was the cauſe that the King of England directed his courſe into Normandy, being otherwiſe purpoſed to ſayle into Aquitaine. He diuided his Armie into three partes, whereof two raunged along the ſea coaſt, waſting the fields, ſacking diuers townes, and leading away their priſoners, leaſt afterward they might gather to a head and worke them ſome diſpleaſure. The third wherein was the King himſelfe, marched through the maine land, making hauocke of all things, and euery night they mette all together againe at the kings campe.
               The French King in the meane time cauſed ſuch an armie to be raiſed, as a more puiſſant had not beene ſeene in Fraunce of many yeeres. Letters were alſo addreſſed to the King of Bohemia for ayde, who at that time highly fauoured the French King. The Engliſhmen tooke a very rich towne in Normandy called Saint Lupes, and afterward haſtened to the ſiege of another much richer called Caē, borrowing that name of the riuer running by it. The townſmen were purpoſed to haue giuen battell to the Engliſhmen in the field: but being people vnexperienced in armes, at the firſt fight of the enemie, they fled backe again into the towne. The French captaines had betaken themſelues to their fortreſſes, but beholding the huge ſlaughter made in the Citie (for the Engliſhmen had taken it) they 
                     Caen in Normandy wōne by the Engliſh. yeelded. Amongſt other priſoners the Conſtable was one, whome with the reſt which were taken in his company, the King of England afterwards bought of him that took them for twentie thouſand crownes. The Engliſhmen

marching ſtill forward, paſſed ouer the riuer Seane towards Roane, and their light horſmen ſcoured the country euen vnto the Suburbes of Paris: where encountring the townſmen of Amience well appointed, poſting towardes Paris vppon commaundement from the King, becauſe of long time before they had been charged with no ſeruice for the warres, they let fiercely vpon them, and bereft them of their carriage.
               The French King in the meane while (notwithſtanding the Pariſians earneſt ſute to the contrary) departed from Paris to Saint Dennis, whither as then the reſt of the Peeres were aſſembled. From thence purſuing his enemie with a certaine vehement and wonderfull deſire to fight, he remoued to Amience. The King of England aſſayed to paſſe his armie ouer the riuer Some, but there was neither foord knowne, nor bridge poſſible to be taken, they were all ſo ſurely garded by the French men. At length after proclamation of enlargement and reward to any French priſoner that ſhould performe it, a certaine young man taken by chaunce, diſcouered a forde. The French men ſuſpecting they would paſſe ouer at the ſame place, oppoſed themſelues ſtrongly againſt them, and entertained them in the riuer with a ſharpe skirmiſh. Neuertheleſſe the Engliſhmen waded through and put them to flight. By this time The battell of Blanchetaque.
                   the French King was come to Abbevile, and the King of England wayted for him in the plaine fieldes, to giue him battell.
               When the time of battell approched, the King of England made his prayers to God to ſend him an happy victory, and diuided his wholy Armie into three parts. In the vauntgarde was his Sonne, in the reregard himſelfe. The The memorable battell and victory of King Edward at Creſſy.
                   fight was furious on both ſides, but at length the Engliſhmen obtained the victory, which may ſeem a wonder conſidering the huge multitude of their enemies. In this battell the King of England (who awaiting oportunitie, had not yet put himſelfe in preaſſe) being aduertiſed that his

Sonne fighting valiantly in the forefront, was wellnighe oppreſſed by the enemy, he made anſwere to the meſſengers in this ſort: Demaunde no helpe of me this day ſo long as my Son liueth: For I will that he now ſhewe ſome proofe of his valor, and that the honour of the victory be wholy his and theirs that are appointed to attend him. In this battell was ſlaine Henrie of Lutzenburge Father to Charles King of Bohemia, who although he were blinde, would needes adventure againſt the enemy notwithſtanding. Towards night the French King accompanied with very fewe, withdrewe himſelfe out of the field. The King of England cauſed the dead bodies of the French men to be numbred, and there were found ſlaine, eleven Princes, foureſcore Barons, twelue hundreth Knights, and about thirtie thowſand others. By commaundement from the King, all the noble men were buried in the villages neere adioyning, and three daies truce was graunted to giue buriall to their dead.
               After the King of England had obtained this notable victorie, he tooke his way directly towards Calice, and environning 
                     Calice beſieged. the towne with a ſtronge ſiege, there planted himſelfe, in purpoſe not to depart before he had conſtrained them to yeelde for famine. Meane while the French King ſent word to his Sonne the Duke of Normandy, lying ſtill at the ſiege of Aguillion, that he ſhould giue ouer his enterpriſe, and conuey his forces againe into Fraunce, to withſtand the Engliſh men who ſubdued all things before them as they paſſed. Before this aduertiſement came to the Army, there was another battell fought betweene the French and the Engliſh: wherein was preſent Phillip ſon to the Duke of Burgundy, who falling with his horſe ſoone after departed this life. During the ſiege of Aguillion (wherof an Engliſh Baron was captaine) the Earle of Derbie whome the King of England had before ſent into Aquitaine, remayning at Burdeaux. Aſſoone as he vnderſtood that the ſiege was rayſed and the Duke of Normandy departed,

he aſſembled to the number of ſix thouſand men, and raunging through a great part of the countrie thereabouts, at length tooke Poitiers by aſſault, and then returning againe to Burdeaux, diſmiſſed his ſouldiers, leauing no Garriſon in Poitiers, becauſe the towne was vtterlie raced.
               Whilſte the King of England was buſied about the ſiege of Calice, David King of Scottes (partly of his owne motion, partly by procurement of the French King) perſwading himſelfe that all the ſouldiers of England or at leaſtwiſe the greater part were gone a warfare with their King, aſſembled his forces to the number of fortie thouſand or there about, and invaded England. The Queene of England in the mean time behaved her ſelfe with great courage and diſcretion, conſulting with the Lords and Prelates of her Real me, about the direction of her affaires. So an armie was levied vpon the ſuddaine, and the enemie fiercely encountred certaine Archbiſhops and Biſhops of England being preſent in the conflict: whoſe power notwithſtanding it were ſarre inferiour in number to the Scottes, yet they obtained the victorie. In this battell the Scottiſh King himſelfe with many others, were taken priſoners. 
                     David King of Scottes taken priſoner. The number of them that were ſlaine, amounted to fifteene thouſand, the reſt ſaued themſelues by flight. After the accompliſhment of this honourable victorie, the Queene of England croſſed the ſeas and went to viſite the King her huſband.
               In the battell before mentioned, amongſt others was alſo The battell of Creſsy.
                   ſlaine the Earle of Flaunders, who by reaſon of the rebelliu of Iaques de Artevill, was compelled to put himſelfe into the French Kings protection. He left a Sonne named Lewis at that time about fifteene yeeres of age. Now the King of England was in great expectation, that through the politicke aſſiſtance▪ of Iaques de Artevill, he ſhould haue brought the Flemminges to receiue him for their ſoveraigne, and that his Sonne the Prince of Wales
                  
with their generall acceptance, ſhould haue obtained the Lordſhip of all Flaunders. But the author of ſo wicked a deuiſe was ſlaine as is already declared: for the Flemmings would not diſinherit the Son of their Lord, though they loued not his Father. The King of England therefore began to treate of a marriage betweene the young Earle, who was then remaining in the French Court (for he fled thither with his Father at ſuch time as the ſtate grew troubleſome in Flaunders) and a daughter of his named Iſabell. Againſt this match the Duke of Braband oppoſed himſelf, for he alſo had a daughter at the ſame time whom he deſired to match with the young Earle. Meanes were found by the Flemminges to conuey the Earle from the French King, and he returned into Flaunders in hope to recouer his Fathers poſſeſſion. The King of England in the meane while was nothing ſlacke in ſoliciting his ſute with the Lordes of Flaunders. By them the matter was mooued and the match profered to young Lewis. But he vtterly refuſed it, proteſting that he would neuer marrie the daughter of him that had ſlaine his Father. When the counſellors of Flaunders ſawe him ſo reſolute in this opinion and that he would giue them none other anſwere, they committed him to ſafe cuſtody, and would graunt no enlargement, but vppon condition that he ſhould be ruled by the aduiſe of his elders. So at length he was perſwaded, and the King of England with the Earles wife that ſhould be, the Lordes of Flaunders, and himſelfe, mette together at a day appointed. There the matter was debated, the Earle conſented, was forthwith contracted, and after returned into Flaunders, where he was nothing ſo ſtraightly lookt vnto as he had beene. A little before the nuptialls ſhould be ſolemnized, he tooke occaſion accompanied with a ſmall traine, to ride a hawking, where pretending great earneſtneſſe in following a Faulcon, which he had let flye at the heron, by little and little he outſtripped the reſt of his companie, till at laſt he loſt ſight of them all, and ſo

eſcaped againe to the French King.
               Whilſte the King of England beſieged Calice, the truce which we told you was concluded by certaine Cardinals between Charles of Bloys and the Counteſſe of Mountfort expired, by occaſion where of the warres were renewed againe afreſh. The King of England ſent a competent crew of horſemen out of the army which beſieged Calice, to ſuccour the Lady Mountfort. Certaine Engliſhmen were ſtraightly environed by Charles of Bloys in a towne & caſtle which they had taken immediatly before: But certain other Engliſhmen ſent ſuddainly from the Counteſſe in the dawning of the day, brake vnlookt for into the campe of the French men (who by reaſon of a little good fortune in a certaine skirmiſh the day before, lookt negligently to their watch) and putting a great part of them to the ſword, 
                     Charles of Bloys taken priſoner. tooke alſo the Lord Charles of Bloys himſelfe priſoner.
               In the meane time the King of England preſted the town of Calice with great vehemency, and the French King intending to raiſe his ſiege, levied a mighty army. Whereof the King of England hauing aduertiſement, ſo fortified all places, by which the French men might haue any acceſſe as well by the ſea coaſt as the maine land, that they could not poſſibly make any approche to diſturbe him. The French King ſeeing all entrance already forecloſed, required the King of England to giue him battell. But the King of England conſidering how he had ſpent welnigh a whole yeere in the ſiege of this Citie, and withall conſumed a great treaſure about it, thought it good policy to hold his advantage. The ſame time alſo two Cardinals ſent from Pope Clement to endeuour an accord betweene the Princes, had three dayes communication with the Lords that were appointed Commiſſioners from both parties, but could effect nothing of their purpoſe. Wherevppon the French King preſently after diſſolued all his great army. The Cal ſians ſeeing themſelues depriued both of preſent ayde and future expectatiō, began to parly of giuing vp the town. But

the King of England would accept no other condition but one, which was to put themſelues, life, and goods abſolutelie into his power, and to remaine wholy at his diſpoſition. His counſell earneſtly diſſwading him from this obſtinate reſolution, as a thing tending to very ill example, at length the matter was brought to this iſſue: that ſix of the principall citizens, bareheaded and barefooted, with halters about their necks, and the keies of the towne in their hands, ſhould preſent themſelues before him to be diſpoſed of at his pleaſure. The report of thoſe tydings, ſuddainly mooued great mourning and lamentation in the citie. In which ſorrowfull confuſion, when one not of the meaner ranke had proteſted openly that he would not ſhunne death in the behalfe of his country, now almoſt pined with hunger, his example ſoone after drewe fiue more to the like affection.
               Theſe men being publikely brought forth in ſuch manner as he appointed who had now iuriſdiction over their liues, and by his commaundement adiudged to dye: when all the Noble men had made interceſſion in vaine, the 
                     Calice yeelded to King Edward.
                   Queene at length after many reaſons alledged for her purpoſe, with much entreatie obtained their pardon. Then were ſome ſent to take poſſeſſion of the towne, and by authority from the King all the old Inhabitants were removed, and the Citie new peopled with Engliſh. After this, by meanes of a certaine Cardinall, a truce was taken for two yeares.
               The King of England entruſted the gouernment of Calice to a certaine Italian. Not long after, a French Lord that laye in Garriſon at Saint Omers, knowing the nature of the Italians to be aboue all other people couetous of golde, practiſed priuately with this fellow, to ſell him the Caſtle for twenty thouſand Crownes. The King of England, I know not by what meanes, hauing intelligence hereof, diſſembled his knowledge, and ſending for the Italian, examined him of the matter. Who ſeeing no other remedy

confeſſed the truth, and beſought him of pardon. The King graunted, and at his departure gaue him in charge to proceede with his proiect. A day before this practiſe ſhould be put in execution, the King himſelfe ſtrongly guarded, as couertly as might be entered into Calice. The french man who had payd his money down, and knew nothing that the plot was diſcouered, ſent his men of armes before to take the Caſtle. Aſſoone as they came in, not ſuſpecting any ſuch matter, they were preſently attached and made priſoners to the Engliſh. Then in the dawning of the day the King of England iſſuing out of the Citie, charged ſuddainly vppon the reſt of the French men which houered thereabout to ſee the ſucceſſe of their enterpriſe, and put them to flight, taking many priſoners, and amongſt others the ſame perſon that was the firſt contriuer of this treaſon.
               About this time King Phillip of 
                     Ʋalois married another wife, the daughter of Phillip King of Navarre: and almoſt at the ſame inſtant Iohn his eldeſt Son tooke to wife I
                        •
                     aue Ducheſſe of Boloine, late wife to the Duke of Burgundies Sonne, the ſame that at the ſiege of Aguillion ended his life, in the yeere of our Lord 1346. 1346. Phillip of Valoys dieth, and Iohn his Son ſucceedeth.
               
               After the deceaſe of King Phillip, Iohn his Sonne ſucceeded in his ſtead, who not long after his coronation arrained the Conſtable (then newlie deliuered out of priſon in England) of treaſon, and cauſed him to be beheaded at Paris.
               
               
                  John the ſon of Phillip de Ʋaloys.
                  SHortly after the coronation of King Iohn, Pope Clement departed out of this life at Avinon. He appointed for his ſucceſſour in the papacy, the Cardinall of Oſtia a French man borne, called before his election Stephen Albert,
                     
but afterward named Innocent the ſixt. By occaſion of certaine diſgracefull ſpeeches mutually enterchanged, a mortall quarrell was growne betwixt the King of Bohemia and the Duke of Lancaſter, which they were at point to decide by ſingle combate: but the French King interpoſing himſelfe, by his mediation the matter was compounded. After the Conſtable as we tolde you, was by the kings commandement put to death, Charles of Spaine, vpon whome the King had beſtowed the ſeigniory of Angoleſme, & who had alſo eſpouſed the daughter of Charles of Bloys, being aduanced to that office, was by Charles king of Navarre ſlaine ſuddainlie in his bed. With this fact, as ye may well iudge, the French kings mind was not a little troubled, neuertheleſſe vppon certaine conditions he was pacified. To this Charles thus murdred ſucceeded Iaques of Burbon. And the truce taken between the French king and the Engliſh to endure till Aprill, was prolonged to Midſommer. For the ambaſſadours of both kings meeting at Avinion before the Pope, when they could not agree vppon articles of peace, added ſo much more time to the continuance of the truce.
                  The Prince of Wales brought an army into Aquitaine, and the King his Father intending to proſecute his warres in Fraunce, came to Calice. There the French King by an herauld profered the ſingle combate, but the King of England refuſed it. The French King ſending out his writtes, ſummoned to Paris all his nobilitie, with the heads of the church and the burgeſſes of his townes, declaring vnto them how greatly it imported him to prouide for the warres. So by act of Parliament a generall ſubſidy was graunted, from payment whereof there was no man could be exempted.
                  The King of Navarre, Iohn Earle of Harecourt, and divers others, being ſurpriſed by the French kings vnſuſpected approche, as they ſat at dinner in the Caſtle of Roan, were ſuddainly apprehended and committed to ſafe cuſtody.

The King of Navarre was ſent priſoner to Paris. The Earle of Harecourt had vttered I wot not what reprochfull words againſt the King, in preſence of diuers noble men, ſtoutly maintaining that the ſubſidy lately exacted, ought not to be payd, and withall exhorting the reſidue to ſtand ſtifly in deniall thereof. Hence grew the ground of his inditement, and hence proceeded the cauſe of his puniſhment. For herevppon the King commaunded him to be beheaded, and his body afterward to be hanged vppon a gibbet.
                  The King of Englands Sonne who came lately (as we 
                        Edward the black Prince. told you) into Aquitaine, ſetting forth from Burdeaux, waſted all the country thereabout, namely Poytiers, Turon, and Berrie; where fourniſhing himſelfe with what was needfull for his owne vſe, the reſt he vtterly ſpoyled and deſtroyed, burning vp their corne, and ſhedding out their wines to the intent that afterwards it might not be cōuerted to the benefite of his enemy. The French King in the meane while hauing a great power aſſembled at Charires, departed from thence, with all poſſible haſt, and a right enemie-like affection following after the Engliſh Prince. When he came neere vnto Poytiers, newes was brought him that the Engliſh armie laie encamped not farre off. Immediatlie herevppon calling his counſell, he gaue direction for the ſetting of his men in order, diſpoſing his whole armie into three battalions. In the firſt he placed 
                        •
                     he Duke of Orleans, in the ſecond Charles his eldeſt Son, and himſelfe led the reregard. The number of his enemies was very ſmall. Aſſoone as he vnderſtood by his ſcowts in what ſort they were embattelled, and how they had planted themſelues in a place both by nature and their owne induſtrie ſtronglie fortified, he gaue commaundement that all his people ſhould fight on foote, three hundreth or ſomewhat more onlie excepted, who with their horſes were appointed to breake the aray of the engliſh archers. He was accompanied in the field with his foure 
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
realme, with great impunitie of vice, as generally happeneth during their Kings captiuitie. in ſuch caſes, where ſcarce any are thought to remaine which by authoritie might repreſ
                        •
                     e miſchiefe & puniſh offenders. Theeues and robbers banding themſelues together, filled the country with repine and murder, foreſtalling the highwaies, and ſpoyling the paſſengers. Beſides this, the S
                        •
                     ates could not well agree among themſelues, for the nobilitie began to diſtaſte the authoritie of the 
                        •
                     ix and thirty which were appointed to haue chiefe rule in the cōmon wealth. But moſt horrible of all other, was that 
                        •
                     umultuous inſurrection of the peaſants which aſſembled in Champaine and the places thereabout, whoſe companie by little and little aug
                        •
                     enting through the daily concourſe of ſuch raſcalles as reſorted to them from all quarters, at length encreaſed ſo farre, that their number amounted to an hundreth thouſand. Their purpoſe was to have deſtroyed all the nobilitie and gentry of Fraunce. And with this intent entring violently into the noble men and gentlemens houſes, they ri
                        •
                     led them, bound the Maiſters to the poſtes, & 
                        •
                     auiſhed their wiues and daughters before their faces, murthered cruelly all the whole houſhoulde, and laſtly conſumed the houſes with fire. And now their barbarous outrage preuayling ſo 
                        •
                     arre, that the women of greateſt calling were compelled to forſake their dwellings and hide themſelues in ſecret places, vnleſſe they would abandon their bodies to the beaſtly luſt of moſt filthy varlets, an army at length was raiſed, and at the towne of Meaulx they were fought withall, and euerie one ſlaine or drowned in the riuer Marne.
                  
                  
                     Charles the kings ſonne, perceiuing there was a ſecret conſpiracie betweene the King of Navarre and the Prouoſt of Paris, departed out of the towne, and aſſembled his forces. It ſeemed as if the matter would haue growne to a troubleſome iſſue, for hee beſieged the cittie, but by the mediation of certaine Biſhops, the Princes were reconciled. The Prouoſte neuertheleſſe intending to ſet all in an

vproare, had plotted one night to diſpatch all thoſe of the contrary faction. And the matter was brought to ſuch forwa
                        •
                     dneſſe, that he had already agreed with ce
                        •
                     taine (
                        •
                     ho for the ſame purpoſe awayted their prey without the gates) that at a time appointed in the night they ſhould enter into the cittie. But the treaſon beeing diſcouered, hee himſelfe was apprehended in the night ſeaſon with 
                        •
                     he keyes of the towne in his hand, and ſo ſlaine with ſo
                        •
                     e others that were partakers of his practiſe. This Prouo
                        ••
                     e (during the troubleſome ſtate of thoſe times,) was the firſt that encloſed Paris with walles and ditches, and planted gates at the entrances into the cittie.
                  The King of Navarre beeing certified of this mans death, whome he dearely eſteemed in regard of the manifolde benefits he had receiued at his handes, and partly moued with diſpleaſure of the matter, but 
                        •
                     ore neerely touched, for that himſelfe was commonly noted to bee chiefe author of that practiſe, as well of his o
                        •
                     ne accord, as by inſtigation of his brother Philip, (who had formerly vexed Normandy with warres, & deſired nothing more then to 
                        •
                     orke miſchiefe to the realme of Fraunce) 
                     
                        •
                     orthwith denounced warre, and hotly purſued it, making many excurſions towards Seane and Marne, and 
                        •
                     inning alſo diuerſe townes and fortreſſes about Amien
                           •
                        e & Arras. The Prouoſt had furniſhed him with great ſommes of money, and therefore he might maintaine men of warre at his pleaſure: beſides, many fauoured his pretence and furthered his proceedings. Hereby it cam
                        •
                      to paſſe that oftentimes he tooke many townes and caſtles 
                        •
                     ith little or no difficultie: inſomuch that certaine of the principall to
                        •
                     neſmen of Amie
                           •
                        ce at an houre agreed vpon in the night, ſet open the gates of the towne for his ſoldiers to enter, where then nothing elſe remained to winne but the caſtle. But by good fortune certaine fre
                        •
                     ch horſemen falling vpon them, diſſappoynted their purpoſe, putting the aduenture
                        •
                     s to flight, and the tra
                        •
                     tors to execution.
                  
                     
Together with theſe euills (as is wonte to happen) enſued a wonderfull dearth and ſcarcitie of all things, in ſuch forte as the poorer people had much adoe to ſuſtaine their liues: and this plague continued fower yeeres. For, ſo long as the inſatiable ſoldiers deuoured all mens goods, of what eſtate or degree ſoeuer without controlment, ſo long the huſbandman might not apply his labour in ſafetie, not the merchant exerciſe his trafficke without extreame hazard both of life and goods: what other effect could enſue thereof, but a generall & common miſchiefe, and ſuch a one as ſhould concerne euerie particular perſon?
                  Certaine of the king of Navarres people beeing vpon a A ſtrange ſhift in extremitie. time ſurpriſed by their enemies at ſome diſaduantage, whē they ſawe that of neceſſity they muſt put their fortunes in tryall, though farre ouermatched in number, yet ſeeing no other remedy, they betooke themſelues to a little hill, and putting off all their ſpurres, pitched them in the ground before thē with the rowells vpward to hinder the aproach of their enemies. But the euening came on ſo faſt, that it ſtayed the frenchmen from the'ncounter. In the night time with great ſilence they conveyd themſelues into the next village, and there making fires as if they had purpoſed to tarrie all night, they ſecretly departed contrarie to the frenchmens expectation, who purſued in vaine, but could not ouertake them. Amongſt other places the Navarrois held Melune vpon Seane. To the beſieging of this towne, the Duke of Normandy ſent foure thouſand horſemen. But by mediation of the Cardinals which wee ſpake of before, a peace was concluded betweene them. But Phillip the King of Navarres brother would neuer giue his conſent to any conditions of peace whatſoeuer, vpbraiding his brother that he was deluded with witchcraftes and enchauntments: and therefore he retired himſelfe to certaine holdes vppon the Sea coaſt which were in the kings of Englands ſubiection.
                  
                     
By that time the peace was confirmed betweene the Navarrois and the Frenchmen, the three yeeres truce (obtained by the Cardinals after the taking of King Iohn) betweene Fraunce and England, expired. Therefore all ſuch as had ſerued 
                        •
                     nder the King of Navarre, repayred to the Engliſh Captaines for entertainment, and ſo one miſchiefe drew on many more ſucceſſiuely enſuing each other. Notwithſtanding for that time, the Engliſhmen were but ill entreated by the French, though not without great dā
                     mage to the poore wretches that inhabited in the vpland country, or in townes but weakly fortified. For the Engliſhmen accompanied with forreine ſouldiers, made ſpoyle of them at their pleaſure.
                  When the time of truce (as wee ſaid before) was worne out, the king of England and his eldeſt Sonne with the Priuate conference about a peace. French King and the Duke of Burbon, conferred priuately together at London concerning a peace, the articles whereof they ſent ouer to the Duke of Normandy, and he propounded them to the three eſtates of the kingdome. But when the matter came to be debated in counſell, theſe conditions were vtterly diſliked, and anſwere was giuen to the Ambaſſadors, that they would rather chooſe to endure yet greater miſeries, then condiſcend to ſuch articles. This anſwere was taken in very ill parte, as well by the captiue King of Fraunce, as by the King of England: who immediately thereupon cauſed ſuch an armie to be levyed, as neuer any man ſaw paſſe out of England before. Hee tooke landing at Calice, accompanied with his foure ſons. But before his departure out of England, he made open declaration of his intent before the whole army: in effect, that he had vndertaken this expedition in hope and full purpoſe to enforce the French men to receiue ſuch conditions as ſhould be both for the honour of his perſon, the commoditie of his people, and the dignity of his crowne: And that he was reſolued neuer to giue ouer, nor returne again, till ſuch time as he had accompliſhed his affaires in ſuch

ſorte as he deſired. Wherfore if any man diſliked his pretence, hee ſhould haue free liberty to depart, or tarrie. But there was none amongſt them all which did not willingly embrace theſe conditions.
                  From Calice the King of England marched to Rhemes, 
                     1359. which cittie when he found for the bigneſſe thereof to be ſtrongly fortifyed, he forbare to aſſault it, becauſe he wold not raſhly hazard the loſſe of any of his men whome he reſerued for greater ſeruices. From thence after two moneths ſiege or ſomewhat more, he tooke his way into Burgundy. The Duke ſent meſſengers to him, requeſting that It ſhould ſeeme to be but twenty thouſand. his ſouldiers might not be ſuffered to ſpoyle his country, The King of England beeing a very curteous Prince was eaſily entreated; but vppon condition that the Duke of Burgundy ſhould pay him an hundreth thouſand crownes. In the meane time Fraunce was miſerably waſted, partly by the King of England himſelfe, partly by the reſt of his army left in Picardy, and not a little by the King of Navarre, who yet againe moued armes againſt the Duke of Normandy.
                  
                  A certaine fryer of the order of Saint Frauncis, propheſied at Avinion that both the Clergy ſhould ſuffer much Iohannes Ro
                        
                           •
                        hetaillada. for their pride, couetouſneſſe and ambition, and that the kingdome of Fraunce ſhould be extreamly afflicted by the invaſions of ſtrangers, in ſo much that no part of it ſhould be free from that miſerie. The Pope becauſe he foretolde matters that diſpleaſed him, caſt this fryer in priſon.
                  The King of England ſent word to the Duke of Normandy, that he would giue him battell: but the Duke hauing no diſpoſition to put himſelfe to the curteſie of Fortune, ſtayed ſtill at Paris. And becauſe he well perceiued, that the ſtate could not long continue at this paſſe without the vtter ſubuerſion and ouerthrowe of the kingdome: by aduiſe of his nobility & counſell, he ſent ambaſſadors to the king of England to entreate of peace. The matter was diuerſly attempted, but it ſeemed almoſt an impoſſibility to

accord their difference. For the King of England ſtill abſolutely maintayned, that the crowne of Fraunce was his rightfull inheritance.
                  Whilſt things were thus in conſultation, there ſuddainly roſe a meruailous tempeſt about Chartres, the violence King Edward inclineth to peace. 1360. whereof was ſuch, that it ouerthrew both men and horſes. The king was ſo moued with the conſideration hereof, that he made a vowe he would incline his minde vnto peace, & ſo at Calice the matter was concluded. The conditions were theſe: that the king of England, his heyres, and ſucceſſours after him, ſhould hold & enioy the Countyes, Cities, Caſtles, holds, Lordſhips, Iſles, rents and revenues of all Aquitaine; alſo the Cittie, Caſtle, county and whole ſeigniorie of Poytiers: the Cittie and caſtell of Rochell, and Limoges with all the country about it. To theſe were added, Angoleſme, aſwell the towne as the caſtle, with all the territory thereto belonging: Alſo Calice, and many other places beſides, whereof as the number is great, ſo the reherſall would be tedious. Item, that the king of Fraunce ſhould renounce his title to all theſe, and releaſe all fealtie and right, which he, his heires or ſucceſſors might by any meanes clayme therein, & that the king of England ſhould hold them all frankly and freely without acknowledgment of any homage or ſuperiority to the king of Fraunce or his ſucceſſors in that behalfe. Item, that the king of England ſhould againe, for himſelfe, his heires and ſucceſſors, diſclaime all title, right and intereſt, which eyther hee or his poſteritie might pretend to the crowne of France. Item, that he ſhould reſigne all the portion which he challenged in the Dukedomes of Normandy, Aniow and Turon: alſo all his right to Britaine. Theſe and many other articles, deſcribed more at large in my author, both the Kings and their ſonnes were ſolemnly ſworne to obſerue. And for further aſſurance, the French King gaue in hoſtage, the Peace concluded, and King Iohn ſet at liberty. Dukes of Orleance, Aniow, Berry & Burbon, beſides ſome twelue Earles and Barons, and diuerſe perſonages of good

account ſent particularly from all the chiefe Citties of Fraunce. Theſe being all conveyed to London, the French king was ſet at libertie and returned againe to Paris, to the great reioycement of his ſubiects. 1360.
                  
                  Immediately vpon his returne, he directed forth letters to all his officers, Lievetenants, and Captaines, to avoyd out of all ſuch Townes, Caſtles and holds, as hee had departed withall to the King of England. But it is wonderfull to report, with what vnwillingneſſe they all for the moſt part obayed this commandement: for it ſeemed a very ſtrange and difficult matter for them to vndergoe the yoke and ſubiection of the Engliſh. But the French King beeing a iuſt and vertuous Prince, would for no reſpect infringe his oath, or ſwarue from his covenants. Therfore he gaue commaund that all things ſhould bee performed according to the expreſſe tenor of the agreement. In like manner the King of England ſent commiſſioners to ſurrender againe certaine Caſtles and holdes taken in the warres into the French kings poſſeſſion. When the townes and fortreſſes were in this ſort delivered, the ſoldiers which had now accuſtomed themſelues ſo long time together to liue vpon ſpoyle and pillage, conſidering that in regard of the wicked acts they had formerly committed, it would bee little for their profit, and leſſe for their ſafetie to returne home againe, determined from thenceforth to ſeeke their fortunes. And thereupon aſſembling themſelues together, they ranged through Champaine and the places adioyning, waſting and deſtroying all things before them, and as it commonly falleth out, their number daily encreaſed. The French king beeing informed of their miſchieuous proceedings, ſent Iaques of Burbon againſt them with an armie. He found them encamped vppon a very high hill, the ſcituation wherof was ſuch that it was impoſſible to take any perfect view of their forces: & being indeed ſome ſixteen thouſand, they appeared to his ſcouts not aboue 5000. When it came to the encoūter, it was fiercely fought

on both ſides, but fortune inclined to the worſer party. Many gallant gentlemen periſhed in this conflict: the Duke of Burbon himſelfe with Peter his eldeſt Son were verie ſore wounded, and being conveyed to Lyons, died within three daies after. When theſe villaines had obtained this victorie, they tooke their waie directly towards Avinion; at whoſe approche the Pope and his colledge of Cardinals were not a little affrighted, for ſuch was both their courage and their crueltie, that no man durſt oppoſe himſelfe againſt them. Neuertheleſſe the Pope and his Cardinalls being thus driuen to their ſhifts, and hauing no other meanes to repreſſe this mutinous multitude, to whome no miſchiefe came amiſſe, commaunded a croyſie to be preached againſt them, with a graunt of cleere remiſſion of all their ſinnes which tooke it vppon them. Many aſſembled, but when there was no mention of pay, they ſhrunke away euery one. The very ſame time the Marques of Mountferrat made warre vppon the Duke of Millaine. The Pope therefore practiſed with him to lead away this rebellious rebell into Lumbardie. And euen ſo it fell out, for when the Pope and Cardinalls had paied them threeſcore thouſand crownes, and that the Marques alſo had promiſed them entertainment beſides, they followed him and did him good ſeruice in his warres.
                  The french King paſſed through the Dukedome of Burgundy 
                     1362. (which was then lately fallen to him by the death of the younger Duke) towards Avmion to viſite the Pope, who in ſhort ſpace after deceaſſed. And when they could not determine vpon a new election (by reaſon of the inordinate ſtrife which was chiefelie betweene twoo contending for the papacie) at length a certaine abbot of Saint 
                        Ʋictors in Marſeilles, a learned and godlie man, was choſen, and from thenceforth called Pope Vrbane.
                  
                  The King of Ciprus the ſame time arriued at Avinion, 
                     1362. and made earneſt interceſſion to the Pope and the french King, for the vndertaking of an expedition againſt the

Saracens and other enemies of the chriſtian faith. The Pope promiſed his furtherance, and in a publike aſſembly propounded the matter. Wherevppon the french King with a great part of his nobility, tooke vpon them the ſigne of the croſſe. Afterward the King of Ciprus trauelled into Bohemia to the Emperour, and from thence through Germante, Brabant, and Flaunders, he came into England, making the like petition to King Edward, but he honourably excuſed himſelfe. Out of England he returned vnto Amience where the french King then ſoiourned: and after that he repaired into Gaſcoine to the Prince of Wales, who about the ſame time had a Son borne named Edward.
                  
                  The noble men that were left in hoſtage for the french King, began to grow diſcontented for the long reſtraint of their liberty, and king Edward being of a gentle and curteous diſpoſition, had giuen them leaue to go ouer to Calice, as well to recreate and refreſh their mindes, as alſo that from thence (being ſo neere Fraunce) they might the more commodiouſly diſpoſe of their affaires in their owne countrey. They ſent oftentimes to the King and the Duke of Normandy his Sonne. But the King was ſo buſied about the preparation of his voyage againſt the Sa
                        •
                     acens & withall ſo troubled by the King of Navarre, who ſtill continued in armes againſt him, that he could not convenientlie intend to diſpatch them. By meanes whereof, it came to paſſe that the Duke of Aniow the kings Sonne, leaving the reſt of his felow pledges, returned againe into Fraunce.
                  
                  The french King had a mervailous deſire to ſee the King of England againe, becauſe he had ſo honourably entreated him whilſte he was his priſoner. He was counſelled to the contrary, notwithſtanding he ſtill perſiſted in his purpoſe, and ſo much the rather for that he would excuſe his Sonne for departing without licence. So he went and was entertained very royally. But not long after he fell ſicke and died The death of King Iohn.
                      at London. His body was conueied ouer into Fraunce and buried in the towne of Saint Denniſe, the King of Ciprus
                     
being preſent at his funeralles.
                  The King of Navarre thinking that occaſion was now fitlie offered him to make warre, collected forces from all partes where he could raiſe them: and in Normandy a battell was fought with great fierceneſſe and little advantage on both ſides.
                  After the death of king Iohn, his ſonne Charles who was before ſtiled Duke of Normandy, ſucceeded in the inheritance of the kingdome, and was the ſame yeere crowned at Reames, together with his wife the daughter of Peter Duke of Burbon. At his coronation were preſent, the King of Ciprus, Wenſlaus King of Bohemia, and the Dukes of Lutzemburge and Brabant. When the ſolemnities were finiſhed and the new King returned to Paris, he proclaimed his younger brother Phillip, (who had beene priſoner with his father in England) Duke of Burgundy, the ſame being formerly promiſed him by King Iohn before his laſt going ouer into England.
                  
               
               
                  Charles the fift.
                  
                     AS yet Fraunce was not throughly purged from the remnant of thoſe rauinous cutthroates before mentioned: and in Normandy and the places thereabout, many taking part with the Navarrois, much afflicted the countrey. The ringleader of theſe warres was Lewis of Navarre. King Charles appointed his brother Phillip (lately created Duke of Burgundy) to go againſt them, by whome all for the moſt part was againe recouered. About the ſame time the

Earle of Mountpeliarde, ayded by certaine Germaines his friends, entered into Burgundy not farre from Beſanſon. Incontinently the Duke repaired thither with his armie, but his enemies were retyred before his comming.
                  Amongſt the Articles of peace betweene the kings of England and Fraunce, (whereof we haue giuen you a breefe abſtract before,) the matters of Britaine were excepted, and the kings had both promiſed to employ their mutuall endeauours that the controuerſie might be indifferently decyded. But the matter was very ſlightly handled, and it happened that King Iohn dyed as is already declared. By meanes whereof the warres brake forth afreſh, and the french King ſent a thouſand horſe to the ayde of Charles of Bloys, who vppon the delivery of his Sons in hoſtage, was now releaſed out of priſon. On the other ſide, Iohn Earle of Mountfort obtained ſuccour partly from others, but principally from the Engliſhmen, who at that time held the poſſeſſion of Aquitaine. When their armies were both come into the field and ready to ioyne battell, a cerraine nobleman of Britaine (for whome it was not lawfull to beare armes becauſe he was a priſoner) vndertooke to be a mediatour betwixt them, exhorting and humbly intreating them that they would accord friendly amongſt themſelues, and not ſuffer the matter to come to tryall of the ſword. It was poſſible he might haue preuailed, but that certaine gentlemen ſecretly perſwaded the Earle of Mountfort their generall, that he ſhould not by any meanes come to compoſition with his enemy. For theſe men having already conſumed the greateſt part of their meanes, now ſet vp their reſt, either to recouer themſelves againe by the wars, or to loſe what remayned in the adventure of their fortunes. Thus battell was giuen, with much bloudſhed on both ſides, but the Engliſhmens valour put their enemies to flight. Charles himſelfe was ſlaine in the field, which many thought to be a matter plotted of purpoſe, becauſe 
                        Charles of Bloys ſlaine in battell. there was no other meanes to bring thoſe warres to

concluſion. The Earle of Mountfort beholding his body depriued of life, could not refraine from teares notwithſtanding he was his enemie.
                  When Mountfort had thus chaſed his enemies and gotten the victory, in ſhort ſpace after he recouered many townes of Britaine. The French King being advertiſed of the ſtate of theſe affaires, ſent his brother the Duke of Aniow, as well to comfort the late wife (now widdowe) of Charles, which remained exceeding ſorrowfull and penſiue, as alſo to animate and encourage their mindes which in her behalfe ſtill maintained their garriſons. But a great part of Britaine being by this time brought vnder the ſubiection of Mountfort, the French King vppon further deliberation with his counſell, ſent ambaſſadours to him to treate of agreement. Mountfort referred his cauſe to the King of England, who not diſliking the matter, he accepted the conditions profered: which in ſubſtance were theſe. That Mountfort ſhould hold all the Dukedome of Britaine during his life, and if it fortuned him to dye without iſſue, then the inheritance ſhould againe returne to the Sonnes of Charles, which as we told you were thē kept hoſtages in England. Item, that he ſhould aſſure vnto the widdow of Charles, ſome Earledome in thoſe parts, whoſe yeerely revenue ſhould amount to twentie thouſand frankes. Item, that at a time preſcribed (being ſummoned by the french King) he ſhould preſent himſelf in perſō before him, to be by him inveſted in his Dukedome, and to performe all ceremonies vſually incident to that ſolemnitie. And finally of his owne voluntary motion he promiſed to employ his endeauour for the ranſōming of his kinſmen that remayned pledges in England.
                  
                  About this time Lewis of Navarre went into Italy to be affianced to the Queene of Naples daughter. The French King lent him threeſcore thouſand frankes for the furniture of his iourney, receyuing certaine Caſtles of his in pawne for the repayment of his money. When he had

almoſt brought his matters to effect at Naples, ſhortly after he ended his life.
                  After the warres of Britaine and Navarre were finiſhed, euery place ſtill ſwarmed with ſuch cutthrote ſouldiers as were accuſtomed to liue vppon pillage, and theſe mightilie plagued the countrey. The French King well conſidered that they muſt be either wholy ſubverted, or by ſome other meanes remooued out of the Realme. Therefore, the King of Hungary hauing wars at that time with the Turke, he would gladly haue conveyed them over to him as he requeſted: but the old ſouldiers to whome that countrey was not vnknowne, diſſwaded their fellowes from vndertaking that voyage. Then another deviſe was contrived, and Pope 
                        Ʋrbane lying at Avinion, furthered the french King in his purpoſe. For he alſo out of his good affection to Fraunce would willingly haue had that miſchievous multitude diſpatched out of the kingdome. There ragyned at that time in Caſtile a King called Don Pietro, a wicked perſon and a notable tyrant. For he not onely put to death diuerſe good and vertuous perſons, but murthered many alſo with his owne hands, and amongſt others his owne wife, diſcended of the honourable houſe of Burbon. He caſt the gouernors of the church in priſon, and ſeaſed all their goods into his owne poſſeſſion. It was reported by his own familiar freinds, that he had conſpired with the King of Granado the generall enemy of chriſtendome. His father was King Alphonſo, who falling in affection The occaſion of Prince Edwards expeditiō into Spain.
                      with another woman beſides his wife, had by her three ſonnes, the eldeſt whereof named Henrie was a man both of valiant courage and vertuous diſpoſition. This tyrant in regard of the manifold crimes whereof he was often accuſed before the Pope, had already prouoked all mens hatred againſt him. Pope 
                        Ʋrbane therefore vppon good conſideration, ſent for this baſtard Henrie, and Peter King of Arragon, (who was at continuall enmity with the tyrant, as one that had bereft him of diuers Lordſhips) to

come before him at Avinion. There Henrie the baſtard was made legittimate, and denounced King of Caſtile, the tyrant being firſt excommunicate, after deſpoſed. The King of Arragon promiſed free paſſage through his country, and prouiſion of victualles, to ſuch armies as ſhould be conducted into Caſtile againſt the tyrant: intending alſo by the helpe of thoſe forces to recouer his owne loſſes. To this expedition reſorted many honourable perſonages: and by this meanes thoſe ſouldiers that had ſo long annoyed the realme of Fraunce, were conveyed into Castile. The tyrant having intelligence of the armie that was comming againſt him, betooke himſelfe to flight, with his wife, his two daughters, and one noble man onlie. For he was ſo 
                        Don Pietro the tyrant expulſed, and Henrie the baſtard made King of Caſtile.
                      hated of the commons, that not one of them would take armes in his defence: ſo he was forſaken and left deſtitute of all men. And Henrie the baſtard arriving in Caſtile with great ioye and generall applauſe of the people, tooke vppon him the adminiſtration of the kingdome. After his coronation, when he had received the othe of allegeance from the moſt part of the Nobilitie, and Cities of the realme, the noble men by whoſe ayde he had obtained the crowne, tooke their leaues and departed: for now all ſemed to be accompliſhed. But he had not yet diſcharged thoſe french make-ſhiftes, becauſe he purpoſed to make warre againſt the King of Granado.
                  
                  The tyrant remaining in theſe perplexities, by the aduiſe of that one noble man which attended him, addreſſed letters to the Prince of Wales, full of lamentable complaints concerning his misfortunes, beſeeching him to commiſerate his eſtate and to releleeue him with ſuccor. Shortly after, he himſelfe not daring to truſt his owne ſubiects, repayred to Bayon. The Princes counſell were of opinion that he ought not to be ſuccoured in regard of his abhominable wickedneſſe and vngodly diſpoſition, nor that any daungerous enterpriſe ſhould be vndertaken for his ſake. Contrarily the Prince iudged it an vnworthy thing

that a baſtard Sonne ſhould vſurpe the inheritance of the crowne, which was a very ill preſident and extended to the preiudice of other kings and princes. Therefore when the tyrant came he receiued him courteouſly into the town of Burdeaux, and promiſed him his aſſiſtance. Neuertheleſſe he ſent in
                        •…
                      
                     England to the King his Father, declaring to him the wh
                        •…
                      circumſtance of the matter, and requiring his cou
                        •…
                      and direction concerning his proceedings. The King of England in regard th
                        ••
                      of long time before, there had beene a league between 
                        〈…〉
                      Spaniard and him, encouraged his Sonne (in the anſw
                        •…
                      of his letters) to go forward with his purpoſe for the 
                        〈…〉
                      him to his 
                        •
                     ing do 
                        〈…〉
                      And ſo the iourney was 
                        〈…〉
                      vppon betweene th
                        •…
                     . But one thing was 
                        〈…〉
                      in the wa
                        •…
                      Their 
                        •…
                     aſſage lay through the King oSpan
                        •
                      
                     varres country, who had lately contracted amity with Henrie the newe King of Spaine. Howbeit matters were ſo handled, that a meeting was had at Bayon, and vppon certaine conditions the King of Navarre was 
                        •
                     o well ſatisfyed, that he promiſed all curteſy, frendſhip, and peace. King Henrie being aduertiſed of theſe proceedings, ſent to the King of Fraunce forayd.
                  The Prince practiſed with the Captaines of thoſe ſouldiers which before had been ſo troubleſome to Fraunce & now tooke paye of the Spaniard, that they ſhould forſake King Henries ſeruice, and follow him. There was about twelue thouſand of them: and as they were marching towards Gaſ
                           •
                        oine, in the kingdome of Arragon they endured great diſtreſſe, the wayes and paſſages being on all ſides ſorecloſed and fortified. Nevertheles they made way through all inconveniences, and holding on their iourney till they came almoſt at Tholous, they were receiued into Mount Albane, a towne pertayning to the territory of Guyen. The french men vnderſtanding thereof, beſette the wayes rounde about that they might not iſſue foorth into Tholous, or the places adioyning. In concluſion, it

came to hand-ſtrokes: and the French men fought valiantly, inſomuch that they chaſed their enemies euen vnto the towne: but by reaſon of the freſh ſupplies comming continually to their reſcue, in the end the French men were ouerthrowne, and the greater part of them eyther ſlaine or taken priſoners. In which number was the Earle of Provence, who came at that time to ayde the men of Tholons: and beſides him, diuerſe others of great account The Earle of Provence taken priſoner. both of Provence and Fraunce. Hauing thus cleared their paſſage by the ſword, they proceeded to the end of their iourney.
                  The prince of Wales becauſe he was loth to burden the people of Aquitaine with exactions for the maintenance of his ſoldiers, borrowed no ſmall ſome of money of his father, & beſides that conuerted all his plate both gold and ſiluer into coyne.
                  Many priſoners (as the cuſtome is) were diſcharged vpon their worde; ſo was the Earle of Provence. But Pope 
                        Ʋrbane for hatred he bare to thoſe mutinous ſoldiers, took vppon him to acquite the Earle of Provence and others that were ſet at liberty after the ſame manner, from their ranſoms: ſo that they payd not one farthing, but had a cleare diſpenſation from him of all bonds and obligations whatſoever.
                  Whilſt the Prince was making preparation for the The king of Maiorica craveth ayd of Prince Edward, and obtayneth promiſe of the ſame. warres, there arived at Burdeaux the King of Maiorica, who made grievous complaint of the King of Arragon, which had ſlain his father in priſon at Barcelone, and withheld all his poſſeſſions from him by force: towards the reuenge of which iniuries and the recouerie of his inheritance he humbly implored the Princes ayd. He had to wife the Queene of Naples. The Prince vpon hearing of his complaint, promiſed that ſo ſoone as he had finiſhed this enterpriſe for Spaine, he would vndertake his affaires, and ſo bring to paſſe that either vppon reaſonable conditions, or by force of armes, he ſhould be reſtored to his

kingdome.
                  Before the Prince ſet out from Burdeaux he had a ſonne borne, to whom the baniſhed King of Maiorica was godfather. The birth of King Richard 2. He was named Richard, and afterward came to be king of England, Edward the Princes elder ſonne being dead before his father.
                  In the beginning of Februarie the Prince departed from Burdeaux, and within a little while after, an vncertaine rumor Prince Edward ſetteth forward on his iourney into Spaine.
                      was bruted abroad concerning the King of Navarre, as if he had entred into a newe league with King Henry of Caſtile, and that therevpon the Ptince and his Army ſhold be denyed paſſage through his country. Herevpon letters were addreſſed to the King of Navarre, who aduiſedly alleadging the reaſons that moued him, withall declared his good affection to the Prince and the baniſhed Tyrant. The Prince marched with his army in three battels, one following another, the vauntgard was conducted by the Duke of Lancaſter ſent lately from the King of England to aſſiſt him, the King of Maiorica had the leading of the rereward, and he himſelfe accompanied with the tyrant marched in the maine battell. As they paſſed through Navarre, the King himſelfe for their better direction became their guide, and bare them company through a great part of his country. At Pampelone alſo (which is the chiefe citie of Navarre,) he entertayned the Prince with a banket. Many feared that the armies ſhould haue been ſtay'd aſſoone as they came within his kingdome, but contrarie to their opinion, the King ſtill perſevered in peace and friendſhip.
                  King Henry hauing advertiſement of the army comming againſt him out of Aquitaine, levyed forces in Spaine to the number of threſcore thouſand fighting men. For he was exceedingly beloued, and every man was willing to vndergo any danger for his ſake. Thē he ſent an herault with letters to the Prince, deſiring to know what the reaſon was that he vndertooke theſe warres againſt him, ſeing

that for his parte he had neuer offered him any manner of offence or iniury. The Prince vpon deliberation with his councell detained the meſſenger, and marching ſtill forwards, arriued at a towne called 
                        Ʋictoria, nere vnto which, both himſelfe and his aduerſarie encamped with their armies. The king of Spaine had three thouſand ſoldiers ſent to his ayd out of Fraunce.
                  
                  The Engliſhmen had planted themſelues vppon a hill. Counſell was giuen to the Spaniard that if he purpoſed to winne the victorie without ſlaughter and bloudſhed, he ſhould need to take no other courſe, but only to ſhutte vp the wayes that no prouiſion of victuall might be conveyd to his enemie. For the Engliſhmen were encloſed as in a ſtreight, & with ſmall labour all paſſage might eaſily haue beene intercepted. But the King of Spaine deſirous to fight, in regard of the greatneſſe of his forces which were now growne to aboue an hundred thouſand (for their number daily encreaſed) choſe rather to abide the tryall of battaile.
                  When the Prince had reſted ſome fewe dayes in that place, becauſe of the barrennes thereof he diſlodged from thence, and encamped in another ground more commodious. And being not far diſtant from his enemie, he ſent backe the meſſenger, whom he had now detayned almoſt three weekes, with letters to the King of Spaine, containing briefly this anſwere: that, for reſpects of great importance he was come to ſuccour the baniſhed King, that he would willingly compound the difference betweene them, but vpon no other termes then that King Henry ſhould renounce the title and reſigne the gouernment of that kingdome, whereto he could pretend no lawfull intereſt: and if this were refuſed, that he ſhould finde him prepared as well the one way, as the other.
                  We ſhewed you before in what manner the Engliſhmen ordered their battells. The ſpaniards in like ſort divided their whole power into three parts. The firſt was led by

a certaine French Captaine of great eſteeme, and in it were about foure thouſand men. The ſecond was commanded by the two brothers of King Henry, and it contained ſome fiue and twenty thouſand, horſe and foote. The third by King Henry himſelfe, and his battell far exceeded both the other in number, as hauing in it ſeaven thouſand horſe, and threſcore thouſand footemen, whereof a great part were armed with croſſebowes. The field was pitcht betweene Navarre and the towne of Navarette. Seldome or neuer hath any battell beene fought with greater fury and violence. The ſpaniards vſed ſlings, whoſe force was ſuch that therewith they pierced the helmets of their enemies, ſurely a cruell kinde of fight. On the other ſide the Engliſhmen being moſt expert arches, ouer whelmed them with the multitude of their ſhot. One of king Henries brothers (which as we told you had the leading of the vauntgard) aſſoone as he ſawe the Princes colors aduance towards him, departed out of the battell, and neuer ſtrooke ſtroke againſt the enemie. His example much diſcouraged a great many of the reſt. But King Henry himſelfe whereſoeuer he ſawe his men fainte or go by the worſe, preaſſed in thither, calling earneſtly vppon them, exhorting and encouraging them, and often putting them in remembrance both of his honour and their duty: in ſo much that thriſe in that one day did his vehemēt acclamations adde new life to his ſouldiers courage, and thriſe reſtrayned them from flying, when they were euen betaking thē
                     ſelues to flight. Neyther did the common ſoldiers onely, exerciſe their weapons that day, but the Princes themſelues alſo, laying hand to their ſwords, made honourable proofe of their particular valour. The depoſed Tyrant ſought by all meanes he could to haue encountred King Henry. The fight continued for a time very vehement & cruell, the ſoldiers on either part well expreſſing the hoſtilitie of their affection by the violence of their actions: but at length the Spaniards vnable to withſtand the vnited forces

of the Engliſhmen and Gaſcones, gaue themſelues to flight, neither could king Henry by his authoritie or perſwaſion Prince Edwards victorie againſt Henry king of Caſtile
                      cauſe them to turne head againſt their enemies. So that perceiving himſelfe to be more and more abandoned of his people, he was conſtrayned to fly alſo: for he made no queſtion at all that he ſhould be put to death if he had beene taken priſoner in the battell. The Engliſhmen purſued the chace & meruaillous deſtruction was made partly of thoſe that were ſlaine partly of thoſe that-periſhed in a certaine notable river thereby, whereinto they choſe rather to caſt themſelues hedlong, then to come alive into the hands of their enemies. When the chace was ended, a generall view was taken of the dead bodies, and there were found ſlaine, little leſſe then ſix hundreth horſemen, and almoſt ſeaven thouſand footmen, not accounting them that were killed at the bridge or drowned in the Riuer. After this battell the Princes came together to Burgis (a towne of Spaine) and thither reſorted all the Nobilitie of the country, from Toledo, from Liſbone, from Gallicta, frō 
                     Sivill, and from diuerſe other places of Caſtile, to ſweare Don Pietro reſtored. fealty to Don Pietro, againe reſtored: for well they ſaw, it was not poſſible to reſiſt ſuch power as he had now about him.
                  Theſe things diſpatched, Prince Edward delt with the Tyrant to provide money for the payment of his ſoldiers, by whoſe helpe he had recovered his kingdome: wherevpon Don Pietro tooke his iourney into Sivill, there to levy mony for that purpoſe, pretending to returne within fewe weekes after, and to give ſatisfaction to all men. For at ſuch time as he was driven out of Caſtle, & came firſt to Burdeaux to implore the Princes ayd, as we haue formerly declared, hee made faithfull promiſe, that aſſoone as he ſhould be reſtored to his kingdome, he wold giue liberall contentment to all that ſerued in his quarell: and to the ſame effect became bound to the Prince, that ſo the Prince might be his ſurety to the Captaines and

gentlemen that were readie to vndertake the enterpriſe in The ingratitude of the Tyrant. his behalfe. At his departing towards Sivill, he made certaine appointment with the Prince, and gaue him his faith to returne verie ſhortly againe, and to bring mony with him for the diſcharge of his ſoldiers. When the prince vppon expectation of his returne, had taryed certaine moneths beyond the time prefixed, he ſent meſſengers to inquire the cauſe of his delay. The tyrant excuſed himſelf, how he had ſent certaine of his ſervants with the mony, & that they were intercepted in the way by theeves. Wherfore he requeſted him to returne into his owne country, & leave ſome officers of his in Caſtile, to whome he would make ſatisfaction to the vttermoſt. This anſwere greatly diſpleaſed the Prince, but no other at that time could be obtayned.
                  King Henry eſcaping out of the battell, fled to 
                        Ʋalentia a cittie of Arragon, and there acquainted the king with his calamitie. From thence he went to Mountpelier to the Duke of Aniow, a mortall enemy of the Engliſh. After that, he tooke his iourney to Avinion to Pope 
                        Ʋrbane (who was then prepayring to depart from thence to Rome) and to him likewiſe recounted his miſeries and misfortunes. At laſt being privately ayded, by the Duke of Aniow, he aſſembled certaine forces, and invaded Prince Edwards dominions. The Princeſſe ſomewhat amazed with the ſuddainneſſe thereof, ſent to the French King to repreſſe her enemie. But the French King winked at the matter. Herevppon Prince Edward having advertiſement how the world went, was conſtrayned to returne into his owne country before the King of Caſtile had payd him his money. As he came through Arragon he met with ſome impediments, & his paſſage was ſtopped. Nevertheleſſe at a day of meeting the matter was taken vp friendly betweene them.
                  Prince Edward after his returne into his owne dominion, becauſe he had conſumed a great maſſe of money about

this expedition into Spaine, ſummoned all the nobilitie of Aquitaine with the burgeſſes of the citties, to a parliament: and there made publike requeſt for the graunt of a generall ſubſidy to belevyed through all his dominion, and that only for five yeeres, in conſideration as well of the great debt wherewith he had charged himſelfe, and had not yet diſcharged his ſoldiers, as alſo for that he had ſpent, and in a manner cleerely exhauſted all his owne treaſure about this voyage. All the citties for the moſt parte gave their conſents; but many of the greateſt Lords oppoſed themſelues againſt the Princes purpoſe. Affirming that ſo long as they were ſubiect to the King of Fraunce, they were never burdened with any ſuch exactions, and rather then they would now vndergoe them, they would endure the vttermoſt whatſoever. When the Prince would relent no part of his rigor, the Lords which had thus gainſa
                        •
                     d him, tooke their The Lords of Gaſcoigne rebell againſt Prince Edward.
                      way directly to Paris to the French King, where in aſſembly of the councell, they declared their griefe, making ſore complaint of the Prince, and withall beſeeching the French King to receive them into his protection.
                  The French King made anſwere that he would deale by the adviſe of his counſell, and according to the articles of peace concluded betweene his father and the King of England. Meane while the Lords of Gaſcoine remained at Paris. The ſubſidy was ſuch, that euerie houſhold ſhould pay yeerely one francke: which had amounted to the ſome of twelve hundreth thouſand Frankes by the yeere.
                  King Henry having advertiſement of the rebellion of the Gaſcones, and holding it good pollicie to make vſe of another mans trouble, reſolved not to let ſlip ſo faire an opportunity. Therefore by the King of Arragons aſſiſtance, he raiſed an army of ten thouſandmen, and which way ſoever he directed his forces, he recovered townes and

caſtles againe to his ſubiection. Don Pietro remaining the ſame time at Sivill, aſſoone as he heard newes of theſe proceedings, ſent preſently to the King of Portingall and the King of Granado for ſuccour. He obtayned his requeſt, and had gathered together in all, forty thouſand men, amongſt whom there were many Saracens.
                  
                  King Henrie ſeeing it ſtood him in hand to proceede rather by diſcretion and pollicy, then by plaine force, (for the Tyrant farre exceeded him in number of ſouldiers,) following the aduiſe of a certaine Captaine of his, even in the mornings firſt approche, contrary to expectation, ſuddainly invaded his enemies, and fought proſperouſly: in ſuch ſort, that the Tyrant was conſtrained to fly for tefuge into a caſtle thereby, whereof aſſoone as King Henry had intelligence, he brought all his Army thither, and bent his forces againſt it. The tyrant perceiving his imminent perill, iſſued ſecretly out of the caſtle, accompanied with ſome ſewe in the dead time of the night, hoping ſo to haue eſcaped by flight. But it was his fortune to fall into the hands of the captaine of the Scowtwatch, by whome he was apprehended and brought forth with before King Henry, who at his firſt entrance began preſently to inveigh againſt him with moſt bitter termes, and the tyrant for his part alſo returned words of like reproach, calling him ſonne of a ſtrumpet. To be ſhort, King Henry overthrowing The death of Don Pietro, and recovery of the kingdome by Hen ry the Baſtard. him to the ground and getting vpon him, ſtab'd him to the hart with his dagger, and in ſhort ſpace after his death, with ſmall trouble recovered againe the poſſeſſion of the whole kingdome. The King of Portingall wēt about to haue revenged the death of his kinsman Don Pietro by battell, but he was pacified.
                  During the time that the Lords of Gaſcoine ſoiourned at Paris, the French King had a ſonne borne, which afterward carried the name of his father. In the mean while the Lords of Gaſcoine made often ſupplication to the French King, that he would vndertake the defence of their

cauſe againſt Prince Edward: which thing if he refuſed to doe, extreme neceſſitie would compell them to ſeeke ſome vnder whoſe protection they might quietly enioye their poſſeſſions; by meanes whereof it might come to paſſe in time, that the Kings of Fraunce ſhould forgoe all their right and intereſt in the whole province of Aquitaine. The french King conſidering the great importance and daunger of the warre, tooke long reſpite to deliberate vppon the matter. Moſt of his counſell perſwaded him to warre, affirming with great vehemency that the articles of peace were infringed by the King of England. At length it ſeemed good to ſummon the Prince to appeare in perſon at the parliament of Paris, and certaine were appointed to carry the ſummons accordingly. Prince Edward when he heard this meſſage, after ſome pauſe, made anſwere to this effect, that ſithence the French King had ſo commanded him he would ſurely come to Paris, but it ſhould bee with his helmet on his head, and threeſcore thouſand ſouldiers in his company. The meſſengers departed out of Burdeaux, and being apprehended in their way homeward, wereby the Princes commandement caſt in priſon.
                  Here by the way, it ſhall not be amiſſe to make ſome remembrance of the hoſtages left in England. The Duke of Aniow (as is declared already) had conveyed himſelfe away before the death of King Iohn. The Duke of Berry through the King of Englands curteſie, had intreated a yeeres reſpite to ſolace himſelfe in Fraunce. And vppon like fauour diuers others were licenced to depart for a ſeaſon. Some one or twoo onely by the payment of their ranſomes purchaced their liberty. Thoſe that the King had thus diſmiſſed, after the wars began againe, returned no more.
                  The french King proclaimed open warre againſt the The peace broken, and warres againe renued betweene England & Franc
                      King of England, and committed the charge thereof vnto twoo of his brethren, who muſtered ſouldiers from all partes, ſo that the number of them amounted to an hundred

thouſand men. The French men made often incurſions vppon the countrey of Poytiers and other of the Princes dominions. And the Princes ſouldiers likewiſe invaded the Lordſhips of thoſe who had given the firſt occaſion of theſe warres, and made complaint of him to the French King.
                  The french King publiſhed his cauſe and the neceſſity of this warre in diuers places by cunning perſons, with ſo well ſeeming circumſtances, as no man could otherwiſe iudge, but that his proceedinges were grounded vppon moſt iuſt and reaſonable occaſions. The ſame did the King of England alſo, verily to this intent, that by declaring the cauſes of the warre they might haue the people more at commandement to pay their ſubſidies, and to beare the burden of their exactions.
                  
                     Lewis Earle of Flaunders had no iſſue but one daughter: The King of England ſought by all meanes to haue obtained her in marriage for his youngeſt Sonne, and the matter was laboured for the ſpace of three whole yeeres together. In the Earle himſelfe was no want of good affection: but Pope 
                        Ʋrbane in regard they were of his kinred, would in no wiſe giue his conſent to the marriage. The Earle therfore perceiving this match might not go forward, began to make meanes by his friends to Phillip Duke of Burgundy the French kings brother, that the marriage might be made betweene him and his daughter. This treatie tooke effect, and ſo it came to paſſe that Burgoigne and Flaunders were vnited together.
                  The King of England conſidering how by meanes of this marriage the Duke of Burgundy ſhould become heyre to the Earle of Flaunders, practiſed with the King of Navarre who bare a ſecret grudge to the French King for certaine Lordſhippes, that he ſhould denounce open wars againſt him.
                  The French king had provided a great power of ſhipping, intending to ſend his brother the Duke of Burgundy
                     
with an army of choyce ſouldiers to make warres in England. The King of England having intelligence thereof, made preparation according, and determined to receiue them with ſome entertainement in their paſſage. Moreover he ſent his Sonne the Duke of Lancaſter with certaine forces to Calice; which when the French King vnderſtood, by the adviſe of his counſell he altered his purpoſe, iudging it the better courſe to encounter with his enemie, when he had already paſſed the Seas of his owne accord. Herevppon the Duke of Burgundy was ſet forth well appointed, who at ſuch time as he lay encamped neere his enemy, notwithſtanding he were of much greater puiſſance, yet would he not adventure to giue him battell, vnleſſe he had expreſſe direction for the ſame from the king his brother.
                  My author reporteth that a certaine Engliſh captaine, a man of approoved valour and diſcretion and withall very fortunate in his affayres, hauing one day obſerved a faire oportunitie, would haue attempted ſome exploit vppon the enemy: and to the intent the better to effect his purpoſe, had requeſted an Engliſh Earle to guard him with certaine horſemen for the performance of his enterpriſe. Which when the Earle had condiſcended vnto, ſome followers of his gaue him counſell to the contrary, perſwading him that if the adventure prooved ſuccesfull, the reputation thereof would redownd to another, and therefore that it were better for him to vndertake ſome ſervice by himſelfe, the honour where of might be entirely his owne. By this meanes the Captaine being diſappointed, was faine to leaue his deſired enterpriſe vnperformed. Thus we ſee, envy and ambition, hath ſome predominance in all places, and oftentimes it falleth out, that through private 
                        •
                     mulation, whilſte one will adventure nothing in anothers behalfe, many notable occaſions are neglected, which perhaps the enemy afterward converteth to his owne aduantage.
                  When the French and Engliſh armies had thus a while

conf
                        •
                     onted one another, the Duke of Burgundy by the kings commaund brake vp his campe, and licenſed all his ſouldiers to depart. The Duke of Lancaster returned to Calice, and when he had there reſted ſome fewe daies to refreſh himſelfe, reaſſembling his forces, he tooke his way into Fraunce, where having burnt vp certaine townes, becauſe the winter approched, he diſſolved his army and returned into England.
                  
                  Theſe long-laſting warres greatly grieved many noble men of Fraunce, inſomuch that divers of them conveyed away their goods & houſholdſtuffe, remooved thēſelus into other places where they might with more ſafety expect the comfort of a calmer ſeaſon, wiſely miſtruſting leaſt in ſitting ſtill, o
                        •
                      taking part either with the french King or the Engliſh, they might haue taryed to their coſt howſoeuer. For ſo ſtood the ca
                        •
                     e with many of them who had poſſeſſions in both Princes dominions, that they could neither adhere to the one nor forſake the other, without preiudice to their owne eſtate, and apparant loſſe of whatſoeuer they held within either of their iuriſdictions. On the other ſide many Lords of Gaſcoine revolted from Prince Edward and ioyned with the french.
                  King Edward as he was a man of ſingular wiſedome and ſtayed diſpoſition, foreſeeing that this defection of the nobility from his Sonne would tend to much miſchiefe, addreſſed letters into Gaſcoine to this effect. How he vnderſtood that they all for the moſt part were diſcontented with the ſubſidy which his Sonne had lately impoſed vppon them: his mind was therefore to apply a remedy to this inconvenience, and wholy to take away all occaſions which might any way mooue diſſen
                        •
                     ion or controuerſie. To which purpoſe and intent he had giuen commandement to his Sonne that he ſhould ſurceaſe from all ſuch exaction of money, and that all thoſe which found themſelues o
                        •
                     er-charged or burthened, either by him or any of his officers, ſhould haue ſatisfaction allowed them

according to the dammage they had ſuſtained. And further he pardoned all ſuch as had reuolted to the French King, vppon condition that within one moneth after they ſhould returne againe into Gaſcoigne: requeſting this only at their hands, that they would not ſtirre ſedition, but calling to minde their promiſed faith and allegeance, reſt contented to conforme themſelues to the preſent ſtate of gouernment. In ſo doing they ſhould find him ready to make particular recompence to as many as could iuſtly complaine of oppreſſion. And for concluſion that this was the intention and deſire both of himſelfe and all his counſellours.
                  Theſe letters were publiſhed in divers places of Gaſcoine, but they wrought ſmall effect, for many were ſeen daily to forſake the Prince, and to reſort to the French King notwithſtanding: whereby it appeared plainely, that no vertue hath more force to hold the hearts of men in obedience, then affability. For Prince Edward though otherwiſe a worthy gentleman, being puffed vp as men commō
                     ly are, with the proſperous atchieving of great enterpriſes, began to carry himſelfe roughly and auſterely towards the noble men that were his ſubiects: whereby it came to paſſe that they could not loue him. But the french King for King Charles commended for his curteſie. that beſides his excellent wiſedome, he was alſo gentle and curteous, eaſily inſinuated himſelfe into the fauour and affection of all men. By meanes whereof he greatly enriched the Realme of Fraunce, and worthily deſerved to bee regiſtred in the number of the moſt prudent Princes.
                  The french King by the aduiſe of his brethren, the Dukes of Aniow, Berry, and Burgoyne, with other of his nobility, ſent a puiſſant army into Gaſcoine. The Duke of Aniow marching with his forces from Tholouſe, eaſily recouered either by force or by compoſition, whatſoeuer townes or holds were pertaining to the Engliſh in thoſe quarters. The Duke of Berrie invaded the territory of Lymoges. Certaine

Lords of Gaſcoine ioyned themſelues with the Duke of Aniow, they were the ſame that by their complaints and accuſations had formerly incited the french King to vndertake this warre. The Duke of Berry was aſſociated with the dukes of Burbon and Alaunſon and diuers others: which way ſoeuer they tooke, they found eaſie paſſage.
                  About this time the french King fell to agreement with the King of Navarre. For it ſtood him vppon to make him his friend, leaſt perhappes he ſhould haue giuen acceſſe to the Engliſh forces through a part of Normandy which he held, and by the ſeacoaſt, into the reſt of that country pertayning to the crowne of Fraunce. The agreement was vppon this point, that the King of Navarre aſſoone as he returned into his own kingdōe, ſhould make his defiance to the King of England. There came alſo a power out of Spaine to the ayd of the French King, vpon the bountie and good affection of King Henrie. In the mean time the Prince of Wales not vnmindful of his frends A truce taken with Scotland 
                        
                           •
                        or 9. yeeres. & adherents, rayſed men of warre on all ſides; and the King his father that he might with more eaſe ſuſtaine the brunt of theſe warres, tooke a truce with the Scottiſh King for nine yeeres, in ſuch ſort as it ſhould be lawfull for the Scots to ſerue for entertainment on either partie at their pleaſure. He ſent alſo another armie to waſt the countrey of Picardy: the charge whereof he committed to one Sir Robert Knolles, a man marvailouſly affected to the engliſh natiō, though himſelfe were a ſtranger and a briton borne. The number of his forces came to ſome ten thouſand men. With this power departing from Calice and marching through Artois, when he came before Arras, he forbare to aſſault it, but by ſetting fire to the ſubvrbes, tempted the towneſmen to make ſome ſallie out of their gates, whereto notwithſtanding he could not provoke them. So he proceeded forward deſtroying all with fire and ſword as he paſſed.
                  
                     
The Duke of Aniow after he had recouered diuers places from the Engliſh, in regard he thought ſufficient, was performed for the preſent, imparting his purpoſe to the reſt of his aſſociates▪ diſſolved his army and diſtributed his men into garriſons. The Duke of Berry after long ſiege, received the City of Lymoges by compoſition. Whereat 
                        Lymoges recouerd by the French. the Prince of Wales conceived ſo great offence and indignation, that rayſing a power immediatly, he begirt the towne with a new ſiege, vowing never to depart before he reduced it againe into his ſubiection. And when he vnderſtood by ſuch as had taken exact view of the ſcituation and ſtrength thereof, that it was too hard a matter for him to take it by aſſault, he cauſed a mine to be drawne and conveyed vnder the earth even cloſe to the gates of the Citie: which being ſet on fire, the violence thereof overthrew a great peece of the wall, and opened a large breach for his ſouldiers to enter. But who is able to report the miſerable and vnmercifull ſlaughter which then enſued? Not ſo much as women and young Children which caſt themſelues proſtrate at the feete of the Engliſh, lamentably imploring the ſaftie of their liues, could obtained any favour, but were all put to the ſword: ſo implacable was the Princes wrath, ſo relentleſſe his diſpleaſure. And after all Conquered againe & vtterly raced by the Engliſh. this terrible maſſacre of people, the ſpoile and ſacke of the Citizens goods, with the committing of all beaſtly and inhumane outrage, according to the luſt and furie of the ſouldier, the towne it ſelfe by Prince Edwards commaund being ſet on fire, was vtterly raced and laid levell with the ground. The Duke of Berry when he wanne this Citie had diſmiſſed his army as his brother had donne before him: by meanes whereof it came to paſſe, that his ſouldiers being diſperſed and fewe perhaps remayning there in garriſon, the towneſmen were left deſtitute of releefe.
                  The armie of Sir Robert Knolles which had pierced through Fraunce into the country of Aniow, was at length ſlaine by the Conſtable, and Sir Robert himſelfe eſcaping

by flight retourned into Britaine. About this time dyed Pope Vrbane, who but lately before was retuned to Avinion. In his place was ſet vp Gregorie the xi. through the earneſt ſute and great travell of the french King, who foreſawe that this biſhop would be a great ſtrength to his procedings.
                  Prince Edward by the adviſe of his phiſitions left Gaſcoine, and returned into his owne country. For at ſuch time as he warred in Spaine, in the behalfe of Don Pietro the baniſhed tyrant of Caſtile, he caught a greevous and welneere incurable diſeaſe, which was now ſo farre growne and encreaſed vppon him, that he was not able to ſit vppon horſebacke, but was faine to be caried from place to place in a litter: wherevppon his phiſitions gaue him counſell to go into England, becauſe they were of opinion he might better be recouered, in regard the temperature of the climate Prince Edward returneth into England.
                      (being his natiue ſoile) was more agreeable to the conſtitution of his body. At his departure out of Aquitaine, he appointed his brother the Duke of Lancaſter, (who during the whole continuance of the warres had beene partaker of his fortunes) to be his vicegerent into thoſe quarters: beſeeching the noble men of Gaſcoine which were aſſembled at Burdeaux that they would be contēt to accept of his government.
                  We haue formerly made mention of the King of Maiorica, who in hope to be revenged of the diſgrace and iniury done vnto him, had for a time depended vppon the faithfull promiſe of Prince Edward to ayd him againſt his enemie the King of Arragon, then confederate with the Spaniard. But King Henrie of Spaine when after the Princes depature he had almoſt recovered all that belonged to his dominion, found this King of Maiorica in a certaine towne of Spaine, left there by the engliſh for recovery of his helth: and becauſe he had taken part with his enemis, apprehended him and detained him in priſon for the ſpace of certain yeeres after. At length by the helpe of his friends and vppon the paiment of an hundreth thouſand piſtolets, he procured

his liberty, and levying great forces againſt the king of Arragon, the matter had ſurely come to a bloudy concluſion, had he not againe fallen ſuddenly into a violent ſicknes, which in ſhort ſpace ended his life. By this meanes therefore the occaſion being taken away, the warres ceaſſed.
                  Don Pietro the tyrant of Spaine, whoſe hiſtory we haue diſcourſed already, left behind him two daughters, Conſtance & Iſabell, whome certaine noble men of Spaine immediately vpon their fathers death conveyed by ſea into The Duke of Lancaſter marrieth Conſtance one of the daughters of Don Pietro.
                      
                     Aquitaine. The Duke of Lancaſter by aduiſe and perſwaſion of his friends, eſpouſed Conſtance the elder of theſe ſiſſters: wherevnto he was the rather moved, aſwell in commiſeration of the young Ladies miſerie, as in hope hereafter to obtaine the poſſeſſion of their inheritance. The King of Spaine having intelligence hereof, & fearing likewiſe that the King of Englands fift ſonne would marry the Edmond of Langly. other daughter, addreſſed his ambaſſadors to the French King, with whome he ioyned in moſt ſtedfaſt league of friendſhip: the French King for his part promiſing him aſſured ayd againſt any enemy whatſoever, and moreouer that he would never enter into other conditions of peace with the King of England, but ſuch as ſhould be both to the honour and profit of the King of Spaine.
                  
                  The Duke of Lancaſter ſhortly after his marriage aſſembled The Duke of Lancaſter returneth into England.
                      the Lords of the country together, and declaring to them his occaſions and purpoſe of departure, appointed ſuch officers as ſhould governe in his abſence, and departed with his wife into England.
                  
                  King Edward vpon adviſement with his counſell, determined to ſend his ſonne the Duke of Lancaſter with an army into Picardy, which waſting and deſtroying that country, ſhould from thence proceede forward into Fraunce. Moreover he ſent the Earle of Pembroke with another army into Aquitaine, to make warre likewiſe in thoſe parts, that ſo the French men might not faile to haue their hands

full on all ſides. But the French King hauing knowledge hereof, by meanes of certaine Engliſh men that reſorted vnto him, forefortifyed with garriſons all places of Picardy, and further vnderſtanding by relation of thoſe fugitives, that the Engliſh fleete ſhould arrive in Gaſcoigne, he gave ſecret intelligence therof to the King of Spaine his new cō
                     federate. The Spanyard performed the part of a friend, & ſent 40 great Ships with thirteene others of leſſe receyt, well appointed to meete with the Engliſh men in their paſſage. Not farre from Rochell the Spaniſh fleete encountred the Engliſh with great violence, and the fight 1372. continued almoſt a whole day without intermiſſion. During which ſpace the Rochellers ſtood like idle ſpectators beholding the conflict, and being requeſted by their governors to helpe the Engliſh in their neceſſitie, alleadged frivolous matters for excuſe and refuſed: For howſoever they, diſſembled outwardly to the worlde, yet in their harts they vttterly abhorred the Engliſhmens government. The next day they renewed their fight afreſh, and it was maintained with as great reſolution as ever was any. Notwithſtanding, in the end the Spaniards obtayned victory, by reaſon that both in number of men and ſhipping, and in the greatneſſe of their veſſells alſo they much overmatched the Engliſh. Many were ſlaine, and many taken priſoners, amongſt whom was the Earle of Pembroke himſelfe, The Engliſh men overcome at Sea, & the Earle of Pembroke taken priſoner. and moſt part of the captaines in his fleete. The ſhip likewiſe which carryed a great quantity of treaſure for the maintayning of three thouſand ſoldiers, was ſwallowed vp in the ſea. After this battell was ended, came a ſufficient power out of Gaſcoigne to Rochell, but it was too late when the matter had falne out ſo vnproſperouſly before.
                  Thus it came to paſſe, that by little and little the King of England loſt all his whole ſeigniory of Gaſcoigne, the people partly rebelling, and partly yeelding themſelues willingly to his enemy.
                  
                     
Whilſt theſe things paſſed, there repaired to the French Kings court one Ivan, the ſonne of a certaine Brittiſh Lord, making grevous complaint of great iniury done vnto 
                        Ivan the ſon of Ammon Prince of VVales.
                      him by the King of England, both in cauſing his father Ammon Prince of Wales to be wrongfully put to death, & afterward in conferring the principalitie of the whole coū
                     try to his owne ſonne Edward. Vpon relation of his grevance, the French King furniſhed him with a fleete of ſhips and ſome foure thouſand men to ſerue him, by whoſe helpe this Ivan, entring into a certaine yland belonging The Ile of Garneſ
                              •
                           y.
                      to the Engliſh, and comming to encounter with his enemies, overthrew them in the field and put them to flight. After which exploit he was recalled by the French King and ſent into Spaine, there to make proviſion of more Shippes, that he might lay ſiege to the towne of Rochell.
                  
                  This good ſucceſſe of the French kings affaires both by the Spanyards and by Ivan, gave him occaſion to thinke that the reſt of the Engliſh provinces, would eaſily be brought to revolte; eſpecially if the Engliſh men ſhould receive but another overthrowe, or at leaſtwiſe be put to any extraordinary trouble or moleſtation. Herevpon he ſent the conſtable, with a great power of the chiefeſt peeres of his kingdome, to renewe the warres againe in his enemies countries. Aſſoone as they came into the territory of Poytiers, all the townes and caſtles thereabout rendred themſelues into their ſubiection. The towneſmen of Poytiers being at variance among themſelues, addreſſed letters to the conſtable, ſignifying their good affection toward him, and earely in the next morning according to promiſe, 
                        Poytiers yeeldeth to the French. ſet open their gates to receive him into the cittie. This example of the Poitevins diverſe other townes tooke as a preſident for themſelues to imitate.
                  In the meane while, this Ivans whom we ſpake of before, accompanied with the Spaniſh Admirall came with a well furniſhed navy out of Spaine and arrived at Rochell:
                     
which towne notwithſtanding ſuſtained no damage at their hands, becauſe the towneſmen hated the Engliſh, and deſired by all meanes to be againe vnder the French Kings government. They had long ſince freed themſelves from their forced ſubiection, but that the Engliſh garriſon which kept the caſtle, held them alwaies in ſuch awe as they durſt never venter to put their purpoſe in execution. At length contriving a ſtratageme politick enough for the time; vnder pretence of taking a generall muſter as well of the towneſmen, as of the garriſon, they allured the captaine (who was a man of no great forecaſte) with all his company out of the hold. Which done, forthwith a great number of the towneſmen, breaking out from an ambuſh, gaue aſſault to the forte and ſuddenly ſurpriſed it, thoſe fewe which made reſiſtance being eaſily repreſſed. The noble men of Fraunce were at the ſame time aſſembled at Poytiers, and having intelligence hereof, were deſirous to be received by the Rochellers into their towne. Wherevnto they condiſcended, but vppon certaine conditions which were theſe. 1. That it ſhould be lawfull for the men of Rochell vtterly to race their Caſtle, out of which they had often received ſo great diſpleaſure, and to lay it levell with the Rochell yeeldeth to the French. ground: 2, That the French men ſhould ſolemnely promiſe neverto erecte any caſtle there againe: 3, And that Rochell from thenceforth ſhould perpetually remaine a member of the crowne of Fraunce, and never be alyenated to any other Lord, by any poſſible meanes that might be deviſed according as times and ſtates ſhould happen to alter afterward. When the King (who was made acquainted with theſe proceedings by the Lords) had confirmed and ratifyed theſe covenants, Rochell became ſubiect again to the French: and the revolting of this towne, gave occaſion to many other of their neighbours to doe the like.
                  The French kings captaines holding it diſcretion to follow their fortune, vſed ſuch induſtry, that in ſhort ſpace they recovered all the territorie of Poytow and the country

adioyning, not without ſome helpe and furtherance from the Britons, who were exceedingly inclined to the French King, though their Lord wholly favoured the King of England, as by whoſe meanes he had obtayned his Dukedome. It happened not long after that the Engliſhmen immediately vppon their comming into Britaine, burnt vp ſeaven great ſhippes of the King of Spaines as they lay there in harbour. Herevppon ſuſpicion aroſe, that this matter was done by the Duke of Britaines conſent and direction, whereof the French king being advertiſed by certaine Lords of Britaine, ſent the Conſtable to make warres vppon the Duke and to conquer his country, as one who had forſeited his eſtate by entring into a league with the Engliſh men againſt him, of whome he had received the inveſtiture of his Dukedome, and to whome as the cuſtome is he had ſworne homage and fealtie. The Duke The Duke of Brittaine flyeth into England.
                      of Britaine in this extremitie, diſtruſting his owne ſubiects fled into England. And the Conſtable by the helpe of the Britons themſelves brought much of the country in ſubiection.
                  
                     David King of Scotland deceaſſed without iſſue, and 1373. by right of ſucceſſion, the crowne deſcended to Robert.
                  
                  It is ſaid before, that King Edward after his ſonne the Duke of Lancaſter was come with his wife into England, had determined to ſend him ouer againe to make warres The Duke of Lancaſter arriueth at Calice
                      in Picardy. But the matter was delayed. For this yeere was the firſt time of his arrivall at Calice accompanied with the Duke of Britaine, and thirteene thouſand ſoldiers. They raunged through a great part of Picardy, putting all to fire and ſword, but they abſtayned from beſieging of townes for the French king had long before ſufficiently ſtrengthned them with garriſons. And as they marched forward making havocke of all things, the French army ſtill followed without intermiſſion: notwithſtanding they never came to ioyne battell, but by interceſſion of the Popes legates, a truce was taken, and a time appointed

for another meeting at Bruges in Flaunders there to treate of waightyer matters.
                  Before this truce was proclaymed, the Duke of Britaine by the Engliſhmens ayd, had recovered diverſe places, and was like to have gotten more, had not the newes of this truce beene a ſtay to his proceedings. Therfore diſcharging his army and leaving good garriſons in the places recovered, he returned into England. About the calends of 1376. November the ambaſſadors of both Kings repayred to Bruges, that there by mediation of the Popes Legates, they might treate of a marriage betweene Richard ſonne to the Prince of Wales, and Marie the French Kings daughter. The matter was diverſely debated, but could not bee brought to any perfect concluſion. Pope Gregorie taking offence thereat, departed from Avinion and went to Rome.
                  
                  About this time Prince Edward the King of Englands eldeſt ſonne, a moſt worthy and valiant gentleman, ended The death of Prince Edward.
                      his life at London. After whoſe death king Edward aſſembling the reſt of his ſons and the nobilitie of his realme, declared publikelie vnto them, his purpoſe that Richard the ſonne of his ſonne deceaſſed, ſhould ſucceed in the inheritance of the kingdome. And becauſe he had long ſince imparted aſmuch both to the noble men and the reſidue of his ſonnes, before he made his laſt voyage into Fraunce, it was no hard matter to perſwade them all to approve his determination, and to confirme the ſame by oath. Within a while after the King himſelfe alſo departed King Edward the thirds death and commendation. this life, not without great ſorrowe of as many as knewe him: for he was a Prince ſo renowmed, that even the French King himſelfe, when he heard of his death, gave this report, that he thought him worthy to be numbred amongſt the wiſeſt of princes. After his deceaſſe, ſucceeded Richard his grand ſonne, according to his owne appointment King Richard 2. 1377. in his life time, and was crowned king of England the eleuenth yeere of his age, Anno Dom. 1377.

The Duke of Lancaſter was choſen protectour, and tooke vpon him the government of the realme during the kings minority, who in the meane while was trayned vp vnder the inſtruction of a certaine noble man appoynted to that charge by generall election.
                  It is declared before how the French King the better to maintain his warres againſt England, had made a league with the King of Navarre, but it fell out afterward that two gentlemen of the houſe of Nauarre, attending vppon the king of Navarres ſonnes in the French court, were had The French King poyſoned. in ſuſpition of giving poyſon to the King. Which fact when they had publickly confeſſed before the people, they were put to execution for the ſame. Immediately herevpon the French King ſent an army into the ſea coaſt of Normandy belonging to the King of Nauarre, vnder the conduct of the Conſtable, who eaſily ſubdued all that part 1378. of the country. Beſides this, the King of Spaine the French kings new confederate, made warre alſo vpon the King of Nauarre: who beeing driuen to this diſtreſſe, required ayd of Richard King of England, of whome he accordingly obtayned it.
                  The Duke of Britaine remayning ſtill in England, made importunate ſuite to the young King from time to time for ayd, but the king gaue alwaies a dea
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     are to his requeſt. For the Duke of Lancaſter aſpiring to get that ſeigniory to himſelfe, aſſembled a power, and ſayled over into Britaine, where he layd ſiege to certaine places, but the French 1379. army wherof the Conſtable was generall, compelled him to depart.
               
            
            
               
               The ſecond Booke.
               
                  IN the former booke is declared how the French men recouered a great parte of Aquitaine from the Engliſh. There were many ſtill notwithſtanding in thoſe places, which ſtood ſtoutly for the King of England. The Duke of Aniow therefore comming thither with an army ſubdued in a mannner all that euer remayned. The Gaſcoignes had lately before ſent into England for ſuccour: but by reaſon there was trouble and inſuirection budding vp within the realme, their ſending was to none effect. For the Duke of Lancaſter who had all the authoritie in his hands, was much hated by the commons, which afterward was the occaſion of much miſchiefe in England. Thus when no forces came from thence to their reſcue, the Gaſcones deſtitute of all ſuccour, were conſtrayned to yeeld themſelues to the enemie.
               The French King being a wiſe and politicke prince, held correſpondence with all men which might ſtand him inſtead, or from whome he expected any commoditie or furtherance: conſidering therefore with himſelfe how the king of England was yet vnder age, and that trouble and part-taking were growing within the realme, he ſollicited Robert King of Scotland, and put him often in remēbrance by his letters, to make warre vppon the Engliſhmen now while ſo great opportunity was offered, that being thereby buſyed at home, they might not haue ſo good leyſure to paſſe ouer into Fraunce. The ſcottiſh King moued

with theſe inſtigations, and partly of himſelfe deſirous to reuenge old iniuries, eſpecially whilſte the King of England was yet in his nouage, vppon conſultation of the matter, ſent commaundement for the aſſembling of his people to meete him at a certaine time ready furniſhed and appointed for the warres, vppon the borders of England and Scotland. When they were come together, a certaine Scottiſh Lord deſirous to ſhew ſome proffe of his vaſor and bold courage, aſſociating himſelfe with ſome fewe others, in the night ſeaſon whilſte the watch were all ſleeping or negligēt, without any great difficulty ſurpriſed the caſtle of Barwicke. When the gouernour of the towne vnderſtood The Caſtle of Barwicke ſurpriſed by the Scottiſh. it, he gatherd together a company of the townſemen and early in the morning aſſoone as any daylight appeared, firſt brake downe the bridge (which was the onely paſſage to iſſue out,) and then environed the caſtle round about with a ſiege, ſo ſtraightly that it was impoſſible for his enemy to make any evaſion. The people of the country being alſo certified by him how the matter ſtood, brought in ten thouſand men to his ayde. At the tydings whereof, the Scottiſh men raiſed their campe to come and reſcue their beſieged companions. But they were ſo terrified with the greatnes of the Engliſh army, that they would not aduenture the curteſie of fortune. So in concluſion, aſſault was giuen, the caſtle recovered, and all that were in it were Againe recocouered by the Engliſh. put to the ſword, ſaue onely the captaine himſelfe, vppon whoſe authoritie this enterpriſe was vndertaken. After the Caſtle was thus gotten againe, it ſeemed good to the Engliſhmen to purſue their eniemies in their retreyte, which they likewiſe did, though it fell out to their own deadly diſaduantage, fortune fauouring the Scottiſh.
               Pope Gregorie in time paſt had made a ſolemne vow, that if euer he attained to the Papacy, he would neuer keepe his reſidence any other where then are Rome. This was very offenſiue to ſome of the Cardinals which bare ſcarce good affection to the Romaines: and it was nothing pleaſing

to the french King, who was deſirous to haue had the Pope his neerer neighbour. Therefore he ſent his brother the Duke of Aniow to Avinion to perſwade with him, but he was not able to diuert him from his purpoſe. So he went to Rome, the place he deſired, and within a while after there ended his life. When the Cardinals as the cuſtome is were aſſembled together for the election of another, the people of Rome began to make great tumult in the court, threatning violent effects of their diſpleaſure, if they made choyce of any other to be Pope, then ſuch a one Great tumult about the election of a Pope. as was both by birth and anceſtors a Romaine: And therewithall ruſhing in amongſt the Cardinals, and with their fury interrupting their buſineſſe, it came to paſſe by meanes of this diſturbance, that one was choſen for Pope which was 100 yeeres old. This man the Romanes hoyſed vp vpon a white Mule, and with great ſolemnity led him about the Citie. But the crooked old man wearie with this troubleſome kind of curteſie, and tyred with this tumbling vp and downe, within three daies afeer gaue vp the ghoſt. Wherevppon enſued another hurliburly, the Romaines therein with arrogant threates ſhewing themſelues more outragious then before. At length a Romaine borne was elected and called afterward by the name of 
                     Ʋrbane the ſixt.
               About the ſame time dyed the Queene of Navarre the french kings ſiſter, and by her deceaſe a certaine ſeigniory in Normandy fell to Charles and Peter the King of Nauarres ſonnes, which were brought vp in the french Court. Many counſelled the french King to ſeize into his hands all the King of Navarres poſſeſſions in Normandy, and to hold the ſame till his ſonnes were come of age. The King of Navarre miſtruſting as much, requeſted to haue his Sonnes ſent home, pretending that he was purpoſed to beſtow the elder of thē in marriage with the King of Spaines daughter. Anſwere was returned by the french King, that his ſonnes could not be in a better or more honourable

place then in his Court. For he would bring them vp in all reſpects, as was fitting for the Sonnes of a King, and ſuch as were alyed in bloud to himſelfe. This anſwere was taken in diſpleaſure by the King of Navarre, who therevppon fortified thoſe places of Normondy againſt the force of the french men. Many important occaſions mooued the french King to conceiue offence againſt the King of Navarre, but eſpecially that matter of poiſoning, which we told you before was confeſſed. Wherefore ſending an army againſt him, he ſubdued Mountpelier, and the country about it, which at that time were vnder the King of Nauarres ſubiection.
               The King of Navarre being thus moleſted both vpon the frontiers of his owne kingdome, and in Normandy, (for the French King had ſent an army thither alſo) made requeſt to the King of England by ambaſſadours, that he might be receiued into his frendſhip. The King of England ſent him anſwere, how he thought it expedient, that if he would deale ſeriouſly and effectually in matters of ſuch importance, he ſhould come into England himſelfe. This motion was well accepted by the King of Nauarre, and accordingly he repaired into England: where recounting his misfortunes, after the matter had been debated in counſell, he was receiued into league and amity with the King of England, vppon theſe or the like conditions. 1. That from thenceforth euer after he ſhould take part with the Engliſh: 2. That he ſhould neuer make peace with the french King or the King of Spaine vppon any tearmes whatſoeuer, without conſent of the King of England and King Richard entreth into league with the King of Navarre.
                   his counſell: 3. That he ſhould fortifie the Caſtle of Chirburg in Normandy, and maintaine a garriſon in it for three yeeres ſpace to the vſe of the King of England: 4. That, if it ſhould happen the Engliſhmen to recouer any townes in theſe quarters from the french, then the King of England to haue the profits of the ſame, the propriety of the places remaining to the King of Navarre. And this

eſpecially was moſt acceptable to the Engliſh, becauſe from thence they might alwaies haue acceſſe into France at their pleaſure. It was further agreed, that the King of England ſhould immediatly ſend foure thouſand horſemen into Navarre to be employed againſt the Spaniard, and that it ſhould not be lawfull for them to depart out of the King of Navarres ſeruice, till ſuch time as the warres were finiſhed. This to be done, not at the King of Englands charged, but his owne.
               The french King being aduertiſed by ſome of the King of Navarres owne houſhold, that he was purpoſed to goe into England, perſwaded the king of Spaine to make inuaſion vppon his country in the meane while. The commaunder of that army which the french King had ſent into Normandy was a great ſouldier, and one well experienced in martiall affaires, called the Lord Cowcy. This man whilſte the King of Navarre was abſent negotiating his affaires in England, recouered many townes and fortreſſes thereabout, and with ſo much more facility becauſe he caried in his company Charles the King of Nauarres eldeſt ſonne; in whoſe behalfe when many heard thoſe warres were vndertaken, they ſtoode not much vppon reſiſtance▪ Onely the Caſtle of Chirburg remayned ſtill to be brought in ſubiection.
               
                  Henrie King of Caſtile beſieging Bayon (a towne of the Engliſh dominion) with a great army, had ſurely enforced them to yeeld had not the plague conſumed his ſouldiers. Neuertheloſſe he brought not forth his forces in vaine, for he ſubdued many other townes thereabouts: and beſides a great part of his army was conveyed to the ſiege of Pampelone the chiefe Citie of Nauarre.
               
               I told you before of one Ivan a welch man, who after the death of his father Prince of Wales, had from thenceforth of a child beene brought vp vnder Phillip, Iohn, & Charles, Kings of Fraunce. This Ivan being growne to mans eſtate, and deſirous of reuengment, omitted no occaſion whereby

he might worke diſpleaſure to the Engliſh: and in all military employments ſo demeaned himſelfe, that the french King held him in great reputation. As he lay at the ſiege of a certaine Caſtle in the country of Burdeloys, and had brought the beſieged to that point that famine muſt of neceſſity haue enforced them to yeeld, a certaine welchman vnder pretence of bringing priuate intelligence of his countrymens good affection, inſinuated himſelfe into his acquaintance, and in concluſion waiting oportunitie one day when he had no other company about him, cruelly murthered 
                     Ivan of VVales trecherouſly muthered by one Iames Laube a welch man, as he lay at the ſiege of a certaine caſtle called Moctaine.
                   him vnawares as he ſat idely gazing vppon the Caſtle & combing his head. The reſt of the Captaines though they were much troubled with this ſhāefull murther of ſo gallant a ſouldier, yet continued their ſiege very ſtraightly notwithſtanding. But vpon the approche of a great number of Engliſhmen comming by ſea, both the french men, and Britons (which ioyned to their ayd) were conſtrained to breake vp their campe and leaue their enterpriſe vnperformed. By this occaſion the Engliſhmen recouered much in the territory of Burdeauz.
               
               Amongſt other places, the Engliſh had beſieged a towne in Britaine called Saint Maloes, at that time in poſſeſſion Saint Maloes beſieged. of the french men. Many aſſaults were giuen and thoſe very violent, but the french King then abyding at Roan, ſent an army, whoſe comming ſomewhat abated the fury of the aſſaylants, and gaue a ſtop to their proceedings. Neuertheles they went forward with their enterpriſe and attempted to cōpaſſe it by vndermining. Which when the towneſ-men perceiued, taking the aduantage of opportunity, one night very ſecretly they iſſued out of the towne, and whilſt their enemies kept negligent watch, brake vp the mines in ſuch ſort, that thoſe which laboured in the workes vnderneath, were ouerwhelmed with the earth which they tumbled vppon them. The Engliſh thus preuented, and diſappointed of their purpoſe, thought it beſt for their behoofe to returne into their couuntrey. Two of the King

of Englands vncles were cheefe cōmanders in this ſeruice.
               
                  Iohn the King of Spaines Sonne (termed the infant of Spaine) and the Conſtable of Spain together beſieged Pampelone. The King of Nauarre emboldened with the aſſiſtance of the Engliſh, valiantly defended himſelfe and was purpoſed to haue giuen battell in the field: but King Henrie vppon ſome occaſions recalled his ſonne, and ſo the army was diſperſed. The Engliſhmen and Nauarroys together purſued the Spaniards in their departure, and burned and ſacked certaine townes and villages vppon the frontiers. Wherewith the King of Spaine was ſo vehemently mooued, that he rayſed an army of ſome forty thouſand, in purpoſe to haue beſieged Tudell, the place where the King of Nauarre wintered. But by mediation of good men, a meanes was found to make peace between them. Which was, that Charles the King of Nauarres ſon ſhould take to wife the King of Spaines daughter, and the King of Spaines Sonne ſhould likewiſe marry the King of Nauarres daughter. This Charles (as we told you) had been detained certaine yeeres by the french King: but at ſuch time as this treaty of marriage tooke effect, vpon the king of Spaines requeſt, he was honourably ſent home to her father. Immediatly vppon the concluſion of theſe matters, the King of Spaine deceaſſed, and Iohn his ſonne with the 
                     Henrie the baſtard King of Castile deceaſeth and Iohn his Son ſucceedeth. generall conſent and approbation of the ſtate, was receiued in his ſteed. The Duke of Lancaſter and his brother (who had married the daughters of Pietro the tyrant ſlaine by King Henrie) tooke it in high diſpleaſure that the matter was knit vp in this ſort; not a little enuing the new kings coronation. The King of Portingall alſo was very much offended at the ſucceſſion of King Iohn, as ſhall be declared more at large hereafter.
               The French king being a notable politicke Prince, and of great experience in matters of ſtate, to the intent he might more commodiouſly maintaine his warres againſt Edmond of Langly. the Engliſh, ſent an ambaſſadour into Scotland to retayne

the Scottiſh King in amity and frendſhip. This man arriuing by the way at Sluce in Flaunders from whence he purpoſed to haue proceeded on his iouruey, was by the magiſtrate of the towne brought before the Earle then remayning at Bruges: where by occaſiō of ſome vndiſcreet ſpeeches, he was reprooued and ſharpely checkt with tearmes of reproch, both by the Earle of Flaunders himſelfe, and by the Duke of Britaine; inueying earneſtly againſt ſuch kind of perſons, as the chiefe cauſers of all diſſention and vnquietnes. There were others alſo which put him in feare that if he committed himſelfe to ſea, it was likely that the Engliſhmen lying in waight for ſuch oportunities, would intercept him in his paſſage. Here vppon altering his purpoſes he returned into Fraunce without diſpatch of his commiſſion: and vppon the report he made of theſe matters, the french King wrote very ſharpe letters to the Earle of Flaunders, exhorting and aduiſing him as he tendred his owne welfare, that he ſhould not foſter his enemy the Duke of Britaine. When the Earle had imparted theſe letters to his counſell, there were none but perſwaded him, that a baniſhed Prince forced in ſuch ſort to flye his country, was by all meanes to be releeued: many of them boaſting, that if it ſhould come to the puſh to haue warres for the matter, Flaunders was able to withſtand the vttermoſt that Fraunce could doe. Neuertheles the duke of Britaine ſhortly after of his owne accord departed into England, and the minds and affections of his people began to incline more fauourably towardes him then in former times they had done.
               It is declared before, how the Cardinals after the death of Pope Gregorie, to pacify the tumult of the Romanes, had through feare and compulſion choſen 
                     Ʋrbane the ſixt. Now becauſe this 
                     Ʋrbane by reaſon of his pride and inſolency was miſliked of all men, the Cardinals by generall conſent proceeded to a new election, and choſe Robert biſhop of Cambrey, called afterwards by the name of Clement.
                  
There remained at that time in the territory of the Romanes one Robert Budaeus, a m
                     •
                  n honourably deſcended 
                     He is called Silueſter Budaeus. Froſs. Chro. Li
                        •
                     . 2. in the country of Britaine and a ſtout warriour, hauing twoo thouſand of his country men vnder his command. Him did Pope Clement ſollicite for the maintenance of his quarrell, who nothing miſliking the motion, was ſecretly conveyed with his men into the Caſtle from thence, to worke diſturbance to the Romanes. On the other ſide the Romanes oftentimes ſent the Germane and Italian ſouldiers whome they had waged in their defence, againſt theſe Britons: and they handled the matter in ſuch ſort, that their enemies wearied with their often and continuall aſſaultes, were at length conſtrained to yeeld vp the Caſtle vppon no other conditions, but only the ſauing of their liues. Robert their captaine who was not preſent at the dooing hereof, but lay encamped without the Citie, when he heard theſe tydings, waighted oportunitie till ſuch time as he vnderſtood by his eſpialles, that the Romanes ſhould aſſemble together in the Caſtle to conſult of their affaires: then taking his way through ſecret paſſages, and vnder the euenings couert entring cloſely into the Citie euen at the fitteſt time that could be wiſhed for his purpoſe, he aſſayled the Romanes as they came out of the counſell houſe, vnarmed and ſuſpecting no ſuch matter: of whome he made a terrible ſlaughter, and killed many of the principall men and cheefe Citizens amongſt them. After the accompliſhment of which miſch
                     •
                  efe, he returned againe to his campe at leyſure.
               When the French King vnderſtood that a newe Pope was created, he called a conuocation of certaine eſtates & chiefly of diuines, demaunding their opinion whether of the two Popes ought in this diuerſitie to be acknowledged. Their cenſures for the moſt part as happeneth in ſuch caſes, were variable and different. The Lords of the ſpiritualty with the Kings brothers, and many of the diuines, were of opinion that Cleoment ought to be receiued. This

determination pleaſed the King well, and was immediately proclaymed through the whole kingdom, that a certainty might generally be knowne for his ſubiects to truſt vnto. Of the ſame iudgement were the King of Spaine, the Earle of Savoy, the Duke of Millaine, and the Queene of Naples. Charles of Boheme the Emperour diſſembled his minde, notwithſtanding the greater parte of the Empire tooke parte with Pope Vrbane. The Scottiſh King alſo inclined to Clement. Lewis Earle of Flaunders affirmed boldly, that open iniurie was offered to Vrbane: the Henaulters ſtood newter, adhering neither to▪ the one, nor the other. Pope Clement the better to confirme his cauſe, directed the Cardinall of Poytiers into Fraunce and the countries adioyning, to publiſh in all places where he came, how Vrbane had beene by force and violence vtterly againſt the willes of the Cardinalles, intruded into the papacie. It was an eaſie matter to perſwade the French men, who had already giuen ſentence on his ſide. The Earles of Henault and Barband, omitted not to giue him all honourable and curteous entertainment, but for aught elſe, there was nothing to be obtayned at their handes. The Earle of Flaunders had ſent him word long before, that he had no deſire to talke with him, for he accounted Vrbane as chiefe ſhepheard of the Lords flock, and intended neuer to forſake him. Moreouer Pope Clement ſent to Avinion to haue his Court prepared and furniſhed with all things neceſſary againſt his comming.
               About this time the Queene of Naples reſorted to the The Queene of Naples cō
                     meth to the Pope. Pope to treate with him of very important affaires: and thus ſtood the caſe. Lewis of Sicill Duke of Apulia and Calabria, lying vpon his death bed, cauſed this his daughter to come before him & addreſſed his ſpeech to her in this manner. Thou art now (my deare daughter) to enter vpon the inheritance of a moſt flouriſhing eſtate, & I doubt not but many princes will be forward to deſire thee in marriage, in reſpect of this thy goodly and glorious heritage.

Therefore if thou wilt follow thy fathers counſell, match thy ſelfe to a Prince that is rich and powerfull whoſe puiſſance may be able to defend both thee and thy poſſeſſions. And if it happen that thou haſte no iſſue, then make conueyance of all thy patrimony according to the direction of the Pope then being. This my father Robert enioyned me at his death, and this (to diſcharge my ſelfe of that duetie) I likewiſe giue in charge to thee againe. When the father had diſcourſed much more to this effect, the daughter deuoutly promiſed in the preſence of many, that ſhe would not faile in her duety for the performance of his commaund. After her fathers deceaſſe, ſhe was marryed to Andrew the brother of Lewis the King of Hungary: but of this marriage proceeded no iſſue, be reaſon that her husband dyed very young. Afterward ſhe matcht her ſelfe to Charles prince of Tarent, and by him had only one daughter. Againſt this Charles, the King of Hungary moued warres, and ſubdewed from him the countries of Apulia and Calabria, Charles himſelfe being likewiſe taken priſoner in battell and carryed away into Hungary where he ended his life. After him ſhe marryed to the King of Maiorica, and ſent Ambaſſadours into Fraunce to Lewis of Navarre (of whome we haue formerly made mention) for the concluding of a match betweene him and her daughter. Who taking his iourney for the ſame intent, deceaſſed by the way before he could attaine the accompliſhment of his purpoſe. The King of Maiorica in hope to recover his fathers inheritance, prepared to make ſharp warres vpon the King of Arragon, by whome it was with-holden from him. His wife deſirous to retaine him ſtill at home, diſſwaded him all ſhe could from his intended enterpriſe, alleadging how he already enioyed a kingdom large and flouriſhing ſufficient of it ſelfe to maintaine plē
                  ty euen with ſuperfluitie: but ſhe could not preuaile. Therefore giving place to his reſolution, at his departure ſhe earneſtly exhorted him, that he ſhould open all his eſtate

to Charles King of Fraunce who was a wiſe and prudent prince, and declaring to him his iniuries receiued, diſpoſe all his proceedings according to his direction. But the King of Maiorica expecting I know not what greater helpes otherwhere, required ayde of Prince Edward the king of Englands ſonne, who indeede faithfully promiſed him what he was able to performe. Now during his abſence, vppon theſe occaſions his wife ſent a meſſenger to the French King, requeſting him that out of his royall curteſie he would be a meanes to procure her a match for her daughter, ſuch a one as both for the nobilitie of his birth and the worthineſſe of his perſon, were fitting for her eſtate: to the intent that ſo ample & rich poſſeſſions might not at any time fall into the hands of ſtraungers. The frēch king moued with her reaſonable petition, ſent a kinſman of of his, vnto whome ſhe willingly eſpouſed her daughter. The King of Maiorica as is ſhewed before, ended his life in the purſute of his enterpriſe: After his death the Queen marryed againe the fourth time. Whereat the King of Hungaries nephew named Charles, conceiuing great offence, made warres vpon the new king, and beſieging him in a certaine caſtle vppon the ſea coaſt, at the winning therof (which was by compoſition) he tooke both him and her priſoners, and with them alſo her daughter and her huſband, which vnfortunate payre it fortuned ſoone after to exchange this life for a better. The king and his wife were both releaſed, vppon condition that they ſhould ſurrender Apulia and Calabria. Which when Charles had once gotten into his poſſeſſion, thenceforth eſtabliſhing his eſtate, & augmenting his puiſſance by ioyning in league with the princes round about him, he gaped alſo for the kingdomes of Naples, Sicill, and Province. The Queene therefore fearing, and in a manner foreſeeing that aſſoone as ſhe were dead, Charles would with all his forces inuade thoſe dominions, repayred to the Pope diſcourſing to him the whole ſtate of her affayres, and withall beſeeching him

that he would receiue her into his protection. Hereupon by a franke and free graunt, ſhe conueyed Naples, Sicill, Calabria, Apulia & Province, abſolutely to the Pope, to beſtow The Queene of Naples cō
                     ueyeth her inheritance to the Pope. them all vppon whomſoeuer he pleaſed hereafter. The Pope accepted this donatiō of hers very thankfully, & cauſed inſtruments of the ſame made in forme of lawe, to be publikely recorded. Not long after, the Pope at his comming to Auinion beſtowed all thoſe ſeignioryes vppon the Duke of Aniow which came thither from Tholous to viſite him: and this graunt was confirmed to him and to his heyres for euer.
               The men of Bruges endeauoured with great labour and coſt to drawe the riuer Liſa from Gaunt to their towne; & The occaſion of the Flemiſh warres. for effecting thereof, kept well nere fiue hundreth men at worke. The Gauntoyes being certifyed of their proceedings, began to make ſome ſtirre and to ſhew themſelues diſcontent with the matter. There was at that time in Gaunt a meruailous factious fellowe and very popular, called Iohn Lyon, one that applyed his whole ſtudie and induſtry to incenſe 
                     Iohn Lyon a ſeditious fellow in Gaunt, bringeth vp the faction of the white cappes. the people againſt their Prince. His counſell being demaunded by the commons in this matter; with a ſet ſpeech and compoſed countenance, he made anſwere to this effect. That in truth this attempt of the men of Bruges was not to be tollerated, but withall, that an auncient cuſtome of the cittie (very laudable though at that time growne out of vſe) was neceſſary to be renued, namely, that all ſuch as were deſirous of the auncient libertie, ſhould we are white cappes. For (ſayd he) the Gauntoyes haue had many and thoſe very notable priueledges aboue others, which by little and little were now worne out of date and vtterly extinguiſhed, to the great wrong & preiudice of the citizens: and if they would be ſo contented ſtill, it would come to paſſe in the end, that euen thoſe that remayned ſhould be taken from them. That the cittie of Gaunt had in times paſt ſo flouriſhed that men of great account held themſelues well appayd, and thought no ſmall

honour if eyther by deſert, reward, or fauour they might obtaine to be made free denizens of the citty: but now the world was ſo chaunged, that no man (no not for benefite & commoditie profered him) would much deſire to be admitted into their ſocietie. With theſe and ſuch like ſpeeches he exceedingly ſtirred vp their mindes, and eaſily drew the worſer ſorte of people to followe him. Euery man betooke him to his white cap: and one day amongſt the reſt aſſembling themſelues together, they tooke armes & went forth to deſtroy the labourers of Bruges. But they hauing incling thereof, left their worke vnfiniſhed, and prouided for their ſafety by flight. Another matter which greatly exaggerated their diſpleaſure, was this. The Gauntoys would haue had a towneſman of theirs ſet at liberty whom the Earle had cauſed to be apprehended: exclayming that therby their priuiledges were violated. And therfore when they had ſent their meſſenger to the Sheriffe, and could not obtaine his deliuerance, they made meanes to the Earle to get him releaſed. The Earle promiſed he would willingly afforde them that pleaſure, adding further that he would doe nothing whereby their liberties might any way be infringed, and moreouer that he would giue commandement to the men of Bruges wholy to ſurceaſſe from their attempted enterpriſe, and to fill vp all thoſe ditches which they had digged and cut out already. Deſiring onely in the meane time that they would leaue of that faſhion of wearing white cappes, as a thing that miniſtred perpetuall matter of faction and ſedition. When this anſwere was brought to the Gauntoyes, it greatly alienated their affections from the Earle, eſpecially being ſo exaſperated and prouoked againſt him by Lyon the author of this inſurrection: who perſwaded them confidently that if this cuſtome might be abolliſhed, it were the next way to reduce them againe into their old ſubiection and ſeruitude. Now although the Earle of Flaunders entreated his people faire to lay aſide their cappes, yet neuertheleſſe

he ſent ſome two hundred men to haue entred vnlookt for into the citie, who ſurpriſing Lyon and certaine others, ſhould haue conveyd them from the people, and committed them to priſon. But this matter could not be ſo couertly handled, but Lyon gat knowledge thereof, and had leaſure both to call the people together and to exhort them with vehement perſwaſions, that if euer they would fight for the maintenance of their liberty, they ſhould now preſently make proofe of their valour. Hereupon hauing ſome fower hundred of his faction about him, he proceeded to the market place: where encountring the gouernor of the towne, he ſnatcht the Earles enſigne out of his hands, and tearing it in peaces, trode it vnder his feete, killing the gouernor himſelfe from whome he tooke it. What ſhould I tell you, how mightily the Earles patience was moued with this villany? The citizens & twownedwellers which were of honeſter mindes and better diſcretion, foreſeing that all things tended to a ſorrowfull iſſue, conſulted amongſt themſelues, and ſent certaine of their principall men to make ſute to the Earle for pardon of their offence. The Earle at the firſt receyued them ſomwhat roughly, but afterward leaſt by ſeueritie out of ſeaſon the miſchiefe might haue growne greater, he was content to remit the rigour of his diſpleaſure. Whilſt thoſe men trauelled about the common benefite, Lyon who ſought nothing but trouble and diſturbance, to the intent he might know the certaine number of his followers, muſtred them without the towne, and found them to be almoſt ten thowſand. Then ſpeaking to them in open audience many and diuerſe things concerning the maintenance of their liberty, he gaue them counſell to pull downe a certaine caſtle (which the Earle had lately builded) becauſe from thence the citty might be much annoyed: and it was no hard matter to perſwade his ſeditious multitude. So they eaſily wan it hauing no garriſon to defend it, and when they had rifled, it they ſet it on fire: Lyon in the meane time making

ſhowe as if he had beene ſorrie for the fact, pretending that it happened by miſchaunce, whereas in trueth it was committed of meere malice and ſet purpoſe. Theſe tydings ſo troubled the Earle, that he would not endure to heare the meſſengers of the people ſpeak crauing pardon for this offence, as they had done for the other, but there threatned them to puniſhment as the fact deſerued. For he had beſtowed a great ſome of money about the building of this caſtle, beſides the reproachfulnes of the action, wherewith his noble ſpirit was much more prouoked then by any other occcaſion. The Earle made greuous cō
                  playnt amongſt a great company of noblemen & knights aſſembled at Liſle in Flaunders, of the intollerable pride of his rebellious ſubiects, and of the vnworthy iniu
                     •
                  ies they had offered him; wherewith he ſo moued their affections, that they all with one conſent promiſed him their vttermoſtayd and furtherance, and to be ready prepared for any ſeruice wherein he would employ them. Herevpon ſoldiers were forthwith placed in garriſons and warres begonne; the very originall whereof, is the ſame which wee haue already diſcourſed.
               When the Earles minde was thus incenſed againſt the Flemmings, Lyon hauing thereby gotten greater opportunity, after he had in open aſſembly ſlaunderouſly inveyed againſt the cruelty and obſtinate wilfulneſſe of the aduerſe party, and vnder that pretext perſwaded the people that it was very neceſſarie to procure their neighbours to ioyne with them in league and confederacie, he againe muſtered his ſouldiers by the poule, and found them to be nerehand twelue thouſand. Amongſt others which followed his faction, were the men of a certaine towne called Damme: in which towne ſhortly after Lyon dyed very ſuddainly, not without ſuſpition of poyſoning. The men of Ipre were The death of Lon.
                   likewiſe of his confederacy, into which towne the rebells entring by permiſſion of the commons, ſlue certaine gentlemen that lay therein garriſon. After Lyon was dead,

the Gantoyes created them newe captaines, and being aſſiſted by the men of Bruges and many other townes which tooke their parte, their number encreaſing to an infinite multitude, they beſieged (a long while to little purpoſe) The Earle of Flaunders beſieged by his ſubiects. the Caſtle of Teremund, wherein the Earle of Flaunders at that time remayned. Wherefore rayſing their ſiege and ioyning thoſe forces to the reſt of their army, they proceeded forward to the towne of Arde, which they ſtreytly beleagered, and the towneſmen as ſtoutly defended. Notwithſtanding, when no way could be deuiſed to bring victuall to the beſieged, the Earle foreſeing that the neceſſity thereof in concluſion would force them to yeeld, wiſhed ſecretly that ſome conditions of peace might be procured betweene them. Hereunto alſo his mother the Lady of Artoyes was meruailouſly inclined: who but lately before addreſſing moſt friendly letters to the Duke of Burgundy (which had marryed the Earle of Flanders daughter) earneſtly beſought him that he would employ his diligent endeauour to bring this matter of agrement to effecte. For the accompliſhment whereof a treaty being had at Tournay, after fifteene dayes ſpent in debating of diuerſe matters (the Gauntoyes in that while ſhewing themſelues very arrogant & luſty) at length it was concluded to this purpoſe. That the Gantoyes ſhould breake vp their ſiege before Ard, and within one yeare next enſuing reedify the caſtle which they had lately raced: and that the Earle laying aſide all memory of former diſpleaſures, ſhould come and make his reſidence at Gaunt. The Duke of Britaine becauſe he was loth by his long ſoiourning with the Earle of Flaunders, to procure him the French Kings diſpleaſure, departed from thence (as I tolde you before) into England. During his continuance there, he receiued verie comfortable The Duke of Britaine returneth into his country. letters from almoſt all the ſtates of his countrie, ſolliciting his returne home againe: wherupon by the King of Englands aduiſe he returned, but not without Engliſh ayd for his better aſſurance and ſafety.
               
                  
When the Earle of Flaunders according to his former agreement, was come to Gaunt, he made an eloquent oration before all the people, wherein he at large declared his good affection, (by the way lightly glauncing at their ingratitude) and withall (doing the office of a gracious Prince) exhorted them, from thencefoorth to maintaine peace and tranquility in the common wealth. For his part, proteſting that he would ſo order all his affaires, as no occaſion of trouble ſhould any way be deriued frō his proceedings. Onely this he requeſted with great earneſtnes at their hands, that they would forbeare that faſhion of wearing white cappes, and cauſe the cuſtome thereof to be diſcontinued. To all the reſt of his ſpeech they gaue quiet attention, but aſſoone as he talked of laying aſide their cappes, yee might haue ſeene the colours and countenances of moſt of them changed. The Earle (as it is likely) perceyuing their mindes, and conſidering with himſelfe that the ſeedes of diſcord were generally diſperſed amongſt them, diſmiſſed his audience and departed out of Gaunt. This was a pleaſant ſpectacle to the ſeditious, but the honeſtly affected were greatly greeued that this priuate grudge and inward debate ſhould thus be more and more augmented.
               After the Earle of Flaunders had forſaken the towne of Gaunt, a certaine gentleman mooued with deſire of reuenge for the death of the gouernour his kinſeman lately murthered by the rebelles, made defiance to the Gauntoys, & by occaſion ſet vpon certain marchants as they were ſayling vp the riuer of Skeld with corne for prouiſion of the towne. He tooke thē and cut off their hands & put out their eyes: which fact of his was generally interpreted by townſmen as done by the Earles direction. The ſeditious ſort, as if hereby a gap had been opened to doe what miſchiefe they liſted, aſſembled to the number of fiue thouſand men, and ſuddainely ſurpriſed Arde, (which at that time was vnfurniſht for defence, expecting no daunger in regard

the peace was ſo lately concluded) and when they had taken it, beat down certaine gates and towers, and that part of the wall which looked towards Gaunt. Then the Earle being as it were ouercome, and vanquiſhed with their intollerable outrage, after he had by his meſſengers directed into the Citie, layed open in plaine tearmes before the people, both their wicked proceedings, and his patient forbearance, proclaymed open warres and vtter enmity againſt them.
               In the meane ſeaſon thoſe citizens which were deſirous of peace, perſwaded and preuailed with the reſt, that to mittigate the Earles diſpleaſure, they ſhould make reſtitution of the towne they had taken, and baniſh certaine of the chiefe authors of the enterpriſe. This thing gaue the Earle ſome ſatisfaction. And for example ſake, he put to death certaine commoners of the towne of Ipre, which had been chiefe moouers of the late inſurrection. Vpon the report whereof, the rebels and ring
                     •
                  eaders of miſchiefe at Gaunt, began to miſtruſt that all would be amiſſe on their ſides alſo. Wherefore following the counſell of one of their own ſtampe (who was of opinion that liberty could not be procured, but by ſubuerſion of the nobilitie and gentlemens eſtates) they ouerthrew and beat downe all the Caſtles and gentlemens houſes they could come to, and rifling their goods, diuided the ſpoile amongſt them. The gentlemen mooued with this violent iniury, and increaſed in number by the loſſe of their ſubſtance, vppon complaint to the Earle, obtained his licence and with ſuch power as they procured, made cruell warres vppon the Gauntoys. Who fearing leaſt the Earle ſhould procure ayd out of Fraunce, they ſent meſſengers afore hand to the French King, beſeeching him that he would not take armes againſt their common wealth; affirming that they contended with their Lord and endured the diſcommodities of warre, not vppon any wilfull obſtinacy, but in deſire to maintaine their liberty. The french King being already ſcarce well pleaſed with

the Earle of Flaunders for harbouring the Duke of Britaine, both condiſcended to their requeſts, and gaue them encouragement. Pope Clement alſo, whome the Earle had refuſed to acknowledge, was nothing forgetfull thereof, but kept it in mind againſt occaſion ſhould ſerue, to worke him as great a diſpleaſure.
               When the Duke of Britaine (as we haue told you) being King Richard aydeth the Duke of Britaine.
                   called home by his ſubiects letters, was returned into his country, the King of England according to promiſe ſent a number of ſouldiers to his ſuccour: but by violence of tēpeſt they were driuen back into England. The duke in the meane while not knowing hereof, and wondering at the occaſion of their delay, ſollicited the King againe for ayd. Herevppon the King ſent on of his vncles, (the youngeſt ſon of King Edward) and with him ſix thouſand men. After 
                     Thomas of VVoodstocke the Earle of Buckingham.
                   he had paſſed through a good part of Fraunce, when he approched nere his enemy the Duke of Burgundy, the French Kings brother; the Duke was deſirous to haue giuen him battell; but the French King for weighty conſiderations commanded the contrary, preſuppoſing it would come to paſſe that they might be diſſeuered of themſelues. And as he was indued with a kind of fortunate diſcretion for the managing of his affaires, he practiſed by his letters as ſecretly as might be with the men of Nants, (a rich and populous Citie in thoſe quaters) putting them in remembrance of their dutie, and earneſtly deſiring them that they would not take part with his enemies againſt him. They in regard of their affection to Fraunce, promiſed aſſurance of their good will and faithfull endeauour, thereby diſcharging the kings mind of al doubts, and that they might better make reſiſtance againſt their enemies, they requeſted him to ſend a conuenient number of ſouldiers to remaine with them in garriſon. The Engliſhmen after a comberſome iourny and many difficulties, at length arriued in Britaine. My author reporteth that the Engligmen were wont to obſerue this cuſtome: that when they went forth to warfare

into any forraine country, they were ſolemnly ſworne to their King, firſt to conceale and in any wiſe to keepe ſecret all counſels and purpoſes concerning the ſeruice vndertaken: and then that they ſhould conclude no abſolute peace with the enemy, but with the conſent and approbation of their King and his nobility.
               As the Engliſhmen (according to my former ſpeech) were marching through the middeſt of Fraunce towards Britaine, King Charles the wiſeſt and moſt prudent Prince of his times, fell gre
                     •
                  uouſly ſicke. It is declared before how certaine of the King of Nauarres frends had giuen him poyſon. The op
                     •…
                   of which poyſon was ſo violent, that both his haire an
                     •…
                   nailes fell off, and his body became ſo withered, that ſcarce the image of a man remained. Neuertheles the Emperour ſent him a certaine Germaine phiſition, who abated the force thereof in ſuch ſort, both nayles and haire and health alſo by little and little returned. But his body could neuer be ſo cleerely purged, King Charles the 5. dyeth of poyſontaken long before. but ſome part of the venome remained, which being drawne into his arme, diſtilled out at an iſſue made for the purpoſe. And the phiſition told him at his departure, that whenſoeuer that iſſue dried vp, he ſhould not liue long after. Therefore deſpairing of health, and feeling his own weaknes, he ſent for his brethren the dukes of Burgundy and Berry, with the Duke of Burbon, to whome he ſpake in this manner: (as for the Duke of Aniow becauſe he ſeemed ſo His ſpeech at his death. gripple and couetous, he deſired not his preſence.) I feele vndoubtedly my deere brothers, that I cannot long continue amongſt you. Therefore I commend Charles my ſonne to your tuition, beſeeching you that you will be alwaies aſſiſtant to him with your wiſedome and counſell, as it becommeth vncles to aſſiſt their nephew which muſt vndergoe the weight of ſo great a burthen, and that in ſo tender yeeres as he can no waies be able to helpe himſelfe. Aſſoone as I am dead, let it be your care to ſee him crowned: for in you I repoſe all my truſt and confidence. Ye ſee he

is but a very child, and therfore ſhall ſtand in need of good bringing vp and wholeſome inſtruction. So let him be taught, and trayned vp in all points pertaining to the office of a king, as it may appeare to the world that you haue performed your duties. And for a wife when time ſhall ſerue and yeeres be fitting, let me entreat you to make his choice, for birth and eſtate ſuch a one, as by her match the realme may rather be honoured, then impayred. I haue had much conference with a certaine Aſtronomer of great learning and iudgement; who told me, that in the time of his youth he ſhould be put to much trouble and diſquietnes, and ſhould eſcape many caſualties of fortune. Surely I haue often and very much conſidered with my ſelfe, by what occaſions ſuch things ſhould come to paſſe. For at this preſent through the diuine fauour, ye haue a ſtate reaſonable quiet and ſetled. Of Flaunders I know not what to thinke: the Duke of Britaine is ſubtill, a friend to the Engliſh, an enemy to vs: therefore it is behoouefull that ye retaine the cheefe Cities of Britaine in loue and amitie, for by this meanes ſhall the Dukes counſelles be fruſtrate. Surely the Britons deſerue to be commended, and are worthy to be well eſteemed: for they haue alwaies done me faithfull ſeruice, both in defending my kingdome, and purſuing my enemies. Send into Germanie, to prouide a wife for my ſonne in thoſe quarters, that by ſuch meanes the bond of league and frendſhippe betwixt vs may be more ſtrongly combined. Ye haue heard how the King of England takes the ſame courſe, and ſeekes a wife from thence, that he may ſtrengthen and eſtabliſh his affaires by ſuch alliance. This realme of ours (as we ſee) is much diſquiered, and ſuffereth many diſpleaſures by the Engliſh: I beſeech you endeuor to take away all ſuch occaſions of warre and enmity. For howſoeuer I may ſeeme to haue nouriſhed warres, yet in my heart I haue vtterly abhorred them, and the thought thereof at this preſent moues no ſmall remorce in my conſcience. Theſe and many other things

were ſpoken by him to the like effect. The Duke of Aniow was abſent as I told you a little before, notwithſtanding by meſſengers that went and came, hee eaſily vnderſtood how all things paſſed: and vppon aduertiſement from ſome of his frends remayning at the Court, he came to Paris the ſame day that the King ended his life. As 1380. ſoone as he heard certainely that the King was dead, incontinently he ſeazed vpon all the kings apparell and iewelles and whatſoeuer elſe was there of worth or value. For at the ſame time he had determined vppon a iourney into Naples, towards the furniture whereof he had need of many ſuch neceſſaries, eſpecially being ſo augmented in honour as he was lately before by the gift of Pope Clement.
               
               Now although it were appointed by the kings will who ſhould haue the adminiſtration of his goods, yet neuertheles the duke of Aniow took it vpon him, & his brothers did not greatly gainſay him, peraduēture inreſpect he was their elder. Afterward it was decreed by the Peeres of the Realme, that ſo ſoone as the coronation of their new King were finiſhed, the gouernment of the ſtate ſhould be committed to his vncles, to remaine in their hands till the king 1380. came to one and twentie yeares of age. To the coronation of this King were called Albert Duke of Bavaria, the The coronation of Charles the fixt. Earle of Savoy, and the dukes of Gelders and Iuliers: there were alſo preſent Wenceſlaus Duke of Braband, with the duke of Loraine, the Earle of Marche, and others. The Earle of Flaunders excuſed himſelfe. The young King was then twelue yeares old, he had one brother, and one ſiſter, both, by father and Mother; their names were Lewis, and Katherine. After theſe ſolemnities ended, great conſultacion was had about matters concerning the honour and fafety of the kingdome. At length it was concluded, that the duke of Berry ſhould gouerne all that prouince which is commonly called Languedoc, the duke of Burgoine ſhould rule Picardy and Normandy, and the duke of Aniow remaining about the kings perſon, ſhould haue the chiefe

gouernment of the whole kingdome.
               King Charles was a Prince ſo wiſe and prudent, that ſitting The cōmendation of King Charles the 5. in his gowne at Paris in eaſe and quietnes, he recouered many things by counſell and policie, which his predeceſſors fighting themſelues in the field with all the forces they could make, had loſt before in battell, to their enemies. And amongſt other vexations which happened to King Edward at his laſt voyage that he intended into Britaine for the reſcue of his men beſieged, when he was forced backe by the extremitie of weather: this one thing troubled him aboue the reſt, that he muſt make warre with ſuch an enemie as neuer bare armes, nor came into the field: whervppon it is reported he ſhould ſay, that he neuer delt with any enemie which vſed ſo little armor and put him to ſo much trouble. For indeed King Charles after he came to the crowne, neuer put on armour himſelfe, but mannaging all his affaires by wiſedome and policy, committed the execution thereof to his brothers.
               
                  Charles the ſixt.
                  IT is ſhewed before how the youngeſt ſonne of King Edward paſſed with his forces through Fraunce into Britaine to ayd the Duke: who albeit he were recalled by his ſubiects (as I told you) yet the King of Fraunce wrought ſo much by his policy that he found ſmall faithfulnes, and but cold affection in many of them, eſpecially in the people of Nants and ſome others. When the duke Thomas Earle of Buckingham. diſcourſed of his vnfortunate aduentures, and the ſubtilty of his enemies proceedings, the King of Englands ſonne alwaies comforted him and promiſed aſſurance of frendſhip and ſuccour. So they agreed betweene themſelues

to beſiege the towne of Nants with both their forces vnited together, and the Engliſhmen went about it without 
                        Nants beſieged. further delay. The Duke of Britaine in the meane time ſollicited his people to furniſh him with ſuccours for the proceeding in his enterpriſe. But they made him anſwere, that they would in no wiſe waſte their owne country for the Engliſhmens pleaſures, and that they would neuer take armes in his quarell ſo long as the Engliſhmen lingred in Britaine. This was the very occaſion and impediment which made him breake promiſe with the Engliſh. And the King of Englands ſonne meruailing what the matter meant, began to be ſomewhat offended, eſpecially becauſe there came no newes at all from the duke (the meſſengers which carried letters between them being indeed cut off by the way.) At length after long and dayly expectation when he had ſpent two moneths in the ſiege, finding that all he could do of himſelfe was but labour loſt, vnleſſe more forces came from his confederate, leauing his enterpriſe vnperformed, he himſelfe tooke his iourney to the duke, intending to know directly what was his purpoſe & reſolution. The Duke aduiſ
                        •
                     dly purged himſelfe, imputing the blame to his people, by whoſe treachery being deceiued, he was not able to performe his promiſe. Neuertheleſſe, to render his friend ſome ſatisfaction, he gaue him leaue to winter with his army at 
                        Ʋannes.
                  
                  During the time that Nants was beſieged, certaine noble men of Britaine of more eminent reſpect and authority then the reſt, had ſome communication with their Prince in theſe words, or the like. Sir, you ſufficiently declare and manifeſtly ſhew, that you are wholy addicted to the Engliſh nation. But what fruite or commodity, what honour or aduauncement, doe you expect from their friendſhip? what motiues induce you to obſerue them with ſuch affection? For when you haue brought thē into Britaine, they ſhall bereaue you of your goods, and diſpoſſeſſe you of your inheritance deſcended from your

aunceſtors, and this they will doe if euer they obtaine the vpper hand of the French men. Let the King of Nauarres example moue you: who in regard of the ſingular good opinion he had conceiued of their faithfulnes, committed into their hands the towne and caſtle of Chirburg: whereinto being once admitted, they would neuer out of it but held it for euer after as their owne. By like occaſion, if through your ſufferance and fauour they be once receiued into our citties here, neuer perſwade your ſelfe that they will at any time forgoe them: for they may alwaies haue ayd out, of their owne country at pleaſure, whereby their courage ſhall be refreſhed, & their forces renewed. We neede not ſeeke farre for a preſident: ſee you not how they detaine Breſt, a towne entirely of your owne ſeigniory and iuriſdiction? But when will they finde time to reſtore it againe? aſſure your ſelfe for certainty they intend nothing leſſe. Let this therefore be your warning, and holde your ſelfe well appayd that you are beloued of your people, who are reſolutely of this minde and purpoſe, neuer to forſake the French king to pleaſure the Engliſh, will you for your wiues ſake, becauſe you haue marryed an Engliſh woman, take a courſe to ouerthrow your ſelfe and your eſtate? will you therefore aduenture the loſſe of ſo goodly and large an heritage, for the keeping whereof you haue ſuſtayned ſo many perills and ſo great dangers? will you be at the charge to maintaine ſoldiers perpetually? what are you able to performe of your ſelfe, when your ſubiects ſhall forſake you, yea and take armes and fight againſt you alſo? But omitting all theſe reaſons and conſiderations: the French King is now dead which was ſo vehemently incenſed againſt you, and in his place his ſonne ſucceded, who is yet very young and of no euill diſpoſition, we will apply our endeauours to reconcile you vnto him, that friendſhip and amity may be eſtabliſhed betweene yo
                        •
                     . So ſhall it come to paſſe, that both you ſhall enjoy your owne without trouble or diſturbance, and theſe Engliſhmen

finding their expectations and purpoſe preuented, ſhall get them home into their country.
                  The Duke although he were much moued with this kinde of diſcourſe, yet diſſembled the matter for feare of giuing offence to the Engliſh. And the noble men which had giuen him this counſell, thinking it was no time to vſe longer delay, poſted ſecretly to the French King lying then at Paris, where declaring what had paſſed, they treated for peace. The Engliſh generall not knowing what was in hand, purpoſed againſt the next ſpring to haue had new ſupplies out of England, and to haue made ſharper warres in Fraunce then before. The French men themſelues miſtruſted as much: foreſeeing that at one time or other ſome great miſchiefe would befall them from the Engliſh. The Britons which negotiated with the King for agreement, perceiuing that ſuch a matter was feared in Fraunce (like diſcrect commiſſioners who obſerue all things diligently in ſuch occaſions, and apply the ſame to their owne aduantage) in their treaty of peace, did meruailouſly exaggerate that point, and with great pollicy, inſomuch that by mentioning ſuch matters and caſting doubts thereupon, they had the French King farre eaſier to be delt with in all their affaires. The Duke of Aniow (as I told you) was chiefe in authoritie: who for that he was purpoſed ſhortly after to take his iourney into Calabria and the other prouinces which he had obtained in gift from the Pope, intended nothing leſſe then that Fraunce ſhould be troubled with any new warres, by occaſion whereof he might loſe the opportunity of performing what he had before determined. Therefore accepting the counſell of the Briton commiſſioners, ſo much rather for the doubts of future warre which they had ſuggeſted into his opinion, he willingly condiſcended to the motion of agreement. So it was concluded, to this effect: that the Duke of Britaine being receiued into The Duke of Britaine recō
                        ciled to the French king, forſaketh the Engliſh. the French kings fauour, ſhould do homage to him for his Dukedome, with performance of all rights belonging to

ſuch ceremonies. And further, to the intent that the Engliſh generall (who vpon the Dukes requeſt had trauelled ſuch an infinite compaſſe of ground to come to his ayd) might in ſome ſort be honourably ſatisfied, it was permitted to the Duke to furniſh him with ſhips and all other things neceſſary for the conueying of him and his people againe into his country. The Engliſh generall ſeeing himſelfe thus deluded, and deceiued, would admit no excuſes, but full of indignation, hoyſed ſayles to the winde & made homeward into England.
                  
                  About this time the Earle of Flaunders was exceedingly incenſed againſt the Gauntoyes for their intollerable proud and arrogant demeanor. It happened the ſame time very fortunately for him, that variance roſe amongſt the men of Bruges, betweene the Aldermen and the Commons: inſomuch that the magiſtrate wrote letters to the Earle, inſtantly deſiring his preſence. Whereupon he came, and hauing put to death ſome fiue hundreth one & other, he receiued the towne into his protection, with certain other of their neighbors which were deſirous of the like fauour. Being therefore emboldened by the acceſſion of theſe forces, he determined to chaſtice the men of Ipre, who had ſlaine certaine gentlemen of his houſhold, and receiued the Gauntoyes into their towne. At their requeſt, the Gauntoyes their confederates ſent three thouſand men to ayd them. The Earles army with the helpe of the men of Bruges amounted well nere to the number of twenty thouſand. The Gantoyes therefore augmented their power likewiſe by leuying nine thouſand more: and ſo proceeding ſome miles on their way, they ſent word to their fellowes, that they ſhould alſo bring forth their men into the field, that ſo with vnited forces they might ioyntly aſſayle their enemie. There came forth ſome eight thouſand, who when they had marched a while in order of battell, arriuing at a three-way leete, and conſulting among themſelues which way was to be taken, at length they followed the ſame

which was forelayd before by any ambuſh of the Earles ſouldiers: whereinto being once falne, before they could cleere themſelues from the daunger, and come to ioyne with their confederates, they loſt three thouſand of their men, the reſt hardly eſcaping by flight. The party which gaue them counſell to enter that paſſage, being accuſed of treaſon for his labour, was by the people in their furie and vprore admitting no excuſe, miſerably ſlaine and torne in peeces one limme from another, euery man ſnatching ſome part to wreake his particular malice. The vnhappy wretch (doubtleſſe) had this puniſhment vndeſerued: for had he committed ſuch a villany, ſurely he would neuer haue truſted himſelfe in their hands afterward.
                  After this good ſucceſſe, the Earle forthwith addreſſed himſelf to the ſiege of Ipre, now whilſt they were all in this feare & perplexity. But the men of Ipre terrifyed with the late accident, ſubmitted themſelues to his mercy. Being receiued into the towne, he put to death ſome 700 commoners, and ſent three hundreth or thereabouts of the wealthyer ſort, priſoners to Bruges. Many other townes following the example of Ipre, yeelded themſelues likewiſe to his obedience. The Gauntoyes therefore which now in a manner alone ſtood out againſt him, were beſieged, but it could not be done ſo ſtreytly, but that victuall and prouiſion might freely be conueyd into the towne at one gate or another. For the place is naturally very ſtrong, both in regard of the ground wherupon it is ſcituate, and the commoditie of two riuers called Skeld and Liſe running by it: therfore he had neede of a very populous army that ſhould enuiron it on all ſides. The towneſmen muſtered themſelues by poule, and there were found of ſuch as for their yeares were able to beare armes, to the number of foure ſcore thouſand. They ſo little eſteemed the ſiege that euen then whilſt their enemies lay before the cittie, they went forth and ſacked certaine townes of Flaunders. Amongſt others the men of Bruxelles fauoured them exceedingly:

and the Liegeois alſo would ſurely haue ſent them ſuccour, but that the great diſtance betweene them was a hinderance to their purpoſe. The Earle perceiuing he did but loſe time and labour in beſieging Gaunt, for that the winter alſo approched, brake vp his ſiege & diſperſed his army. In the beginning of the next ſpring he 1381. leuyed ſome twenty thouſand men and beſieged Gawre. The captaine that lay there in garriſon deſired helpe of the Gauntoyes, and they preſently ſent a band of ſix thouſand: who falling by chaunce vppon ſome ſix hundreth ſoldiers of Arde, which vpon commandement were marching in great haſte towards the Earle, oppreſſed them with their multitude, and ſlue them euery one. Beſides this, one Peter 
                     Peter de Boys. 
                     de Bois a valiant fellowe, receiuing other ſix thouſand men of the Gauntoyes, had couenanted with him that went before to the reliefe of Gawre, that he ſhould not fight with the Earle, but ioyntly together with both their forces. But the other notwithſtanding, hearing that his enemy approched ready to giue battell, was ſo enflamed with deſire of honor, that without further expecting the company of his aſſiſtant, though his owne power were far too weake for ſuch an encounter, yet he put his men in order againſt the enemy. The Earle diuided his battell into fiue ſquadrons, in euery of which were foure thouſand ſoldiers, and giuing charge vpon his enemies, albeit they valiantly defended themſelues, yet by reaſon of their ſmall number, vnable to ſuſtaine ſo great violence, he ſoone ouerthrew them and put them to flight. His horſemen purſued the chace with great cruelty: and when they had withdrawn themſelues for refuge into a certaine monaſtery therby, the Earle becauſe none of the whole rout ſhould eſcape, cauſed fire to be ſet on all the houſing about it. There were two Captaines ouer theſe forces, whereof the one fighting valiantly at the gate of the place was there ſlaine, the other which had gotten himſelfe vp into a tower, was cō
                     pelled at length by violence of the flame which had now

caught hold of euery thing about him, to leape down headlong amongſt the thickeſt of his enemies, where being receiued vpon their pikes and ſwordes points, he was hoyſed vp againe into the fyre and ſo ended his life. All the reſt periſhed miſerably in the fire, three hundreth onely excepted which tooke their flight directly homeward towards Gaunt, and ſo eſcaped. This Peter de Boys whom we ſpake of, being not farre of, ſaw in what diſtreſſe his fellowes remayned, and beheld the ſad ſpectacle of their deſtruction, but by reaſon of a riuer and certaine mariſhes betweene, he was not able to come time enough to their reſcue. For which cauſe aſſoone as he came home with his company to Gaunt, he had like to haue beene ſlaine by the common people. But he alledged ſuch reaſonable excuſe, that he gaue them contentment, and withall perſwaded them, that in regard they had loſt two expert men of warre in this defeat, they ſhould authoriſe ſome one other by whoſe induſtry they thought the affaires of the common wealth might be better directed: for ſo it was needfull hauing to deale with ſuch a cruell enemy.
                  The Earle diſmiſſing a good part of his army, ſent the reſt into garriſons, but eſpecially to the defence of Arde. In the meane time about twelue hundred of the faction of the white cappes, hauing aduertiſement what time certaine gentlemen would raunge abroad out of Arde to fetch in ſome booty, brake out of an ambuſh vppon them as they returned with their prey, and put moſt of them to the ſword. But they eſcaped not ſcot
                        •
                     ree with this trick: for themſelues being circumuented with like policy, by the companions of thoſe that were ſlaine few or none of them returned to boaſt of their enterpriſe.
                  The wealthyer and honeſter ſort of cittizens in Gaunt did greatly lament (though ſecretly to themſelues) that the ſtate of their common weale was thus crazed and ſhaken, their Captaines and men of warre being from time to time killed vp, and themſelues alſo by little and little

conſumed by the Earle of Flaunders. For ſuch raſcall
                        •
                     es and baſe varlets as in time of peace were of no reputation, but rather eſteemed as beggers, by reaſon of their number and power, were now in chiefe authoritie and ruled all things in the cittie at their pleaſure. And becauſe in theſe troubleſome affayres they might both do & commaund what they liſted, they were well pleaſed with this bloudy ſpectacle of daily tumult and inſurrection. Moreouer Peter de Boys the very well-ſpring of miſchiefe, conſidering with himſelfe that howſoeuer matters ſhould fall out, and though the Earle were reconciled to the Ganntoys, yet he ſhould hardly eſcape without perill of his life, began to looke about for a fellow whom he might commēd to the people for their purpoſe, ſuch a one indeede as could ſtirre ſedition cunningly, and would perſiſt in the maintenance thereof to the vttermoſt. At laſt he bethought himſelfe of Philip de Arteuill, the ſonne of Iaques often Phillip of Arteuill. heretofore mentioned; who albeit in regard of his diſpoſition and ſufficiency, he were a fellow fit for ſuch imployment, yet becauſe his father was ſlaine (in ſuch ſort as we haue formerly declared) by the Gauntoyes, hee alwaies kept himſelfe within the compaſſe of a priuate life. In euery place as on paſſed through the cittie, a man might haue heard the peoples words wiſhing againe either for Iaques whom they had already killed, or ſome other ſuch like whom they might follow as their captaine and gouernor. Boys making vſe hereof to his aduantage, brake the matter to ſome of his owne faction, but not before ſuch time as he had conferred with Philip, whome by declaring theſe circumſtances, propoſing great rewards, and ſe
                        •
                     ting before his eies what honour he might obtaine by this meanes in ſuch a cittie as Gaunt, he eaſily allured to his purpoſe. The next day he began to commend Phillip to the people, taking occaſion at his father Iaques, how there was neuer any who with greater fidelity had gouerned the ſtate of Flaunders then he: wherof the old men of the country,

to whome the truth thereof was knowne, could ſufficiently beare witneſſe how he had alwaies moſt earneſtly defended the honour and profit of the country, which could not poſſibly haue eſcaped extreame miſerie long agoe, had it not beene preſerued by the wiſedome of that one man alone, wherefore for his part he thought his countrimen ſhould not doe amiſſe to chooſe an impe of the ſame ſtocke (being no worſe then it was) to place in the common wealth for the maintenance of publike welfare. Through theſe perſwaſions the people made choiſe of Phillip to be their Captaine.
                  It is declared before how Iohn the ſonne of Henry king of Caſt
                           •
                        e, was by generall conſent of the ſtate admitted to the ſucceſſion of the crowne. This much diſpleaſed Ferdinando King of Portugall, who held it a great indignity that the ſonne of a baſtard ſhould be exalted to the gouernment of ſo great a dominion, and the lawfull Kings daughters be diſinherited the while: of whome as we haue ſayd before, the Duke of Lancaſter had married one, and his brother the other. Moued therefore with the vnworthines Edmond of Langly.
                      of the matter, and alſo becauſe he was alyed in bloud to the Ladies, he proclaymed warres againſt the King of Spaine, deſiring ayd of the King of England, who ſent his vncle the Earle of Cambridge with an army, hauing alſo in his company Iſabell his wife and Iohn his ſonne. The Duke of Lancaſter was ſent into Scotland to treate with the Scottiſh King for the renewing of peace, or at leaſt wiſe to take a truce for a ſeaſon. During his abſence, there ſprung vp a moſt perillous inſurrection, the occaſion whereof in effect was this. The country people in thoſe places (as in diuerſe others) hold their livings of the Nobilitie and Gentlemen, in ſuch ſort as they are bound both to till their lands, to fell their corne, to gather it together, beſtowe it in their barnes, threſh it, dreſſe it, and whatſoeuer elſe belongs vnto it: they are alſo bound to cut their wood and carry it home to

their Landlords houſes. Now the ſame time there was a certain maſſe prieſt called Sir Iohn Wallis, who had preached in his ſermōs to the people, that equalitie ought to be obſerued in all things, that one man was no better then another, the gentleman then the churle, the rich then the poore, the learned then the ignorant: but all men were deriued frō the ſelfe ſame parents, euen Adam & Eve, and that our firſt fore-fathers liued all after one ſort, without any ine quality of ſtate, or difference of perſons. Herewithall he perſwaded them to aſſemble in great number, and make ſuite to the King for redreſſe, who becauſe he was young, might perhaps be brought to harken to their requeſts, or if he would not, then to ſet themſelues at libertie by the ſword. This prieſt being apprenhended and committed to priſon for theſe matters, was by the Archbiſhop of Canterburie let looſe, vpon what conſcience I know not, but ſutelie it proued to his owne ſorrow and confuſion. For after he was once abroad, he proceeded with his enterpriſe more boldlie then before. The poorer ſort of the Londoners for enuie they bare to the rich (as it is commonly ſeene) commended this courſe of the rebelles, and by letters ſoll icited them to come to London, promiſing to giue them entrance into the Citie. Herevppon gathering their company together both out of all the country adio
                        •
                     ing, and from ſome places further of, wel neere to the number of threeſcore thouſand, they came to Canterburie a towne of their owne faction, and there ſpoiled the ſhrine of Saint Thomas. Next dare marching forwards, they beat down to the ground all houſes in their way which belonged not to ſome of their conſpiracie, and which way ſoeuer they went they compelled all huſbandmen to be pertakers of their proceedings. At Rocheſter they tooke a certaine knight by force, and Sir Iohn Newton captaine of the Caſtle of Rochester. At Blackheath. made him to become their leader: and for aſſurance that he ſhould not deceiue them, made him deliuer his children into their hands for pledges. When they came within a little of London, they ſent him to the King with this meſſage,

that they were minded to haue ſome ſpeech with him concerning weightie affaires, and therefore that he ſhould come forth and talke with them. The King vppon deliberation, made aunſwere that he would performe their requeſt. So the next day accompanied with certaine lords he entred his barge, and rowing neere the place where they were deſcended to the ſhore in great number expecting his comming, he demaunded of them what they would with him? They required that he would come out of his barge to parlie, and then their demands ſhould be declared vnto him. But the King diſtruſting their multitude, without any further communication returned backe againe. Then being more vehemently mooued, they haſtned to London, making ſpoile of ſome lawyers and gentlemens houſes in their way. And when they approched the Citie, finding the gates ſhut againſt them, they threatned to ſet fire on the ſuburbs, with the cruelleſt effects of their furie beſides, and that if they entred by force, it ſhould be to the vtter deſtruction of all that were in it. The Citizens herewith diſmaid, eſpecially conſidering that a great number within inclined to ſedition and tumult, gaue them entrance. They were no ſooner come in but preſentlie they raunged through all the tauernes and tipling houſes and fell to drinking and making good cheere, no man preſuming ſo much as once to ſay them nay of any thing. The Captaines in the mean while with ſome twentie thouſand, VVat Tiler. Iack Strawe & Iohn Ball. The Sauoy. marching through the middeſt of the Citie, ſet fire on the duke of Lancaſters houſe, and ſome others which they burned to the ground. They put all ſtrangers to the ſword and rifled the houſes of the Exchangers. In the euening they aſſembled themſelues altogether againe in a company before the tower (where the King then remained, and with At Saint Katherines.
                      him a great number of the chiefe of the citie) openly proteſting that they would neuer from thence till ſuch time as they had obtained their purpoſe. The King & ſome others thought it beſt to haue ſet vpon them in the night ſeaſon as

they lay negligently diſperſed and vnarmed, ouerwhelmed with ſleepe & drunkēnes, and ſo to haue defeated them. Others to whome this attempt ſeemed daungerous and of great vncertainty in the euent, iudged it better that means were made to pacifie them with ſome gentle and plauſible oration. And this counſell tooke effect. The day following the King ſent them word, that as many as would ſpeake with him ſhould repaire to a certaine place where he would Mile end. meete them, and giue ſatisfaction to their demaunds. Many came, and many taried ſtill in the citie, eſpecially the cheefe captaines of the ſedition: who aſſoone as the King was gone forth, followed with ſome fower hundreth of VVat Tiler, Iack Straw, & Iohn Ball. their companions brake into the tower, and there ſurpriſing the Archbiſhop of Canterburie Lord Chancellor of England, they cut of his head, and ſerued diuers others alſo Simon Sudbury. of great account in the ſame ſort, whoſe heads they prict vpon polles, and ſet them vp vppon the bridge, and other places of greateſt view and moſt reſort in the citie. When the King came to communication with the rebells, he demaunded gently of them, what they required? Marry (quoth they) that thou ſet vs and our Children and our poſteritie that ſhall come after vs at libertie for euer, and being ſo enlarged, maintaine and preſerue vs from all manner of bondage and ſeruitude, either in ſhew, or ſubſtance. The King promiſed to fulfill their requeſts, and therevppon ſigned & deliuered vnto them certain writings and charters for the ſame, wherewith a great part of them were reaſonably well ſatisfied, and began to be much more tractable. But the principall heads of rebellion which, as I told you, abode ſtill behinde, being villaines of moſt wicked diſpoſition, whoſe only deſire was to make a prey of rich mens goods, had drawn together in the meane time ſome twentie thouſand with part of the comminalty intending to haue falne to rifling preſently. But the King comming vnawares (though not out of ſeaſon) vpon them, as he returned from parly with the rebells at the place appointed without the

citie, eſpying ſuch a multitude together, pauſed a while to vnderſtand the matter. Immediatly one of thoſe varlets It was in Smith ſield. VVat Tiler.
                      ſtepping forth, began to talke to him in a very rude and contemptuous faſhion, hauing formerly giuen in charge to his companions, that at a certaine ſigne or watchworde which he would giue them, they ſhould ruſh violently forth and kill all that were abount the King, whom only he would haue ſpared in regard of his age. As he continued in his arrogant ſpeeches and behauiour to the King, the Mayor of the Citie diſdaining thereat, thruſt him through with his ſword. Then might ye haue ſeene the enraged VVilliam VValworth. multitude in a blind furie euen ready to haue deſtroyed them all: but the King pacified them preſſing himſelfe alone into the thickeſt of them, which otherwiſe perhaps might haue ſeemed a poin
                        •
                      of indiſcretion; but the ſucceſſe warranted the action. Many counſelled the King to haue purſued them in their departure, and to haue ſet vppon them as they were ſeparated and diſperſed. But the king would not allow of that courſe, nor ſuffer any violence as then to be vſed towards them: thinking that with more eaſe and better leiſure he might take puniſhment of them at his pleaſure hereafter. Neither were all offenders alike: for, as in ſuch commotions it happeneth, a great ſort were taken vp by the way perforce, and compelled to go along with the reſt for company. And he vſed this gentleneſſe the rather becauſe the chiefe captaines and ringleaders of this miſchiefe, beeing detected by the people, they onely might be put to death, and the reſidue be pardoned.
                  The Earle of Flaunders once again beſieged Gaunt, aſſembling men of warre out of Henault and Artoys, the Lordſhip 
                        Gaunt beſieged by the Earle of Flaunders.
                      wherof was lately befalne him by the death of his mother. In the meane time a certaine Captaine of his, winning a little village belonging to the Gauntoys called Grantmont, ſlue all that were in it, euery one both old men, women, and Children, not ſparing ſo much as women with childe, and thoſe that lay ſicke in their beds. The churches

were deſtroyed with fire, and the towne layd leuell with the ground. It happened the author of this ſo miſerable and vnmercifull ſpectacle, in a certaine skirmiſh (ſuch as there were many) falling into an ambuſh of the Gauntoys, to be ſlaine. The Earle taking his death very greeuouſly (for he had not any man about him whome he more deerely eſteemed) brake vp his ſiege, conceiuing greater diſpleaſure againſt the Gauntoys then before. Neuertheleſſe by mediation of the Lords of Henault and Braband, and vppon the earneſt ſute of the people, peace was againe concluded. Amongſt other articles this was one, that within fifteen daies after, the Gauntoys ſhould deliuer two hundreth perſons ſuch as the Earle ſhould nominate, to be diſpoſed of at his pleaſure. Peter de Bloys and Phillip of Arteuill hauing ſecret intelligence hereof, and ſuſpecting themſelues might be ſome of the number, prouided a competent crew of their faction to be in a readineſſe at all aſſayes, and the next morning when the articles of peace were read publikely in the Towne-houſe, they entred in ſtrongly accompanied, and ſlue twoo Aldermen of great account: the ſame which were chiefe agents for the towne in this treaty of agreement. With this fact the Earle was ſo exceedingly prouoked that it ſeemd from thence forth he would neuer haue come to any compoſition with the Gauntoyes before he had vtterly rooted out the whole rabble of that ſeditious generation.
                  About this time happened an inſurrection in Paris: the Commotion in Paris.
                      citizens requiring that the late ſubſidy and new exactions impoſed vppon them, might be taken away, from paiment wherof they pleaded immunity by a graunt they had obtained from King Charles the fift, which they ſaid the new King at his coronation had likewiſe confirmed. The King to whome it was vnpleaſing and tedious to liue amongſt contentious perſons, departed out of Paris to Meaulx. The people in the meane while riſing in an vprore, brake vp the priſons, let out the priſoners, and killed certaine of

the kings officers. At length a certaine noble man of the The Lord Coucy.
                      court who was very well beloued of the people, being ſent to appeaſe the tumult, dealt with the citizens in ſuch ſort, that they were content in regard of the neceſſity of the time, to diſburſe weekely ten thouſand ſranks towards the maintenance of the king warres and paiment of his ſouldiers. Another vprore happened alſo at Roan not vnlike to this at Paris, but it was ſuppreſſed by the King himſelfe. Many Cities and common wealths following the footſteps of the Gauntoys (whome they extolled with high cōmendation as moſt ſtout defenders of their liberty) rebelled againſt their magiſtrates. Behold to what ruine all things tended, if by the induſtrie of valiant Princes, theſe euils had not been reſtrained.
                  The Earle of Cambridge of whome we ſpake before, making a long paſſage for want of good weather, after he had been much toſſed vppon the ſeas with the contrary winds, at laſt arriued with all his ſouldiers at Lisbone in Portugall: When he had taried there certaine moneths, the King of Portingale beſtowed all his men in garriſons, giuing commandement that they ſhould not attempt any thing againſt the enemy without his knowledge and direction. The engliſhmen and Gaſcoines vnacquainted with idleneſſe, and deſirous to be employed in ſome exerciſe of armes, vppon a time when they could not obtayne licence of the King, went forth of their owne heads, and winning certaine holds of the Spaniards, placed garriſons in them and returned. No other memorable ſeruice was performed of many moneths after, by meanes whereof the King of Spaine had time and leiſure more then enough, to make ſufficient preparation for his defence. He had ayd alſo ſent him out of Fraunce, which was allowed free paſſage through Arragon by reaſon of the league that was confirmed between both kings vppon concluſion of the marriage, as we haue diſcourſed already.
                  The King of England ſending ambaſſadours into Germamany,
                     
to Charles King of Bohemia, requeſted to haue his King Richard marrieth Anne ſiſter to Charles King of Bohemia.
                      ſiſter to wife. The matter was debated a tweluemoneth and more, and at laſt tooke effect. The french King to the intent to hinder this marriage, gaue commaundement to the Normans to enter the ſeas with a puiſſant fleet, and to intercept the new Bride with all her traine in their paſſage. But the Duke of Braband, putting him in mind how vnfitting it were for his honour to attempt ſuch an enterpriſe againſt a company of ſilly women vnable to make reſiſtance: partly by the iuſtneſſe of his requeſt, and partly by intreaty and perſwaſion, diuerted the king from his purpoſe.
                  It was covenanted between the King and the Pariſians, that the mony which they were to pay weekly ſhold be kept by the treaſurer of the Citie, and no part of it to be expēded about any other occaſiō but only in time of neceſſity for the maintenance of men of warre. Now the french King when he ſhould ſend his ſuccours unto Spaine, required the treaſurer to diſburſe an hundreth thouſand franks for the vſe of that ſeruice. The treaſurer neither refuſing, nor performing, delayed the matter with friuolous excuſes. The duke of Aniow at that time ſtanding in great fauour with the people, to the intent the more commodiouſly to furniſh himſelfe for his iourney into Naples, wrought ſecretly in ſuch ſort, that no part of this money was ſent to the King: but hauing all the authority in his owne hands, found meanes to bring the matter ſo about, that the whole ſumme which the King demaunded, was without any grudging deliuered to himſelfe. Being therefore plentifully furniſhed with all The Duke of Aniow taketh his iourny into Italy.
                      things needfull, and hauing gathered together about thirtie thouſand men, he proceeded on his voyage. When he arriued at Auinion where Pope Clement then remained, he found the hearts of the noblity meruailouſly inclined towards him. Afterward leauing Prouence, he paſſed through Italy into Apulia and Calabria: of which countries when with moſt earneſt affection of the people he had taken poſſeſſion, he tooke his way towards Naples. But the Neapolitanes

were altogether addicted to his aduerſarie, Charles the King of Hungaries nephewe heretofore mentioned. This Charles after the death of the Queene of Naples, who left no iſſue of her owne to enioye her inheritance, vſurped the title and dominion of all theſe ſeigniories: affirming that the Popes gifte to the Duke of Aniow was for twoo eſpeciall cauſes of no force nor value. Firſt, becauſe it was not in the deceaſed Queenes power to alienate thoſe things that were not her owne: which opinion of his the Neapolitanes and Sicilians ſtoutly mayntained. And againe, though it had beene moſt free for her to diſpoſe of them all at her pleaſure, yet becauſe in thoſe countries they acknowledged Vrbane for chiefe biſhop, and not Clement to whome and from whome that conveyance was made, the gift muſt neceſſarily be voyd and fruſtrate. Charles had long before furniſhed Zeuf an enchaunted caſtle: ſee Froſ: Chro: Lib: 2. Cap: 391. with all manner of prouiſion a certaine caſtle called Leuf, planted (as the people ſay) by art Magicke, encompaſt on euery ſide with the ſea and ſo impregnably fortified, that by any other means then by ſuch like skill, it was impoſſible to be conquered. Into this caſtle abundantly ſtored with all neceſſaries for certain yeares, he withdrew himſelfe and his retinue: taking no great thought for the reſt, in regard he was wel aſſured that the Neapolitanes would neuer forſake him, and as for Calabria though he loſt it for the preſent, yet after a yeere or two he made no queſtion to recouer it. For he knew the Duke muſt alwaies maintaine a great army in pay for feare of rebellion, which he could not long continue, but either want of money or victuall would force him to great inconuenience. So that his power being weakened and his numbers diſperſed, he might eaſily be ouerthrowne and driuen out of the country. But there was a certaine coniurer which promiſed the Duke of Aniow to blinde the eies of them in the Caſtle, in ſuch ſorte as they This enchaunter by ſuch like illuſions had before cauſed the Queene of Naples and her husband to yeild vp the ſame caſtle into the hands of Charles. Froſs. Chro. lib. 2. cap 346. & 392. ſhould belieue there was a bridge made ouer frō the main land, by meanes whereof they ſhould be compelled to

yeeld for feare. But by procurement of the Earle of Sauoy (who accompanyed the Duke in that expedition) he was put to death for a like peece of ſeruice which he had done long before.
                  The Engliſhmen and Gaſcones hauing taryed almoſt nine moneths in Portingale without performing any notable exployt, like men that hated ſuch ſlolthfulnes, determined once againe to aduenture ſorth againſt the Spaniards. Their Captaine the Earle of Cambridge, when they acquainted him with the matter was againſt it, but they neuertheleſſe went forward with their purpoſe, and hauing good ſucceſſe brought certaine townes in ſubiection. After their returne, they complayned that their entertaynment was not payd them. The king of Portingale halfe angry becauſe they aduentured without his commiſſion, made ſhew as if he would not haue contented them. Whereupon ſome counſelled to forrey the country & take out their wages in pillage; but others of more ſtayed iudgment and ſounder diſcretion perſwaded the contrary, and ſo at length by intreaty they obtayned that which they were purpoſed to haue gotten by violence. After this the King of Portingale leuyed an army of fifteene thouſand beſides the Engliſh: and the King of Spaine hauing a power of thirty thouſand, bad him battell. Both their forces came into the field, and many dayes together light skirmiſhes paſſed betweene them. But the king of Portingale becauſe his enemies forces were more in number then his, would in no wiſe ioyne with him in a ſette battell. The Duke of Lancaſter (whom this matter chiefly concerned, in regard he marryed the eldeſt daughter of Don Pietro) had promiſed his brother at his ſetting forth towards Spaine, that as ſoone as he had diſpatcht his affaires in Scotland, he would come thither alſo himſelfe, and bring an other army. His comming the king of Portingale expected. But by reaſon of the late inſurrection, the ſtate being ſomewhat troubleſome in England, the King thought it not conuenient to

ſend his men of warre out of the Countrey. The King of Portingale therefore ſeeing no more ſuccours come, began to treate with the Spaniard of peace, though altogether againſt the mindes of the Engliſh: whoſe Generall highly offended with the matter, returned thereupon into England, and tooke with him his ſonne alſo, to whome the king of Portingales daughter named Beatrice a Lady of 10 years old had beene lately betrothed. The nextyeere following, the King of Spaines wife (which was the King of Arragons daughter) deceaſſed, and the King of Spaine marryed this Beatrice, whom the Earle of Cambridge had in a manner caſt off and forſaken. This marriage was ratifyed by the Pope. Not long after, alſo dyed Ferdinando King of Portingale, in whoſe place, not the King of Spaine 
                     The death of Ferdinando king of Portingale.
                      which had marryed his daughter, but a baſtard brother of his ſucceeded, being admitted to the crowne rather by fauour of the clergy and authoritie of the citties, then by election or approbation of the nobility. Vpon this occaſion much trouble and great warres enſued afterward.
                  When the Gauntoys through the Earle of Flaunders procurement The Gauntoyes kept from victuall, and brought to great extremity by the Earle of Flaunders.
                      were kept ſtreitly from victuall out of all places adioyning, certaine of their towne to the number of twelue thouſand, paſſing through Barband came to Liege and were there relieued with corne and other neceſſaries. In their returne homeward, they earneſtly beſought the Dutches of Braband (for the Duke was then at Lutzemburgh) to be a meanes to the Earle of Flaunders, that at leaſtwiſe he wold be fo farre pleaſed as to ſuffer the matters betweene them, to be debated by indifferent perſons at ſome time & place appointed. The Earle condiſcended, and a meeting was had at Tornay. Thither reſorted the commiſſioners of diuerſe neighbour ſtates, to compound the ſtrife if it might be poſſible. For the Gauntoys came Philip
                           •
                        
                      of Arteuile. But after much expectation, when it ſeemed the Earle would neither come himſelfe, nor ſend any other to treate in his behalfe, the parties aſſembled wrote letters, admoniſhing

and earneſtly entreating him, that he would not neglect this good opportunity, now whilſt his aduerſaries were ſo tractable to deale with, and ſo deſirous of agreement. Whereunto the Earle made anſwere, that he had not leyſure to be preſent there himſelfe, but to gratify thoſe honourable perſons that had trauelled ſo farre in the matter, he would ſend ſome in few daies after, which ſhould fully acquaint them with his reſolution: the effect whereof, vpon relation of his meſſengers, was much to this purpoſe. That he would not come to compoſition with the Gauntoys vppon any other termes, then that all of them generally betweene fifteene and threeſcore yeeres of age, preſenting themſelues without the cittie vppon the open plaine, without any manner of weapon, bare headed and bare footed, with halters about their necks, ſhould firſt craue pardon of him for their offences, & afterward ſubmit themſelues to his mercie, to determine of them and their liues at his pleaſure. Other anſwere then this (notwithſtanding all the interceſſion of his friends) none could be obtayned, and ſo the aſſembly brake vp. Phillip returning to Gaunt, the next day diſcourſed the ſucceſſe of his treaty to the people. Then might ye haue ſeene the lamentable ſtate of a citty reduced to extreame miſerie & deſperation. In which generall calamitie Philip put them in choiſe of three courſes to be taken, eyther to accept the conditions profered, or A hard choiſe to ſhut themſelues vp in their churches, and there praying to God for pardon of their ſinnes, abide patiently the end of their liues: or elſe ſome fiue thouſand of them to iſſue out of the towne and fight with their enemy. After deliberation, this laſt tooke place: for indeede there was no other remedy, but either to try their fortunes forthwith by the ſword, or elſe to periſh miſerably for hunger. The Earle had his men of warre about him the ſame time at Bruges to the number of forty thouſand. For knowing that his enemies were now brought to ſuch diſtreſſe, he was reſolued by all meanes to make an honourable concluſion

of this warre: and therefore when he heard tydings of the Gauntoys approach, 
                        •
                     e diſpoſed his forces to receiue them. The Gauntoyes though they were fewe in number, yet being hartened by perſwaſions, and chiefly for that they left a poore, forlorne, afflicted, and moſt miſerable citty behinde them, wherein their wiues, their children, and whatſoeuer See the effects of deſperate reſolution. elſe was deere to them remayned, the ſafety or deſtruction of all which depended wholly vppon the ſucceſſe of that one dayes ſeruice, came to the field with a bold courage & deſperate reſolution. The men of Bruges who before were exceedingly forward and deſirous to fight (in ſo much that the Earle was in a manner conſtrayned by their importunity to giue battell that day againſt his owne minde and purpoſe) aſſoone as the armies ioyned, being ſtrooken with a ſuddaine feare, vppon what occaſion I knowe not, except becauſe the ſunne was in their faces, brake their aray and ranne headlong out of the battell. The Earle himſelfe alſo when he could by no meanes reſtrayne them, was forced to fly and his battell of horſemen with him. The Earle outryding the reſt of his company, recouered the towne of 1382. 
                     Bruges, and would haue cloſed the gates againſt the entrance of his enemies: but it was in vaine, for they purſued ſo faſt after him as he fled, that they entred the cittie a little before night. And euen then the Earle not altogether The Earle ouerthrowne, and Bruges taken by the Gauntoys.
                      paſt hope, gathered the town
                        •
                      
                     
                        •••
                     en together, & made head againſt the enemie: But he was brought to ſuch extremity, that ſomewhat before midnight the Gauntoyes hauing ouerrunne all the Citty, and he being vtterly deſtirute and forſaken of his people, was faine to conuey himſelfe by ſtealth ſometime into one lane and ſometime into another, and at length entring into the cottage of a poore woman, who had ſcarce ſo much in all her houſe as to hide him, with much adoe ſaued his life. Behold here the miſery and ſtraunge mutability of mans eſtate.
                  After this victory, the men of Bruges were cruelly entreated by the enemy, and amongſt other things that pleaſed

the conquerour, ſome fiue hundreth of the wealthyeſt of their cittie were carryed priſoners to Gaunt. The Earle ſtill doubtfull of his life, after he had lurked there a while in great ſecrecy, fled to Liſle one while on foote, and other whiles on a mares back without any ſaddle, in moſt wearyſome way and moſt tedious weather. This ſucceſſe of Strange alteration in the Earles fortune. the Gauntoys greatly reioyced the people of Paris, of Roan, of Liege, of Braband and all the citties thereabout; not only in regard of the example, but becauſe they alſo wiſhed ill to the earle of Flaunders, whom they generally noted of pride: Phillip was highly honoured in all places where he became, and in all things vſed ſuch exceſſe as euer in a Prince might haue beene counted ſuperfluity. All the townes generally ſubmitted themſelues to the victorious people of Gaunt. Only the men of Arde being ſummoned to yeild, when they had valiantly refuſed euen in deſpight of their enemies, were beſieged by Phillip with a ſtrong power leuyed from all parts of Flannders. The Gauntoyes in the meane time made many rodes into the country, riſſing and deſtroying diuerſe gentle mens houſes. And amongſt the reſt, a certaine caſtle of the Earles where they found the holy Funt wherein the Earle was chriſtened, with his cradle and ſuch other things, which were all made a prey to the barbarous fury and outrage of the ſoldier. The Earle being thus vtterly ouerthrowne & brought vnder foote, conſidered how there was no other hope of recouery now remayning but one, which was to moue the French king to commiſeration of his eſtate. To this therefore he addreſſed himſelfe: and for better obtaynment of his purpoſe, employed the friendly endeauour of The Duke of Burgundy.
                      his ſonne in law, the vncle of him at whoſe hands he required ſuccour. The young king eaſily induced by his perſwaſions, vndertooke this warre with great alacrity. When Phillip of Arteuill vnderſtood that by the Duke of Burgoines 
                     The French King taketh vppon him the Earles quarell againſt the Gauntoys.
                      interceſſion, the Earles ſuite was preferred in Fraunce, he addreſſed letters forthwith in the name of the people to the

French king, beſeeching him that he would be a meanes to make reconciliation betweene the Earle & his country. He wrote not this ſo much for any good faith which he intended, as to learne hereby what opinion was holden of him in Fraunce. But aſſoone as hee ſaw himſelfe diſappointed there (for the King had diſdaine at his letters) he turned to the King of England, of whome he not onely requeſted ayd for the Gauntoyes, but alſo (altogether out of ſeaſon) demaunded the two hundreth thouſand crownes that his father Iaques had lent King Edward at the ſiege of Tourney: by meanes whereof it came to paſſe that he obtayned neither the one nor the other. For had he made no mention at all of the money, but onely entreated of the league, it is like enough he might haue obtayned his deſire.
                  The Earle of Flaunders hauing acceſſe now opened vnto him by reaſon the kings mind was ſo addicted to this war, tooke his iourney into Fraunce. And after he had receiued his inauguration at the kings hands, for the county of Artoys (which was lately befalne him) he began to conceiue better hope of his affaires: eſpecially when he ſawe ſo puiſſant a Prince, with ſuch forwardnes of affection, bring a mighty army of no leſſe then threeſcore thouſand men, to wage batell againſt his enemy in the maintenance of his quarell. Whereof ſo ſoone as Phillip had receiued aduertiſement, he omitted no part of what pertained to his charge, but commaunded preſently that all the bridges vpon the riuer Liſe which were nere hand, ſhould be broken downe. Moreouer he cauſed two paſſages vpon the riuer to be ſtrongly fortifyed and defended with good garriſons: the one of them (at Comius) being kept by Peter de Boys with nine thouſand men. Whereof the French men being not ignorant, ſundry opinions roſe amongſt thē as they conſulted of their affaires: ſome thinking it were beſt to goe about by Saint Omers where the riuer is ſhalloweſt; others giuing counſell to make a bridge ouer

                     Skeld not farre from Tourney, to the intent the army might paſſe eaſily from thence into Arde. At length it likte them beſt to venture vppon the enemy before mentioned which lay at Comius. When they came thither, they found the bridge broken downe and no paſſage to get ouer, whereuppon they fell againe to conſultation. In the meane while certaine aduenturous gallants which were deſirous to make ſome proofe of their valour (hauing formerly agreed amongſt themſelues, that if no paſſage could be found, they would ſecretly vſe ſome meanes by their owne induſtry without knowledge of their commanders, to conuey themſelues ouer) with the helpe of three or foure ſmall botes ſlyding along by a cord faſtened to both ſides of the riuer, paſſed ouer in that ſorte by a fewe at once, till they had gotten all their company to the further ſide in ſafety: and this they did with ſo little trouble or daunger, that the enemy who lay encamped not farre of, neuer perceiued it before ſuch time as he ſaw them marching towards him with Enſignes diſplayd. Peter de Boyis immagining that ſo ſmall a number durſt neuer venture vppon him, becauſe the cuening approched, would not fight with them as then, but rather thought to ſet vppon them in the night when the wearineſſe of their trauell had ouertaken them with They were in all not aboue ſoure or fiue hundreth. Froſ. Chro. lib. 2. Cap. 414. ſleepe. But the French men whom the boldnes of their attempt had made circumſpect in their proceedings, conſidering how great and dangerous an enterpriſe they had vndertaken without lycence either of King or Captaine, were exceedingly watchfull, and ſtood alwaies vpon their guard for feare of diſaduantage. About the breake of day their enemies came forth to aſſayle them, whom they encountred with ſuch reſolution (albeit their number were but a handfull in compariſon) that they ſlew well 
                        •
                     ere ſix thouſand, and chaſed the reſt into a towne thereby which they tooke for refuge. After this battell the French king preſently building vp a bridge, brought ouer the reſt of his forces, and marched directly towards Ipre. The towneſmē
                     
following the fortune of the conquerours army, ſlew their gouernour becauſe he refuſed to yeild, and committed 
                        Ipre receiueth the French king. themſelues to the French King. All their neighbours immitating their example, did both pay great ſummes of money, and alſo brought their captaines priſoners which perſwaded them to ſtand out in rebellion. But the Earle of Flaunders was called to councell in none of theſe proceedings. The men of Bruges could haue bene contented to yeild as well as the reſt, but their Captaines ſo encouraged them with hope of ayd out of England, that they held it out notwithſtanding.
                  When Phillip of Arteuill vnderſtood that the power of the moſt puiſſant King was encamped not farre from him, he alſo brought forth his army into the field, which conſiſted of ſome fifty thouſand men. There he exhorted them in a pithy oration, that now going to battell they ſet before their 
                        •
                     ies that memorable ouerthrowe which with ſo ſmall a company they had giuen to the Earle of Flaunders; and withall to conſider how after this battell, if they obtayned victory, they ſhould thenceforth become Lords of all, and be able to make oppoſition againſt them. Which thing in their behalfe all good and well gouerned common wealthes deſired, to whome no tydings could be more acceptable, then to heare that the Gauntoys fighting valiantly and conſtantly in defence of their liberty, had reaped the honourable reward of their vertue and courage, by deſtroying ſuch perſons as through ambition and couetouſneſſe could not ſuffer any common wealth to remain in quiet. When he had ſpoken much more to this effect, he commanded that in the conflict they ſhould put all to the ſword, and ſpare no man, the King only excepted. The Flemings not forgetting what Phillip had told them, fought very manfully: & this alſo not a little ſharpened their courage, that they had ſtirred vp ſuch a puiſſant enemy againſt them, whome if they might ouercome, it would redound to their perpetual fame amongſt all poſterity. Notwithſtāding

at length being encloſed betweene two wings of their enemies The French kings victorie againſt the Gauntoyes.
                      & forced into a ſtraight, they were ouerthrowne. The battel laſted not much aboue an hower, and yet in that little ſpace xxv. Thouſand of their number were wanting. Philip fighting valiantly amongſt the thickeſt of his enemies Phillip de Arteuill ſlaine.
                      was ſlaine in the field, and his body being ſought for and found amongſt the dead, was by the Kings commaundement hanged vppon a tree. Vndoubtedly, that dayes battell was fought in a fortunate houre for all noblemen and gentlemen. For had it falne out otherwiſe then it did, ſurely (as the world then went) it would haue giuen a great blow to their anthority, and haue ſhaken euen the ſeates of Kings and Princes. The Pariſians, who lately before had begun a cōmotion, long'd exceedingly to heare ſome good newes of the ſucceſſe of this battell. In Champaigne and a great part of Fraunce beſides, all the wealthieſt cities, and the peaſants of the country began to make inſurrection. Therefore vppon the ſucceſſe of this action, depended the ſafety or ruine of many Princes eſtates. The King was then between thirteene and fourteene yeares of age. The men of Bruges perceiuing that by this ouerthrow of the 
                        Bruges yeeldeth to the french King. 
                     Gauntoyes, all hope of ſuccour was bereft them, and all meanes of recouery taken away, ſubmitted themſelues to the kings mercy. And the Earle of Flaunders becauſe he bare no diſpleaſure to this towne, became interceſſour for them to the King, that they might be receiued into fauour paying ſix ſcore thouſand franks. Thoſe that be ſieged Arde, aſſoone as they heard tydings how their fellowes were diſcomfited, brake vp their campe and returned to Gaunt. The Gauntoyes altogether broken and diſcouraged with this ſo great misfortune, began to conſider with themſelues how they might beſt mooue the Kings mind to mercy and compaſſion. But Peter de Boys being brought thither in a horſelitter (for he was yet weake of his wounds) with his great words and glorious vaunts, quite put that immagination out of their heads. After the french King vppon

deliberation with his counſell, thought it not conuenient as then to beſiege Gaunt, he diſtributed his men into diuers garriſons, and returned to Tourney.
                  
                  The Gauntoys as is ſhewed before, had ſent to the King of England about the obtaynment of a league; the articles whereof (deuiſed by his counſell) the King ſent to them in writing by a gentleman of his houſhold, that if the Flemings allowed them, they ſhould confirme them with their ſeales. But the ambaſſadour arriuing at Calice, when he heard how the Gauntoys were ouerthrowne, and that the french men had ſubdued moſt part of the country, without performance of his commiſſion he returned into England. Neither were the Engliſh nobility greatly ſory that the Gauntoys went by the worſe: whome if it had fortuned to go away with victory, the commons generally in all countyres adioyning, would from thence haue deriued a patterne of pride and rebellion, and conſidering how but lately before there had been moſt perillous tumults in England, euery ſmall matter might haue miniſtred new occaſion of inſurrection. Thus they thought, and this was their opinion. Whilſt the french king lay at Tourney, diuers well diſpoſed perſons laboured very earneſtly to make a reconciliation between the Earle and his rebellious ſubiects. The Gauntoys refuſed not to be at the french Kings diſpoſition, but rather then receiue the Earle Lewis againe, it ſeemed they would endure all extremityes whatſoeuer. When nothing could be brought to effect, the french King returned homeward: & as he approched neere Paris, there came forth to meete him ſome 20000 of the towneſemen, all armed and well appointed. This ſeemed very ſtraunge both to the King and all that were about him: and becauſe in thoſe dayes it was no truſting to ſuch a multitude in armes, ther were ſome ſent to inquire their meaning. Their anſwere was thus: that they came forth in ſuch ſort prouided, to the intent the King might ſee with what power the Pariſians could furniſh him vppon ſhort warning whenſoeuer

he had need of their ſeruice. This they framed for, an excuſe at the preſent time, but doubtleſſe their intention was farre otherwiſe before, and had not the King come home with victory, ſurely ſtraunge things had happened. Being commaunded to returne into the towne and put off their armour, they obeyed. The King brought with him a great army of Britons and Burgonions, the countenance whereof kept the Pariſians in feare. Then by aduiſe of his vncles he began leyſurely to deale with them according to their deſerts. He cauſed all their corſ
                        •
                     ets to be brought together vppon a heape, and tooke them from them: put to death many principall men of your Citty, impoſed diuers taxes and tributes vpon them, and in concluſion wip
                        •
                     e them off ſome foure hundreth thouſand franks for fines and ranſomes.
                  There was mortall contention the ſame time between Schiſme in the Church. the two Popes Clement, and Vrbane. Clement then remained at Avinion, and Vrbane, partly for other cauſes, but principally the more commodiouſly to annoy his aduerſary the French King, repaired to Genoa. He came not out of Italy vnfurniſht of meanes wherewith to ſtrengthen his ſupremacy. And theſe were his practiſes. He determined The practiſes of Pope Vrbane againſt Clement his aduerſarie. to ſend his bulles into England, directed to the Archbiſhops and Biſhops of the Realme, wherein he graunted free remiſſion of all ſinnes to ſuch as impugned the Clementines: for ſo did Pope Clement with him in Fraunce. And being well aſſured that he could no way worke the Frenchmen greater diſpleaſure then by this meanes to ſet the Engliſhmen againſt them, he practiſed another deuiſe for the getting of mony, without which, he knew the Engliſh nobility would be nothing forward to take armes for all his abſolutions. Therefore he thought it beſt beſides for his former pardons, to graunt the King licence to leuie a tenth vpon all churchmens goods, the principall prelates excepted, out of which collection the ſouldiers employed in that ſeruice, ſhould be allowed their entertainment.

And to compaſſe this matter the better, he ſuborned the chiefe of the Clergy (whome he had exempted from this payment) to vrge forwarde the inferiour ſort to make contribution. By this meanes, neither the kings treaſure is exhauſted, nor the common people burthened more thē they gaue of their own voluntary affection: which ſurely euery man did for his part moſt liberally, as the world went in thoſe dayes: eſpecially in conſideration of the reward propoſed (which was not meane nor ordinarie) the oportunity of obtaining whereof, no man thought was in any wiſe to be neglected. Thus partly by the great number of bulles which Pope Vrbane ſent into England, and partly by He ſent no leſſe then 30. as appeareth: Froſs. Chro: lib. 2. cap. 428. ſermons preached in euery place to that purpoſe, mens mindes were ſo rauiſhed, that they thought themſelues already in paradiſe, which had the fortune to dye in ſuch a bleſſed ſeaſon: ſo that in ſhort ſpace there was gathered together, of the tenths of the Clergy and beneuolence of the people, ahout the ſumme of fiue and twenty hundred thouſand franks. And that the matter might import more credit, it was the Popes pleaſure ſome churchmen which had experience in ſuch affaires, aſſociated with ſome other skilfull captaine, ſhould haue chiefe commaund ouer the army thus aſſembled. In like manner he ſent his bulles into Portingale, and vſed the like practiſe there to trouble the King of Spaine which tooke part againſt him. So the Duke of Lancaſter was appointed to inuade Spaine, and a Biſhop of the family of the Spencers was ſent to make wars Henry Spencer Biſhop of Norwich. in Fraunce. But in regard the Duke was nothing fauoured by the commons, and ſuſpected to haue taken vppon him this voyage, rather for couetouſneſſe then any conſcience, moſt patt of the people deſired to ſerue vnder the Biſhop. To whome the King at his ſetting forth, gaue commaundement that he ſhould tarry for his other aſſociate and fellow Captaine of the warre, at Calice. But the Biſhop being one that could away with no lingring, and ſuppoſing there was no delay to be vſed in the matter, led forth his army preſently

into Flaunders. The Earle lying then at Lile, ſent to him to know the cauſe of his ſuddaine inuaſion without defiance. Whereto he aunſwered, that he perſecuted all the Clementines in the behalfe of Pope 
                        Ʋrbane. The meſſengers replyed, that Flaunders held altogether of Vrbanes ſide; & it there were none other occaſion but that, he had vniuſtly vndertaken this warre againſt thoſe that had no way deſerued it. Wherefore they deſired him to graunt them ſafe conduct, that they might paſſe ouer into England to ſpeake with the King. Then the Biſhop in a froward faſhion told them, that for his part he would make them no ſafe conduct neither to goe nor tarry; if they would needs paſſe, they might do it at their owne perill. When no other aunſwere then this could be obtained from a perſon ſo arrogant and vnciuill, the Flemings to the number of Nine thouſand flemings ſlaine by the Engliſh in a battell not farre from Duakirk.
                      twelue thouſand made oppoſition againſt the Engliſh, not farre from the towne of Dunkirke; where encountring them in battell, (after they had ſlayne a Herauld ſent with a meſſage from the Engliſhmen) they were ouerthrowne and put to flight with the loſſe of ſome nine thouſand of their people. Then the Engliſhmen hauing taken certaine little townes thereabout, marched forward to beſiege Ipre. And to the intent to make their power the ſtronger, they ſent word to the Gauntoys that they alſo ſhould draw out their forces into the field. For there was no league eſtabliſhed between them, and it grieued the Engliſh not a little that the french men wonne the victory in the former battell, ſo enuious were they of the french mens honour or good fortune. The Gauntoys therefore ſent them 20000. men to the ſiege of Ipre. Whilſt Ipre was thus ſtreightly enuironed, the Earle of Flaunders by mediation of the Biſhop of Liege, determined to fall to ſome friendly agreemēt with the Engliſh, whome (as in reaſon it might be ſuppoſed) he ſhould find tractable in that behalfe, conſidering how the warre was rayſed onely againſt the Clementines, and himſelfe with all his people were 
                        Ʋrbaniſts But the

                     Gauntoys who were partakers of the Engliſh mens counſels, for hatred they bare to their Lord, interrupted this treaty. Then had the Earle no other hope but the helpe of the french King, who being againe ſollicited by the Duke of Burgome, his vncle, and the Earle of Flaunders ſonne in law, vndertooke the matter, and rayſed an army of aboue 1383. The French King agayne vndertaketh the Earle of Flaunders cauſe. an hundred thouſand men. The Biſhop as vnskilfull in matters of warre ſo wonderouſly proud, when he heard that the kings power was comming againſt him, ſtreytway diſlodged his campe, and breaking vp his ſiege withdrew himſelfe towards the ſea coaſt, with part of his army (the reſt being diſperſed in garriſons) to the intent that when his enemy approched, he might the better prouide for his ſafety by an eaſy retreyte to Calice. In the Kings army was the Duke of Britaine, which ſeemed a ſtraunge ſight to the Engliſhmen, through whoſe friendſhip and aſſiſtance he had often been ſuccoured & reſtored to his Duke dome. But he might lawfully do it at that time without empeachment of his honour. Firſt, becauſe he was lately before reconciled to the french King: and againe in regard he ought this reciprocall dutie to the Earle of Flaunders, whoſe bounty and good affection he had abundantly taſted in the time of his neceſſity, when he liued as an exile, expnlſed out of his owne country. Such is the inſtability of mans eſtate, that the affliction which oppreſſeth one to day, ſeizeth vppon another to morrow. And yet the Duke ſhewed himſelfe no whit vnmindfull of the benefits he had receiued from the Engliſh, who vpon the approche of the french army, had retyred themſelues into a certaine towne called Borborough, and were beſieged in the ſame. For conſidering the imminent perill that hung ouer their heads, which they could no way auoyd but by yeelding (the ſucceſſe whereof was likewiſe vncertaine) he ceaſed not to exhort them (as they parlyed with him from the walles) to prouide in time for their owne ſafegard by offering ſome reaſonable compoſition. The Engliſhmen not only vnthankfully

accepted his motion, but further entreated him to be a meanes to the King for the effecting of their purpoſe, which he alſo vndertooke and performed. So the King vppon ſome deliberation, receiuing the towne into his hands, ſuffered all the Engliſhmen to depart without harme or violence. When the expedition was ended, and the army brake vp, the King gaue honourable thanks to ſuch forraine Captaines as had ſerued him in this iourney, eſpecially to Duke Frederick of Bauier, who had put himſelfe forth into this action, only vpon deſire to ſee the countries and to obſerue the order and diſcipline of the french warres.
                  The Duke of Britaine deſirous in regard of his good affection, aſwell to the french King as the Engliſh, to bring them to agreement, procured ſo much by his great trauell and diligence, that an appointment was made for the meeting of certaine ambaſſadours from Fraunce, England, and Spaine. For the french King would not deale with the Engliſh, but ſo as the Spaniard might be included in the treaty. And becauſe in ſo doubtfull a caſe, neither the french men wold come to Calice, nor the Engliſhmen to Boloine, a place indifferent betweene both was aſſigned for their meeting. There the french kings vncles demaunded againe all Aquitaine, together with Calice, and all the fortreſſes which the Engliſhmen then held on that ſide the ſea, as farre as the riuer of Gerond, aſwell in Normandy, as in the countries of Britaine, Poytow, and Rochell. Contrariwiſe the Engliſhmen would part from none of all thoſe things, and beſides, the principall points which they had in cō
                     
                        •
                     iſſion to treate of, they would alſo that the Gauntoys ſhould be receiued into this ſociety: For ſo it was formerly agreed betweene the Gauntoys and them at Calice. But againſt this demaund the Earle of Flaunders oppoſed himſelfe with great vehemency, affirming that they were in no wiſe to be admitted into league with ſo great Princes. In concluſion, when nothing elſe could be agreed vppon, a truce was taken for

tenne moneths both by ſ
                        •
                     a and land, between the French, Engliſh, Spaniſh, Scottiſh, and Gauntoys, notwithſtanding all that the Earle of Flaunders could alledge or perſwade to the contrary. This alſo was added, that ſomewhat before the truce expired, the ambaſſadours ſhould meete againe at a place appointed to conferre of theſe affaires more at large.
                  Within a while after deceaſed the Earle of Flaunders, 
                     1383. The death of Lewis Earle of Flaunders.
                      whome fortune for a time had wonderfully entangled with warres amongſt his owne ſubiects; ſo that in his example alone we may behold, how great a happineſſe it is for a Prince ſo to gouerne his people as he may be both beloued and feared: and contrarily, how daungerous it is to happen vppon a puiſſant common wealth which vnder pretence of maintayning their liberty, confoundeth all things together, to the intent to ſhift their necks wholy out of the yoke of obedience.
                  When the ambaſſadours departed from the treaty aboue mentioned, it was agreed amongſt other matters, that the French men ſhould giue notice of the truce to the King of Scotland. But this was left vnperformed, by what errour or negligence I know not. It ſhould ſeeme after the Earle of Flaunders death, the duke of Burgoynes brai
                        •
                     e was ſo buſied that he quite forgot it: for all that inheritance was deſcended to him. Certaine Engliſh gentlemen taking aduantage of this occaſion made a rode into Scotland, waſting the country as they went with fire and ſword. The Scottes who knew nothing what had paſſed, meruailled much at the matter, ſeeing no warre was proclaymed, and ſo much the more becauſe they had heard a certaine darke rumor of a truce. But howſoeuer the caſe ſtoode, they prepared to defend themſelues. When report hereof was brought to the french King, the Peeres began to accuſe one another of negligence in forgetting a matter of ſo great moment. And becauſe there was now no other remedy, they ſent certaine into Scotland,
                     
which by declaring the true circumſtances of the matter ſhould giue them ſatisfaction. The king himſelfe was well inclined to peace, but the Lords of his country made much adoe and were very hot vppon reuenge, and in like maner rode forth into the borders of England to ſhew that they neither wanted courage nor ability to defend themſelues and their goods from their enemies. At length being pacifyed and the King perſwaded, the French ambaſſadors ſent an herauld into England, and ſo quieted the ſtrife. And when the truce was receiued and ratifyed on both parts, it was proclaymed by ſound of trumpet, that no man ſhould preſume to tranſgreſſe the articles therein contayned. But to perſwade the king of England to this peace (for he was highly offended at the late inuaſion of the Scottiſh) great meanes were made by the Duke of Lancaſter, who had formerly determined to make his voyage this yeere into Spaine, with the aſſiſtance of the King of Portingale: which warre he was the more deſirous to accō
                     pliſh, in regard he had iſſue by his wife, to whome he affirmed the kingdome of Spaine was both by the lawe of nations and nature it ſelfe, of right apper
                        •
                     ayning.
                  It is ſhewed before with how great preparation & puiſſance the Duke of Aniow paſſed into Italy. When he came thither he found no oppoſition, but onely in the Neapolitanes, who would in no wiſe be turned from his aduerſarie: but Prouence, Calabria, and Apulia receiued him. The Earle of Sauoy (as I told you) accompanied him in his iourney, and about this time ended his life. Now when he had retayned his ſouldiers for the ſpace of three yeeres together, being almoſt drayned dry with ſo great and cō
                     tinuall charges, he requeſted his brothers that they would not faile him in theſe his affaires of ſo great honour and importance. They out of their loue and honourable affection, holding it not fit to abandon him in ſo 
                        •
                     uſt a quarrell, The Duke of Aniow dyeth in Italy.
                      ſent an army to ayd him: which when it came to Auinion, receiued certaine tydings that he was lately dead at a Caſtle

not farre from Naples, and ſo returned home againe.
                  After the death of the Earle of Flaunders, the inheritance of that country deſcended to Phillip Duke of Burgundy which had married his daughter. Now the Dutcheſſe of Braband (whoſe husband Wenceſlaus of Bohemia dyed lately before at Lutzemburge) deſired earneſtly, that Burgundy, Henault and Flaunders, might be vnited in perpetuall league and amitie. The Duke of Burgoigne had a ſonne named Iohn. This Iohn marryed Margaret the daughter of Albert Duke of Bauier and Henault at Cambray. And William the ſonne of Albert tooke to wife Margaret daughter to the Duke of Burgoigne. The french king was preſent at theſe nuptialles. And the Duke of Burgoigne gaue in dowry with his daughter an hundred thouſand franks. Theſe allyances troubled the Duke of Lancaster, who had a purpoſe to haue matcht a daughter of his to the ſonne Her name was Phillip whom he had by Blaunch his firſt wife. of Duke Albert. And therefore at ſuch time as theſe matters were in treaty, he endeauoured by his letters to Albert, to haue hindred their proceedings, but it preuayled not.
                  Concerning the Earles of Henault, ye muſt conceiue that William the Lord of this ſeigniory had foure daughters, Margaret, Phillip, Ione, and Iſabell, and one ſonne named VVilliam. Margaret was married to Lewis of Bauier the Emperour: Edward king of England, marryed Phillip: Ʋ
                        Ʋilliam was ſlaine in battell againſt the Phriſoners & left no iſſue. Therefore by his death the right of ſucceſſion deuolued to Margaret the eldeſt ſiſter: and ſhe enioyed the heritage till ſuch time as Albert her ſonne whom ſhe had by Lewis the Emperour, being growne to mans eſtate, entred vpon the inheritance of his anceſtors. And afterward VVilliam the ſonne of Albert married the Duke of Burgoignes daughter, as is a little before declared.
                  The Duke of Aniow left behinde him two ſonnes, Lewis, and Charles: in whoſe right their mother (by the counſell

of Pope Clement and the French king) made warre vppon the people of Prouence, not without the French Kings aſſiſtance, who ſupplyed her wants both with men and money. The men of Manceilles were well affected towards her, but all the reſt oppoſed themſelues againſt her, and as it ſeemed, would not accept her for their ſoueraigne, before Calabria, Naples and Apulia had done the ſame: of which countries when ſhe could ſhowe her ſelfe to haue quiet poſſeſſion, they alſo offered to put themſel es vnder her obedience.
                  The truce by this time being expired, the French King had a mervailous deſire to bee doing with the King of England. Hereupon leuying an army, he ſent the Duke of Burbon into Aquitaine, that if it were poſſible he might expell the Engliſh men wholly out of Fraunce. He ſent another The Admirall of France ſent with a power into Scotland.
                      army alſo into Scotland vnder the conduct of his Admirall, to the intent the Scottiſh power and his being ioyned together, might put the king of England to the greater vexation. But when the Admirall arriued in Scotland, he found not ſuch friendly entertaynement as he lookt for.
                  
                     Charles the fift, vpon his death-bed had requeſted his brothers to chuſe a wife for his ſon of ſome noble family, & eſpecially out of Germany, that the allyance might be the ſtronger. They did according to his deſire. For he married Iſabell the daughter o
                        •
                      
                     Stephen Duke of Bauier, a Lady 
                        Charles the French king, marryeth Iſabell daughter of Stephen Duke of Bauier.
                      of moſt excellent beauty. But the firſt meanes of this match was deriued from this occaſion, that Fredericke of Bauier her vnckle had followed the French king in his late warres againſt the Engliſh, as hath beene already declared.
                  Shortly after the death of the Duke of Aniow, who had attempted great matters in Italie, dyed alſo his aduerſary Charles, ſur
                        •
                     amed the Peaceable. It was ſuppoſed, that he was made away by the Queene of Hungarie, who hauing two daughters by her husband Lewis deceaſſed, feared

leſt this Charles which was his brothers ſonne, ſhould diſpoſſeſſe them of their inheritance, ſpecially for that he openly tearmed himſelfe King of Hungarie: and therefore wrought meanes to diſpatch him out of the worlde: but whether this be a true report or a coniecture, I cannot affirme. Then ſent ſhe ambaſſadors to the French King, requiring that her daughter might be matchd to his brother Lewis of 
                        Ʋaloys. This being not miſlikte in Fraunce, commiſſioners were ſent into Hungarie to go through with the matter in the behalfe of Duke Lewis, and others afterward ſent from thence into Fraunce to fetch the bridegroome. In the meane while Henry of Bohemia, called the Marques of Blankford, the naturall brother of Charles King of Bohemia, diſdayning that a king ſhould be ſought ſo farre off, by the procurement of certaine Lords of Hungary, and not without conſent of his brother, beſieged the Queene and her daughter, as they ſoiourned for their recreation in a certaine caſtle ſeated in a ſolitary place farre from reſort of people. By meanes whereof ſhe was at length conſtrayned to giue him her daughter to wife. The French kings brother who was proceeded on his iourney, as ſarre as Champaigne with all his houſhold and retinue, when he heard newes of this alteration in Hungary, was not a little diſcontented with the matter & returned again to his brother: who ſeemed not greatly ſorie, for as much as Hungary by reaſon of the farre diſtance of the country from Fraunce could hardly afforde him any helpe at neede.
                  The Scottiſh king vnderſtanding the Admiralles deſire to be employed, leuyed an army of thirty thouſand men. The French and Scottiſh men together inuade the borders of England.
                      He himſelfe would not be preſent in the iourney, but he ſent his nine ſonnes: who together with the French men ſet forth towards their enemies country, and waſted the borders farre and neere. But aſſoone as they vnderſtood that the King of England approched with an armie of ſeauenty thouſand men, they made no longer abode, but retyred

and the Engliſh purſued after. The Admirall perſwaded to giue battell, but the Scottiſh men in regard their enemies were more in number then they, and becauſe they knew likewiſe that the Engliſh were men of great practiſe and experience in armes, by all meanes refuſed the encounter. And it appeared, the Engliſh were neuer almoſt more vehemently bent to doe the Scottiſh a diſpleaſure, then at that time, becauſe they had then waged forraine ſoldiers againſt them, and that out of Fraunce: wherwith the Engliſh men were exceedingly prouoked. The Scottiſh men the better to ſatisfie the Admirall (who ſtill vrged them to giue battell) brought him to a hill there by of exceeding great height, from whence he might perfectly take a view of all his enemies forces. Which aſſoone as he had ſeene, he was content to followe their counſell that were of a contrary opinion to his owne. Notwithſtanding leaſt they ſhould ſeeme to haue performed nothing, with both their powers ioyned together, they inuaded the marches of Wales, where they did ſomewhat more harme then they could in England. The Duke of Lancaſter and many others gaue counſell to followe after them, but a certaine perſon of great credyt and authority, quite diuerted the kings minde from that purpoſe, ſuggeſting The Earle of Oxenford.
                      into his conceit, how the Duke ſought to thruſt him forth into this dangerous action, to the intent he might periſh in battell, and ſo himſelfe get poſſeſſion of the crowne. How much miſchiefe this bringing the King in ſuſpition of his vnckles bred afterward in England, ſhall be declared in place conuenient.
                  The Gauntoys tyred with ſeauen yeeres warres, were deſirous of peace, but it was priuately amongſt themſelues. For Peter de Boys who knew it was moſt for his profit and reputation, to haue the people alwaies in trouble & contention, held them vnder in ſuch ſort, that ſcarce any man durſt openly make mention of peace. Neuertheleſſe, through the diligent endeauour of two well diſpoſed cittizens

(men ſtudious of the publike welfare) and a certaine gentleman of vertuous qualitie, who was well beloued 1358. and befriended in Fraunce, their matter was brought to a peaceable concluſion: and the Duke of Burgoigne who The Gauntoies receiued to ſauour, and their peace made vvith their Lord the Duke of Burgoigne.
                      was lately become Lord of the country, ſhewed himſelfe very gentle and tractable, which he did ſo much the rather, becauſe in the beginning of the next ſpring he was purpoſed to make warres in England. My author makes a large reherſall of the Articles of this peace, which here it ſhall not be needfull to inſert. When Peter de Boys vnderſtood theſe proceedings, he likte them ſo well, that he left the Cittie, and went ouer into England with an Engliſh gentleman Sir Iohn Bourchier.
                      whom the Gauntoys long before had procured vppon erneſt entreaty to be gouernour of their towne. For howſoeuer after the peace was confirmed, it ſeemd he might haue ſtayed there in ſafetie, yet not daring to truſt the multitude, he thought it his beſt courſe to conuey himſelfe out of their danger. The author of this worke after rehearſall of theſe matters, diſcourſeth how himſelfe for his better knowledge and inſtruction of ſuch occurrenty as happened in Spaine, Portingale, Gaſcoigne, and the countries thereabout (when he was of thoſe yeares that he was able to endure the trauell of the iourney, and of that capacity and vnderſtanding that he could deſcribe and regiſter in writing ſuch things as he learned by his owne or others obſeruation) came at length to the houſe of a Gaſcone Lord called the Earle of Foys, a man of much honour and The Earle of Foys.
                      reſpect in thoſe times: by whome being familiarly entertayned for certaine moneths together, he receiued diuerſe informations both from the Earle himſelfe, and from other perſons of great credyt and account which had bene preſent themſelues at the doing of thoſe things whereof they made relation. Amongſt the reſt he recounteth a certaine ſorrowfull aduenture, and ſuch a one as would make euen nature it ſelfe aſtoniſhed; the diſcourſe is this.
                  
                     
The Earle of Foys an honourable and valiant gentleman, held in cuſtodie a certaine noble man whom he had The ſtrange ſtory of Gaſcone Earle of Foys, and his ſonne. taken priſoner, by the lawe of armes, who for his ranſome couenanted to pay fifty thouſand franks, for which ſumme the king of Nauarre (whoſe ſiſter the Earle had married) profered to become ſurety. But the Earle ſuſpecting the Kings credite (wherewith perhaps he had beene too well acquainted) would not but vpon better aſſurance, deliuer his priſoner. His wife diſpleaſed to ſee her brother no better reſpected, was very importunate with her husband, and would not be in quiet till ſhe had perſwaded him: oftentimes making mention how there was a matter of as great value as that, to be aſſigned to her brother in conſideration of her dowry, and therefore that he neede not feare to be deceiued. The priſoner by this meanes being ſet at liberty, as ſoone as he came home into his countrey, to the intent to diſcharge his credite, prouided the ſumme of mony and ſent it at his day accordingly, not to the Earle himſelfe, but to the King of Nauarre his ſurety: which when the Earle vnderſtoode, hee maruelled much the mony was not brought him, and by his wife (who willingly vndertooke the iourney) ſignified his minde to the King of Nauarre, deſiring him to remember his promiſe, who vpon receit of the meſſage anſwered his ſiſter in this ſort: Siſter, this mony belongs all to you as your husbands debt in lieu of your dowry, and ſince it is now come to my handes, I will in no wiſe ſuffer it to paſſe from me againe. Then beganne ſhe to intreate and earneſtly to beſeech him that hee would alter his purpoſe in that behalfe, ſhewing how great occaſion it would miniſter of perpetuall hatred and contention betweene them, & how ſhe durſt neuer returne home to her husband, vnleſſe ſhe brought the mony with her: for hee was by nature wrathfull, and would neuer be pleaſed with her againe, if he ſawe himſelfe deceitfully dealt with, conſidering how ſhe was the onely meanes which mooued him to accept that aſſurance, and to deliuer his priſoner,

neither of which he would haue done but vpon hir intreatie, and therefore the whole blame would be imputed to her by her husband. When ſhe had oftentimes thus expoſtulated in vaine, and ſawe his obſtinate minde would be nothing changed, not daring to goe backe into her owne country, ſhe abode ſtill in Nauarre with her brother. During the time ſhe ſoiorned there, her ſonne which bare his fathers name, a youth of ſome fifteene yeares of age, came thither to viſite her: and after certaine moneths tar
                        •
                     iance Gaſcone. when he prepared to depart, he would faine haue perſwaded her to returne with him to his father, but ſhe would by no meanes be intreated. So he tooke his leaue, and went from thence to Pampelone to doe the like to his vncle: who not onely vſed him with all honourable and kinde reſpect, but alſo at his departure gaue him many rich giftes, and amongſt the reſt, a purſe with a little box in it full of a certaine confection in fine powlder, the force whereof was ſuch, that whoſoeuer had taſted of it in neuer ſo ſmal quantity, ſhould incontinently haue died. In preſenting this amiable gift to his yong kinſeman, he vtterd theſe ſpeeches. You ſee (ſweet nephew) how great diſpleaſure your father hath conceiued againſt your mother, yet not ſo great but that there is poſſibility they may be againe reconciled. No man will imagine how much I am grieued for the diſcontentment betweene them, and no leſſe in duty ought you to be alſo. But for remedy of this inconuenience, when you are returned to your father, you ſhall find the meanes to caſt alittle of this powlder vpon the meate which ſhal be ſet before him, but you muſt do it very cloſely: for it will come to paſſe, that whereas now he vtterly abhorreth her, as ſoone as he hath eaten of that meate, he ſhall deſire her aboue all things; inſomuch as he ſhall ſcarcely at any time endure her out of his company, ſo great ſhall be his loue, ſo ardent his affection. Vndoubtedly you haue much reaſon to wiſh it were ſo; but in any wiſe beware you make no man of your counſell, for then you looſe your labour. The

yong gentleman as yet vnacquainted with the world, thinking his vncle (of whom he would neuer haue ſuſpected ill) had intended good faith and ſpoken as he thought, receiued the gift thākfully, & promiſed to do according to his direction. When he came home, his father gently welcōmed him, inquiring of diuers circumſtances concerning his iourney, and other nouelties, and amongſt the reſt, whether his vncle had giuen him any at his parting, or no. He anſwered yes, and ſhewed him all his gifts, the box only excepted. But it ſo fell out, that a baſtard ſon of the Earles, who kept familiar company with his brother, I know not by what occaſion, lighted vppon his garment and found the purſe hanging at it, wherein he perceiued ſome ſpeciall thing whatſoeuer it were, was contained. Wherevppon queſtioning with his brother what it ſhould be that he carryed ſo continually about him in his boſome, he would giue him no anſwere, but changed colour and ſeemed angry that he had been ſo inquiſitiue. Within few dayes after they fell at variance playing at tennice, and the young Lord buffetted his baſtard brother with his fiſts: who hauing no other meanes to make his party good, ranne ſtraight to the Earle with a lamentable complaint, ſhewing what iniury was donne to him by his brother, who indeed deſerued to be beaten himſelfe, and well chaſtized with a whip. And for what cauſe (quoth the Earle) doeſt thou thinke him worthy to be whipt? becauſe (quoth the baſtard) euer ſince he ruturned from his mother, he hath carryed about him at his breaſt a thing with a ranke ſauour, to what purpoſe I know not, but that he told me it would not be long before his mother and you were reconciled. With that the Earle began to haue ſome ſuſpition, and commaunded the boy to keepe all ſecret. Next meale as he ſat at dinner, and his ſonne (after his ordinary cuſtome) ſeruing him with aſſay, he eſpyed the purſtrings hanging at his boſome: wherevppon he harkened him to him as if he wou
                        •
                     ld haue whiſpe
                        •
                     ed in his eare, and when he came nigh, tooke hold

of his dublet and vnbuttoned it, and cutting of the purſe, made a prooſe of the confection vppon a dog, who aſſoone as he had reciued it, fell downe dead immediatly. Then the Earle enraged with anger, and trembling all ouer his body, roſe vp againſt his ſonne intending doubtleſſe to haue ſlaine him, but that the Gentlemen which were about him, abhorring the cruelty of ſuch a fact, and amazed at the ſtrangenes of the accident, withheld him. When he ſaw he could be ſuffered to vſe no other violence, with bitter execrations he curſed his ſonne, that had gone about ſo vnnaturally, and with ſo horrible kind of death to haue murthered his owne father, who had oftentimes ſuſtained great warres againſt mighty and puiſſant Princes, only to enlarge his ſeigniorie and to leaue him the richer inheritance. All that were preſēt did what they could to appeaſe his wrath: but he commaunded his ſonne forth with to priſon, and to be ſure he ſhould not eſcape, gaue in charge that he ſhould be ſtreyghtly watched, threatning this keeper with extreame puniſhment if he ſhewed him any fauour. Moreouer he put to death with moſt cruell torments about fifteen perſons all gentlemen of good worth becauſe that being conuerſant and familiar with his ſo
                        •
                     ne, they had not diſcouered this damnable practiſe. Afterwards in an aſſembly of all the ſtates of his country, whome he had ſummoned to be preſent at a day appointed, when he had declared at large the moſt wicked and vnnaturall treaſon which his ſonne had practiſed againſt him, amplifying the matter with diuers circumſtances to make it appeare more haynous, he gaue ſentence vppon him that he ſhould be put to death. Interceſſion was made of all hands humbly entreating him that he would not ſhew ſo cruell an example: neyther would they depart from thence before hee had faithfully aſſured them, that his ſonnes life ſhould be ſaued. He performed his promiſe, but detayned him ſtill in priſon. When report of this matter came to Pope Gregory the xi. he ſent certaine Cardinals from Avinion, whome he had giuen

in charge to make a perfect attonement betweene the father and the ſonne. But (God knowes) they came to late. For the young Earle during the ſpace of tenne daies that he was kept in priſon, had taken little or no ſuſtenance, (though meate were ſet before him) ſo as it ſhould ſeeme, through continuall muſing vppon the ſtrangenes of his misfortune, he had conceiued ſo great g
                        •
                     eeſe, as he deſired nothing but death. Whereof his father being informed by the keeper, he entred in vnto him with a troubled mind, The Earle of Foys killeth his owne ſon vnwittingly. holding a penknife in his hand wherewith he was paring his nailes, and by what fatall aduenture I know not, cut a vaine of his ſons throat, chiding him bitterly in the meane time for refuſing his meate, and ſo departed out of the roome. Immediatly after, the keeper comming in, found him dead vppon the floore. Which newes being brought to the Earle, did maruailouſly afflict him though he were much disquieted before. For this accident happened altogether beyond his intent and expectation.
                  Yee haue heard before of the death of Ferdinando King Pag. 110. of Portingale, in whoſe place was choſen not Iohn King of Castile the deceaſed kings ſonne in law, but another of the clergy, Ferdinandoes baſe brother, & that rather by fauor of the cities, thē of the nobility. Whervpon the King of Spain ſent ambaſſadors forthwith to the ſtate of Liſbone (the principall & moſt floriſhing of all that country) ſharpely accuſing & reprouing them for ſo vniuſtly taking the inheritance of the crowne from him, who had married the only daughter of their King Ferdinando, and conferring the ſame vppon one which in right had no title at all to that dignity.
                  When this would not preuaile, and that they ſhewed themſelues themſelues reſolute to abide by their election, he rayſed an 
                        Iohn King of Spaine layeth claime to the crowen of Portingale, & beſieged Lisbone.
                      armie of thirty thouſand men, and beſiegd their Citty. But after a yeares continuance and more, hauing performed no notable ſeruice, he was conſtrained to returne into Spaine by reaſon of a peſtilence which conſumed wel-nee
                        •
                      20000. of his men: & not long after there came ſuccours to him to

out of Fraunce, wherewith both his power and his courage were anew reenforced. Neuertheleſſe when it came to conſultatiō, the Spaniards thought beſt to diſcharge the army, but the French men being demaunded their opinion, gaue counſell to fight with the enemy, alleadging probable reaſons for the ſame. At ſuch time as the King of Spaine retyred with his army from Lisbone, certaine ſhippes of the Engliſhmen arriued in the hauen. They were not ſent thither by the King of England, but of their own heads, after they had roued about from place to place in Gaſcoigne and Guyen, they aſſembled at Burdeaux, and there taking ſhipping would needes goe ſerue the king of Portingale. The king was very glad of their ſeruice, and thereupon leuied his forces again in purpoſe to giue his enemy battell in the field. But diuers of the nobilitie ſuch as had not giuen their conſents to his election, being offended with the Cittizens of Lisbone, whoſe authoritie in that behalfe preuailed, refuſed to take armes at his commaundement. The King hereuppon aduiſing with his counſell, they perſwaded him to make no longer delay in the matter, but to go forth againſt his enemy with ſuch power as he had already: how there was no other meanes to ſet the Kingdome in quiet: that it behooued him to make way for his fortunes by the ſword, and not be diſcouraged though his enemy were of greater puiſſance than he, for oftentimes it fell out, and examples were plentifull, that great numbers were ouerthrowne by ſmall handfulles: laſtly, that he ſhould propoſe to himſelfe the example of Henrie, the father of the king of Castile then raigning, who by the ſword had conquered that Kingdome, and by the ſword maintained his conqueſt. Encouraged with theſe and ſuch like ſpeeches, he brought his army into the field, conſiſting of ten thouſand men. The Engliſhmen ſeeing themſelues ouermatched in number, gaue the King counſell, that he ſhould not abide in the plaines, but ſeeke ſome place of ſtronge ſituation to encampe in, where the enemy might

make no approche but to his diſaduantage. Such a place was found, which they likewiſe ſo fortifyed by their induſtrie, and compaſt on euery ſide with ſundry impediments, that but by one onely entrance, and that not very large, there was no poſſible meanes to come at them. In the Spaniſh army, the French men carried greateſt ſway by reaſon of the kings fauour, who ordered all his affaires by their counſell and direction: which things ſtirred vp enuie in the Spaniards hearts, as thoſe that could by no means endure, ſo great hope ſhould be repoſed in the ayd of ſtrangers. This alſo much encreaſed their grudge, that when the King had brought his army to the place of battell, the French men ſued importunatly to haue the leading of the vauntguard. When they approched neere their enemyes, the French men perſwaded to giue battell preſently, but the Spaniards counſelled 
                        •
                     o deferre it till the next morning, becauſe night was then at hand. But the Frenchmens perſwaſion tooke place: who aſſoone as the ſigne of battell was giuen, ran furiouſly vppon their enemyes, and aſſayled them with great violence. The fight was maintained with great force and courage on both ſides: but the valour and skill of the Engliſh archers here approoued it The King of Portugale through the Engliſh mens ayde obtaineth a notable victorie. ſelfe, as it had oftentimes done in other places. For the ſhowers of arrowes which they ſent amongſt the Frenchmen, ſo galled their horſes, and diſtreſſed their men, that the greateſt part of them being ſlaine the reſidue were all taken priſoners. The King of Spaine with the reſt of his forces to the nomber of twenty thouſand, was two miles behind when the French men gaue this ouer-haſty onſet: and when word was brought him, that they were dangerouſly engaged, and in perill to be all ſlaine, he was very deſirous to haue come to their reſcue, but he could not bring his ſouldiers forward. For it was determined amongſt them, that ſeeing the french men would needes ſeeme valiant aboue the reſt, and had vaunted themſelues with ſo great brauery, they would giue them leaue to goe through with

their enterpriſe alone, and diſclaime all intereſt in the ſucceſſe of their proceedings. A little before night the King of Spaine drewe neere to his enemy, who vppon aduertiſement thereof, firſt placed his men againe in order of battell, and then gaue commaundement on paine of death, that all ſuch as had any priſoners ſhould preſently kill thē, leaſt in the enſuing conflict, they might happen to recouer armes and ioyne with the enemy. Surely it was a cruell ſight, and ſuch a one as mooued even the conquerours themſelues to pitty and teares: but there was no remedy, they muſt doe as they were commaunded. There was about a thouſand of theſe priſoners, all which were conſumed by a cowardly kind of death; ſo as it appeared, their fellowes which dyed valiantly before in fight were much more happy then they, who being both by fortune and their owne vertue preſerued, after aſſurance giuen by the enemy, and receiued by them according to the law of atmes, fell into extreame calamity at ſuch time as they thought themſelues moſt ſecure of life and ſafety, and were ſlaine by the conquerour, not enraged and angry as in the fury of battell, but being now at peace with them and euen himſelfe abhorring ſuch an vnnaturall ſlaughter. The Portingales through the great aduantage of their ground, ouerthrew their enemies againe; and in this ſecond battell was mercy ſhewed to no man. They that could, ſaued themſelues by flight, the reſt were all ſlaine. The Spaniards miſt of their number about ſeauen thouſand. Afterwards (as the cuſtome of Princes is when they haue performed many notable miſchiefes) a truce was agreed vppon. So the King of Spaine diſmiſſed his ſouldiers, and the King of Portugale was receiued with great triumph into Lisbone.
                  
                  About the ſame time the French men recouered all that was holden by certaine Brigants in the country of Tholous & the places there adioining. The Gaſcones for that the wars they made in France was greatly to their enriching, did willingly ſerue vnder the King of England: and if they had been

gently and reſpectiuely vſed they would neuer haue changed their Lord. But the King of Englands Sonne by his ſtrāge behauiour alienated the greateſt part of the nobility from him, in ſuch ſort that they forſooke him, & put themſelues vnder protection of the French King. Beſides this, his officers vſed the Gaſcones diſdainfully as vnworthy to whome any charge in the common wealth ſhould be committed. Herevpon grew hatred betweene them, and by this occaſion Charles the fift recouered all againe, as hath been already declared.
                  Whilſt the warres were yet hotly purſued between the two Popes, the ſouldiers of Clement had beſieged Vrbane in Pope Vrbane beſieged. a certaine caſtle of Italy, and if money had come to content them he had ſurely beene taken. But the Biſhops treaſure at Avinion was already ſo waſted, that the ſūme of twenty thouſand frankes which ſhould be diſtributed amongſt the ſouldiers, could not poſſibly be raiſed. This diſſention betweene the two Popes, drew almoſt all the Princes of Chriſtendom into ſundry factions, as hath beene ſhewed before. Theſe miſeries and many other wherewith the Clergie ſhould ſometimes be afflicted, a certaine Franciſcane Fryer had long ſince foretolde in the time of Pope Innocent: and being for the ſame caſt in priſon at Auinion, had loſt his head for his labour, but that he confirmed his ſayings by authoritie of ſcripture.
                  We haue ſpoken of Ferdinando king of Portingall, which left behinde him one onely daughter named Beatrice, marryed to the King of Spaine. Now my author declareth how he vnderſtood afterward, that ſhe was begotten by the king of Portugall vppon a certaine Ladie whome he had rauiſhed, and whoſe huſband he had chaſed out of the kingdome: and that his daughter ſo borne was afterwards by Pope 
                        Ʋrbane made legitimate. And moreouer, at ſuch time as the marriage was in treaty betweene this Lady and the King of Spaine, this matter was alſo brought in controuerſie. But the King of Portugall to remoue all

doubts, dealt in ſuch ſort with his nobilitie and chiefeſt of the citties, that they all ſolemnly promiſed him, not to acknowledge any other ſoueraigne after his death, then this his onely daughter, neither to admitte any man elſe to the ſucceſſion of the crowne, but him that ſhould haue her in marriage. Aſſoone as he was departed out of this life, the noble men were deſirous the inheritance ſhould paſſe to the King of Spaine: but the citties for hatred they bare to the Spanyards, aduanced him to the crowne, of whom we haue oftentimes ſpoken before, namely the baſe brother of the King deceaſſed. And becauſe at ſuch time as the king of Portugall dyed, the Ladies huſband remayned ſtill aliue, moſt men thought that the childe begotten betweene them, was borne in adultery. Moreouer that couple had liued fiue yeeres together as man and wife, whē the king doting in his wicked and frantick affection, attempted this diſhonourable practiſe, not only for a Prince, but for any other perſon, moſt vnworthy and ſhamefull. The wretched husband being robbed of his wife, gat him to the King of Spaine: and after the King of Portingales deceaſe returned againe to Liſhone, but receiued his wife no more, following therein the 
                        •
                     ounſell of his frends, who alledged great reaſons to the contrary. Afterward he was ſlaine in a certaine ſkirmiſh: and it is likely he had ſmall ioy of his life, conſidering the extreame iniury and diſgrace receiued from ſuch a one, of whom he had no hope to be reuenged.
                  At ſuch time as Lisbone was beſieged by the Spanyards, the king of Portingale ſent Embaſſadors into England, exhorting and requeſting the Duke of Lancaſter to ſuccour him in this great neceſſitie, againſt ſuch an enemy as both poſſeſſed a kingdome which was none of his owne, and ſought alſo by force to ſeize vpon the crowne of Portingale, whereto he had no more right then to the other. Vppon hearing of their ambaſſage, it was concluded that the Duke of Lancaſter ſhould be ſent into Portingale, and all

things were prepared and made ready for his voyage, when ſuddainly the Admirall of Fraunce landing with an army in Scotland, from thence made warre vppon the Page. 127. Engliſh, as hath bene before declared. Hereuppon the Dukes iourney was ſtayed. Neuertheleſſe the King of Portingale fought proſperouſly, and vanquiſhed his enemie in two battells as is ſhewed already. And after this victorie returning to Liſbone, by aduiſe of his counſell, he ſent Ambaſſadours againe to the king of England, and the Duke of Lancaſter, deſiring him if euer he meant to attempt any thing againſt his aduerſarie the king of Spaine, that he would not neglect the preſent opportunitie. For twiſe he himſelfe had already defeated him in battell, and driuen him from the field: now did he quake and tremble for diſtruſt of his eſtate, and it were an eaſie matter to ouerthrowe him whollie, ſpecially if they ſhould aſſaile him with both their forces vnited together. Scarce could he know on which ſide to turne him, his affaires and his counſels would be all ſo confounded: and that his ſtate might be more violently ſhaken, it ſeemed beſt in his opinion to make preſent inuaſion vppon him befote he ſhould recouer his ſtrength or bethinke him of the danger. When theſe and many other like matters had beene deliuered by the Ambaſſadors, it pleaſed the King that the Duke of Lancaſter ſhould now at length proceede with his voyage before vndertaken. So with a certaine number of horſemen, The Duke of Lancaſter ſayleth into Portugall. Briſtowe.
                      and more then two thouſand archers, accompanied with his wife and children, he tooke ſhipping at a certain hauen in Wales, whither the Portingales vppon aduertiſement from their ambaſſadors, had before ſent fiue and twentie ſhippes and Gallies to attend him. And becauſe he ſaw great likelyhood of troubles to ariſe in England, & that he was enuyed by many which were in authority about the King his nephew, he was very glad and deſirous to goe this iourney. His firſt landing was in the hauen of Breſt, which towne becauſe the Engliſhmen refuſed to

reſtore to the Duke of Britaine, was at that time by the Britons and Frenchmen together beſeiged. But the Duke of Lancaſters puiſſance enforced the Britons to raiſe their ſeige. Then directed he his courſe towards Cologne a towne in Spaine. For after much deliberation it was generally thought more honour to land firſt in their enemies country, then to go ſtreight to their friends. But the towne was ſo ſtrongly fortifyed as their atttempt and endeauour was vaine. Therefore looſing from thence they The Duke of Lancaſter arri-Seth in paine.
                      ſayled to Compoſtella, into which towne after ſome parly they were honourably receiued.
                  Aſſoone as the King of Spaine heard tydings of the Engliſhmens arriuall, he tooke counſell with certaine French Lords whome he chiefly fauoured, concerning his affaires, and what they thought of the Engliſhmens proceedings. They were abſolutely of opinion, that the king of Portugale ſhould marry the Duke of Lancaſters daughter, and therefore that it behou'd him to require ayde of the French king: who both in reſpect of his owne good diſpoſition, and the moſt ſtrict and auncient alliance betweene Spaine and Fraunce, would not faile of his friendly dutie in that behalfe. Moreouer aſſuring him that there were a great number in Fraunce ſo ill affected to idlenes that nothing could happen more according to their deſires, then to meete with any occaſion of millitary employment. When they had giuen him this counſell, they further aduiſed him to take order, that all weake holds, churches, and ſuch like, whereinto the country people had conueyed their goods for feare of the forraging ſouldiers ſhould be beaten downe. For thoſe places were ſuch as could not be defended, and if they were taken, the prey and pillage therein would afforde greate profite and aduantage to the enemy. The King to whō this counſell ſeemed not amiſſe, authoriſed the French men to caſt downe what they thought good at their diſcretion, and withall to ſeize whatſoeuer they found in them

(after a day prefixed) to their owne commodity. The French king being ſolicited by the king of Spayne for ayd, required him to be of good courage, for within ſhort ſpace he would bend all the forces he was able to make againſt the Engliſh nation: who being once ſubdued, he would ſend ſtore of ſouldiers into Spaine, by whoſe helpe he ſhould be enabled, not onely to brydle and reſtrayne, but to breake and confound the puiſſance of both his aduerſaries. Whilſt the Engliſhmen wintred at Compoſtella, they made often rodes into the country, and brought certaine townes vnder their ſubiection. In the meane time the king of Pontingale wrote diuerſe Letters to the Duke of Lancaſter full of great kindneſſe and affection. But counſell was giuen the Duke, that he ſhould delay the matter no longer, nor negociate with the King any further by letters: that it was very behooueful for him, now he had proceeded thus farre, to goe through with his affaires as ſpeedily as might be: the French men were ſubtle fellowes, the Spaniards had ſmall faithfulnes: and it might ſo fall out that the French men, by whome the King of Spaine was wholy carryed, would perſwade him to agreement with the King of Portingale vppon ſome indifferent conditions. Theſe reaſons were approoued, and therevppon the Duke ſent word to the King of Portingale that he was deſirous to ſpeak with him, whereto he condiſcended and ſo they met at a place appointed. After much communication, it was concluded that the Duke of Lancaſter ſhould ſtay all the winter at Compoſtella, ſending abrode his ſouldiers to forrey the country in the meane while, and aſſoone as the ſpring time approched, to aduance their Standards both together againſt the enemy, in what part of the Kingdome ſoeuer he remayned. Alſo that the King of Portugale ſhould take his choyce which of the Dukes daughters he would haue in marriage. He choſe Phillip the Dukes daughter by his firſt wife. The matters thus accompliſhed, the duke returned to Compoſtella. The King of Spaine being diſquicted

by the Engliſh ſouldiers, which waſted his country and forced his townes to yeeld, meruailed much that there came no ayd all this while out of Fraunce: but the French Lords alwaies encouraged him, putting him in comfort, that aſſoone as the wars in England were diſpatched, he ſhould not faile of ſufficient ſuccours.
                  The French King, vppon a meruailous deſire to inuade The French King maketh great preparation to inuade England.
                      
                     England, aſſembled the greateſt puiſſance he could poſſibly make. There were numbred of noblemen and gentlemen aboue twenty thouſand, and more then fifteene hundred ſhippes, abundantly furniſhed with all neceſſaries, euen to ſmalleſt trifles. And although this preparation was ſuch, as a greater or more ſumptuous had not been ſeen in mans remembrance, yet (as it often happeneth in ſuch occaſions) the report thereof in England farre exceeded the truth, and was extended aboue meaſure. In ſo much that publicke prayers and ſupplications were daily offered to God, that he would auert and turne from them this imminent miſcheife. All the hauens and port townes where they ſuſpected the French men might land, were ſtrongly fortified and planted with Garriſons: and an vnmeaſurable maſſe of mony was leuied, amounting to the 
                        •
                     umme of twenty hūdred thouſand florēs, ſo as there was no man in the whole kingdome which felt not the waight of this heauy burthen. All good and well diſpoſed perſons bewayled the preſent ſtate of their country; but idle vnthrif
                        •
                     s, male-contents, and ſuch as had nothing to take to, were of nothing more deſirous. The French army was now fully furniſhed and all things put in a readines in the hauen of Sluſe in Flaunders, nothing was wanting, but onely the Duke of Berryes preſence. He neuer allowed this enterpriſe, and at his comming thither, when conſultation was had about ſetting forward on their iourney, he perſwaded the contrary with diuers reaſons, as the roughnes of the winter weather (for it was then about Chriſtmas) and the tender age of the King whome he thought in no wiſe was to be committed to the

vncertainty of winds and ſeas at that vnſeaſonable time of the yeere. His counſell preuailed, and therevppon the voyage was put of till the next ſpring; the preparation whereof ſtood Fraunce in little leſſe then thirty hundred thouſand Frankes. It was oftentimes reported for certainty to the King of Portugale, that the French Kings army was already entered into England. Wherevppon ſome gaue him counſell, that he ſhould not be to forward in marrying his wife which he had lately affianced, but rather to exſpect what iſſue the wars would come to: for if it ſhould happen the King of England to go by the worſe (as it was likely enough at that time) the Duke of Lancaſters friendſhip would then do him ſmall pleaſure. The King following their aduiſe, diſſembled his marriage, and for a while made nomotion at all thereof, but with kind letters and coſtly preſents ſtill continued the Dukes fauour for his aduantage.
                  
                     Leo King of Armenia who had been driuen out of his country by the Tartars, and came lately before into France, being not a little ſory that ſo great diſſenſion ſhould grow between two ſuch puiſſant Princes as the French King and the Engliſh, of a certaine godly zeale and good diſpoſition ſayled ouer into England, to make a tryall if he could doe ought in eſtabliſhing a peace between them. The King of England gaue him patient eare in diſcourſing his miſeries and baniſhment, and how the power of the Turkes and Barbarians daily encreaſed through the mutuall wars and diſſention of the Chriſtian Princes. And when by occaſion hereof he deſcended to the point, to exhort to loue and concord, the King anſwered, that he ſhould firſt deale with his aduerſary to diſcharge his great army; and that done, for his part he was not ſo peruerſe, but he would willingly embrace whatſoeuer was agreeable to equity and reaſon. Herevpon he returned to the French King, who ſeemed nothing affected, nor inclinable to peace.
               
            
            
               
               The third Booke.
               
                  IT fortuned in Fraunce, that a certaine Jaquesle Gris ſir Iohn de Carogne. gentleman of the Earle of Alaunſons houſe, rauiſhed another mans wife whilſte her husband was abſent in a forraine country. Aſſoone as he returned, the ſorrowfull Lady with teares in her eyes and ſhame in her countenance, declared vnto him the violence ſhee had ſuffered. Her husband complained to the Earle of Alaunſon, and the party accuſed denied the deed. Now the Earle ſhewing himſelfe more fauourable to the offender, then to him that had the iniury, the plaintiffe appealed to the Parliament of Paris. A whole yeere and more the matter was there ca
                     •
                  uaſſed; and in concluſion, when the one ſtill auouched the fact, and the other ſtood ſtoutly in denyall, it was decreed, that the controuerſie ſhould be decided by combate. So at a certaine day which either themſelues had choſen, or the iudges appointed, they encountred one another firſton on horſe-backe, after on foote. Not blind fortune, which otherwiſe is wont to beare ſway in ſuch caſes, but iuſtice and true valour ſhewed their force in this conflict. For he that held his wiues chaſti
                     •
                  y deerer then his owne life, and was not affraid to venture his head in defence of the ſame, by his aduerſaries A notable example of deſtruction, made it manifeſt to the worlde, that

there is a God of vengeance, which will not ſuffer ſecret diuine iuſtice. wickedneſſe to eſcape vnpuniſhed. After he was ſlaine, the hangman drew his bodie to the gallowes and hung it vp: whereas if he had fortuned to g
                     •
                  t the victorie, the woman for falſly accuſing him, ſhould by decree of the Parliament haue bene burned, and her huſband after his death, put to the ſame reproch which now was vſed to his aduerſarie. The whole company of honourable ſpectators The French king was preſent with moſt of his nobility. highly exſtolled the conqueror, and applauded his victory with deſerued commendation. Moreouer the French king out of a certaine princely reſpect and inclination, not ſuffering ſo worthy an acte to paſſe vnrewarded, gaue him preſently a thouſand franks, and from thenceforth a penſion of two hundreth pounds by the yeere, during his life.
               About this time deceaſſed the King of Arragon: who The death of Peter King of Arragon.
                   a little before his death calling his ſonnes vnto him, exhorted them to mutuall loue and concord: & for as much as in ſo great partaking of Princes, he onely had ſtood indifferent betweene the two Popes, he deſired his ſonnes that they would doe the like, and not apply themſelues to any faction till the truth were more manifeſtly diſcuſſed. Neuertheleſſe when he was dead, Pope Clement and the French king, drew Iohn his eldeſt ſonne to their party. But when he came to be crowned, the citties would not conſent, vnleſſe he were firſt ſolemnly ſworne not to leuy any tributes or exactions of money, other then ſuch as had bene formerly accuſtomed.
               
                  Edward Prince of Wales as long as he liued, was for his noble chiualry and glorious fortune held in great admiration, and many ſought his friendſhip and alliance. Amōgſt others there was alſo a league betweene him and the King of Arragon, vnder theſe conditions. That the Engliſhmen ſhould at no time make warres vppon the realme of Arragon: and in conſideration hereof, that the King of Arragon ſhould yeerely ſend fiue hundreth horſe to ſerue the

Duke of Aquitaine againſt any enemy whatſoeuer, or if he could not conuen
                     •
                  ently finde ſo many horſemen, he ſhold pay him a certaine ſumme of mony. Now for the ſpace of ten yeeres he had neither done the king of England any ſeruice, nor payd him any money. The Duke of Lancaſter therefore (to whom at his ſetting forth towards Portugall, the king his nephew had giuen authority to demaund all rights and ſeruices belonging to the Dukedom of Aquitaine, either from the king of Arragon, or any other) thinking that ſo great a maſſe of money would much pleaſure him in his preſent affaires, wrote letters requiring thoſe arrerages, and ſent them to the King of Arragon by the Archbiſhop of Burdeaux. Who at his cō
                  ming found the King very ſicke, ſo as he dyed within few dayes after. The Archbiſhop neuertheleſſe ſtill proſecuted The Duke of Lancaſters ambaſſadour impriſoned by the King of Arragon.
                   his ſuite, and the new king offended with his importunity caſt him in priſon at Barcelone. Whereof when the Duke of Lancaſter was informed, he gaue commandement to the Engliſh garriſon at Lourde (which is the only ſtrong and impregnable caſtle in thoſe quarters) that they ſhould infeſt the Arragonians with warre, and doe them as much diſpleaſure as they could. They were nothing ſlack in performing his commaund, and wrought great annoyance to the country, eſpecially to the merchants, whom they intercepted at euery paſſage and ſpoyled of their commodities. The people of Barcelone being vexed with their daily excurſions, and caught vp as a prey by the rauenous ſouldiers, made ſuch meanes to their king by interceſſion of the nobility, that he was content to releaſe his priſoner.
               After that by perſwaſion of the Duke of Ber
                        •
                     y, the voyage into England was deferred, as we haue ſhewed a little before: aſſoone as the ſpring came on, it was appointed that the Conſtable of Fraunce with twelue thouſand men ſhould be ſent to inuade England, and beſides that certaine forces ſhould be likewiſe conueid into Spaine to the reliefe

of King Iohn againſt the Engliſhmen & Portingales. Vppon this occaſion a new ſubſidy beeing ſeſſed againe through all Fraunce, ye might haue ſeen many country people and towne-dwellers, which not knowing how otherwiſe to helpe themſelues, abandoned their lands and tenements, and departed either into Henault, or into the Biſhoprick of Liege, becauſe thoſe places at that time were free from the burthen of ſuch intollerable exactions. The ſuccours ſent into Spaine were ſix thouſand horſemen, vnder conduct of the Duke of Burbon.
               
               We haue told you before how the king of Portugall expecting the ſucceſſe of the Engliſh warre, diſſembled politickly with the Duke of Lancaſter in the meane while. Now when he ſaw that England was diſcharged of the daunger, and that the French kings army was diſſolued, he ſent ſome forthwith to affiance the Duke of Lancaſters 
                  
                     Phillip the Duke of Lancasters daughter marryed to the King of Portugall.
                   daughter in his name, whome within fewe daies after being honourably conducted vnto him, he eſpouſed. After the marriage he ſent worde to his father in lawe, that he ſhould draw out his forces aſſoone as he pleaſed, and he would doe the like, that ſo they might ioyntly together proceede againſt their enemy. In the meane while the French men well appointed and gallantly furniſhed, arriued in Spaine. After whoſe comming, conſultation being had whether it were beſt to bring their forces in to the field, or to place their men in ga
                     •
                  rriſons, when ſundry opinions roſe amongſt them, the Spaniards perſwading battell, the French men the contrary, it was referred by the King to one of the French Captaines of moſt experience, to determine the matter at his diſcretion. And he in regard the Duke of Burbon their Generall was not yet come, thought it altogether vnfitting to fight with the enemy, but rather to beſtow their ſouldiers in places conuenient till neede ſhould require: for by this meanes it would come to paſſe, that the Engliſhmen ranging ouer all the country, through the intemperate heate of the climate, ſhould fall into many

dangerous diſeaſes: and although for the preſent they became Lords of diuerſe places, yet ſhould they not be able to maintaine them long: and when their ſtrength began once to decreaſe, it would be an eaſie matter to recouer all againe, eſpecially after the Duke of Burbons comming, with the reſt of their forces. This determination tooke place, and ſo immediately the men of warre were conueyd into thoſe parts of Spaine which border vppon Portugall, to defend the frontiers of the kingdome.
               The Conſtable who was appointed to make inuaſion vpon England, had his army prepared, and his ſhips ready rigged in a certaine hauen of Britaine. Diuerſe other Lords of Fraunce were likewiſe ready to be embarked at Harflew in Normandy, whoſe direction was to haue landed their forces together with his, vpon the coaſt of England. But there happened a ſuddaine aduenture in the meane time, whereby their whole enterpriſe was ouerthrowne, and that ye may the better conceiue the diſcourſe, we will rehearſe the matter from his firſt originall. It is declared before, how Charles of Bloys being taken priſoner by the Engliſhmen that ayded the Counteſſe of Mountfort, was ſet at liberty vppon condition he ſhould pay two hundreth thouſand crownes to the King of England for his ranſom, and for aſſurance of the ſame, left his two ſonnes Iohn & Guy in hoſtage. It fortuned afterward that he was ſlaine in battell againſt the Duke of Britaine. After which time the Engliſhmen at the Duke of Britaines requeſt, came thorough the middeſt of Fraunce with a great power to ayde him. Whereupon the French king fearing leaſt the Duke by this occaſion ſhould yield himſelfe ſubiect to the King of England, made compoſition with him as hath beene before declared. Whereat the Engliſhmen (who had trauelled a long iourney through many perills and great difficulties, to come into Britaine) were exceedingly offended, and aſſoone as they came home, made complaint to their king of the Dukes diſcurteſie and ingratitude. And to

the intent to worke him as great diſpleaſure, they made this offer to Iohn the ſonne of Charles of Bloys, (whome they held ſtill as pledge for his fathers ranſome, his brother being deceaſſed there already) that if he would receiue and holde the Duchy of Britaine of the King of England, and doe homage and fealtie to him for the ſame, he ſhould be deliuered out of priſon, and ſet in poſſeſſion of his Dukedome, and beſides, haue in marriage Phillip the Duke of Lancaſters daughter; the ſame which was afterwards Queene of Portugall. The offer of marriage he was well contented to accept, but to ſeeme diſloyall to the French king, or be an enemy to the crowne of Fraunce, that he would neuer conſent to. Whereupon remayning ſtedfaſt in his reſolution, he was againe committed to priſon. Now the Conſtable of Fraunce Sir Oliuer Cliſſon, (who although his inheritance lay in Britaine, yet loued not the Duke, and the Duke on the other ſide hated him more then any man elſe, becauſe vpon the Kings commaund; he had troubled his country with warre) had a daughter whom he much deſired to marry with this Iohn that was priſoner in England, thinking it would be a great aduancement to his houſe if he might bring it to paſ
                     •
                  e. Therefore when he had caſt in his minde by what meanes he might beſt purchaſe his liberty, he began ſecretly to practiſe with the Duke of Ireland (a man whom the king highly fauoured and much delighted in his company) promiſing to giue him ſix ſcore thouſand frankes if he would vndertake to procure his enlargement. The Duke accepted his offer: not withſtanding as long as the Duke of Lancaster remained in the relame; in regard the matter had beene motioned before for his daughter, he could effect nothing of his purpoſe. But after he was gone▪ the Duke of Ireland deſirous of the gold, ontreated the King (with whom no mā was more familiar then himſelfe) that in conſideration of his ſeruices and paines taken in the common wealth, he would beſtowe the priſoner vppon him, for whoſe raunſome

he might get a great maſſe of money. The king who was altogether carryed by this man, in ſuch ſorte as he both neglected and hated his vnckles in reſpect of him, did willingly condiſcend to his requeſt. Aſſoone as the priſoner was deliuered into his hands, he conueid him ouer to Boloine, receiuing there three ſcore thouſand frankes, the reſt to be payd him at Paris: where the Conſtable expecting the young mans arriuall, when he came receiued him with great honour, and married him forthwith to his daughter. How much this matter troubled the Duke of 
                     John of Bloys marryeth the Conſtables daughter of Fraunce.
                   
                  Britaine, he may well coniecture that remembreth the diſcourſe, and conſidereth the circumſtances of ſuch things as haue bene heretofore rehearſed touching the warres in Britaine. For he ſawe that by this marriage his whole eſtate was called in queſtion, and like to be much endaungered. Therefore he prepared reuenge, hauing the thought thereof more conuerſant in his mind, then any other. And at ſuch time as the Conſtable had his army about him in the Dukes country, ready to haue paſſe into England as we told ye before, the Duke ſummoned all his nobility to be at Vannes by a certaine day, for weightie affaires that he had to conſult of: deſiring the Conſtable alſo by letters, that he would honour the aſſembly with his preſence. The Conſtable though he were nothing ignorant of the mutuall grudge betweene them, yet preſuming vpon the greatneſſe of his office, and the authoritie of his preſent emploiment againſt the King enemies, came thither as he was requeſted. After ſome conſultation had about the matters they met for, the Duke as it were for pleſure and recreation, inuited certaine of the chiefe Noble men, and amongſt them alſo the Conſtable, into a certaine caſtle there by which he had lately begunne to build, The Caſtle of Ermine.
                   and now in a manner finiſhed. When they came thither, the Duke ſtoutly diſſembling his purpoſe, and himſelfe leading the Conſtable from place to place, as it had bene to doe him the more honour, at laſt brought him to a certaine

tower of farre more ſumptuous and coſtly building then the reſt, deſiring him to view it well, and if he eſpied any fault, that he would frankely tell him his opinion. The Conſtable entred in alone, and mounting vp the firſt ſtory the dores were preſently cloſed beneath, and certaine armed men ruſhing ſuddainly forth, laide hands vppon him and bound him in fetters. The hangman was likewiſe ready by the Dukes appointment to haue taken away his life. Neuertheleſſe at the humble entreaty and teares of a certaine noble man that came in his company, the Duke The Lord de laval.
                   hardly relenting delayed his execution, commanding him to be kept ſtreitly in yrons. But within fewe houres after, anger boyling in his breſt, & admitting no other thought but reuenge, his wrath not like others being any whit aſſwaged, but rather more vehemently encreaſed by reſpit and conſideration, he againe commanded that his head ſhould be ſtricken of. But what labour and care, what perill and difficulty he againe ſuſtained, by whoſe meanes the Conſtable had hitherto beene ſaued; how many, how ſorrowfull, how effectuall matters he alleadged, before he could moue the Dukes moſt obdurate minde to any ſenſe or feeling of compaſſion: none can conceiue but hee which knoweth that the Duke long ſince had reſolued vppon nothing more certainly then by one meanes or other, to bring the Conſtable to deſtruction; none but he which knoweth that the Duke for many yeres together had with incredible deſire hunted for this opportunity; none but he which conſidereth that it was a moſt vnnaturall & outragious kinde of anger, which vpon time to muſe & thinke of it, was not quenched but enflamed, and could be ſatiſfied with nothing, but the bloud and ſlaughter of a man which was brought in danger by deceipt, and vnder the pretence of friendſhip. Therefore that the Conſtable was ſaued from the Dukes deadly intent, next to the prouidence of the euerliuing God, he was onely to thanke this man for his deliuerance; who immediately made interceſſion

for him, and neuer reſted till by extreame importutunity he had extorted from the Duke, the aſſurance of his friends life and ſafety. So at length the Duke was cō
                  tented to ſet the Conſtable at liberty, vppon condition that he ſhould pay him an hundreth thouſand crownes before he departed, and deliuer three caſtles into his hands, to remaine to him and his heires for euer. Wherof aſſoone as the Duke had taken poſſeſſion, he diſmiſſed his priſoner, who within two dayes after came to Paris & made greuous complaint to the King of the great iniurie and violence he had ſuffered. The king gaue him comfort and hope of redreſſe, but the Kings vnckles vppon relation of the circumſtances, were ſo farre from pittying his miſchaunce, that they rather ſeemed angry and offended, becauſe when he had all things in a readineſſe for his iourney, he neglected his affaires and the opportunity of the ſeaſon, to followe matters of pleaſure and idle diſporte, giuing raſh credyt to ſuch a one, as both he himſelfe hated, and who he knew well enough, had long ſince ſought aduantage of his life. The Admirall and the reſt of the Lords which were ready to take ſhipping in Normandy, vppon vnderſtanding of theſe occurrents, diſmiſſed their forces. So it came to paſſe that this expedition againſt England, which by the generall conſent and good liking of the whole kingdome had beene moſt certainly reſolued and concluded vppon, was by theſe occaſions that yee haue heard, vtterly ouerthrowne and diſappointed. At the ſame time alſo the young Duke of Gelders proclaymed 1390. warres againſt the French King, and ſent him his defiance: for the king of England, for ſo doing had giuen him a penſion of foure thouſand frankes.
               The chiefe motiues that ſtirred the Duke of Britaine to this fact before mentioned, were firſt the mortall hatred he bare to the Conſtable: and ſecondly, that he might thereby reconcile himſelfe to the King of England, whoſe diſpleaſure he had mightily procured by entring in league

with the French King. Moſt part of the noblemen of Fraunce perſwaded the King in the Conſtables behalfe, that he ſhould not ſuffer ſuch a deed to eſcape vnpuniſhed. Herevpon meſſengers were ſent to the Duke, to let him vnderſtand that both the King and his vncles and the whole counſell of ſtate were highly offended with him, becauſe through his violent apprehenſion and detayning of the Conſtable, he had fruſtrated the kings purpoſe of inuading his enemies. Wherefore their will and pleaſure was, that he ſhould make full reſtitution both of the mony and caſtles which he had wrongfully taken: and concerning his diſappointment of the voyage, that he ſhould come in perſon to Paris, there to render an account of his doings. The duke when he had receiued this meſſage, after ſome deliberation of the matter, made anſwere to this effect: that he not only nothing repented him of what he had done to the Cō
                  ſtable, but was alſo exceeding ſory that he did no more, and that it greeued him at the heart as often as he remēbred it, that euer he ſuffered him to go away aliue. As for the caſtles, ſeeing he had them in his poſſeſſion, he would by no meanes reſtore them againe, nor neuer depart with them vnles the King put him out by force. The mony was all beſtowed amongſt thoſe that helpt him to defend his country againſt the Cōſtable, thē whome he had not a more mortall enemy in the world. For interrupring the iourney into England, he had neuer any ſuch thought in his mind, it was a priuate caſe between the Conſtable and him, and whatſoeuer was done, proceeded of no other intent, but only deſire of reuenge.
               Yee haue heard, how at ſuch time as inuaſion was feared in England, great ſummes of money were leuied for the maintenance of war, to defend the Realme. Now, when the French men altering their purpoſe, returned without performance of their enterpriſe, many gaue out ſpeeches that it was vniuſtly done of the kings officers to keepe ſtill the mony, the daunger being auoyded without any charge

or expences. This muttering being ſtilled for a while, vppon occaſion of a new ſubſidy demaunded for payment of the ſouldiers wages which had byn placed in garriſons, was againe renued more boldly then before. The commons tooke the matter very haynouſly, and framed grieuous accuſations againſt certaine perſons, through whoſe diſhoneſty and vnfaithfulnes, they ſaid the whole treaſure of the kingdome, and the goods of the ſubiects, were waſtfully conſumed. The King was led altogether by a few of the meaner ſort, men of baſe quality and ignorant diſpoſition. But eſpecially, the Duke of Ireland had him in a manner at command, and poſſeſt him in ſuch ſort, as it ſeemed he had enchaunted the young kings affections. For whatſoeuer he ſayd was done, and there was nothing ſo vniuſt or contrary to reaſon, which the King would not credit vppon his report. He brought the kings vncles in ſuſpition and hatred, ſo as they had much ado to keepe themſelues out of daunger. As for them, they were nothing diſpleaſed with the peoples complaints: for by this occaſion they ſaw many alterations would happen. Therfore they inclined to the people, allowing their pretence, and encouraging them to proceed as they had already begunne. In At Saint Georges feaſt at 
                        Ʋ
                        Ʋindſore.
                   concluſion it came to this paſſe, that at a certaine time when the King and his nobility were aſſembled together, the Londoners made grieuous complaint of the new ſubſidies and exactions which from time to time were impoſed vpon them: and which grieued them moſt of all, that they ſaw no good or neceſſary vſe wherto all that mony was conuerted. They thought the King was not made priuy to any thing, and therefore they required that a day might be aſſigned to the kings collectors and receiuors to yeeld an account of their receits and payments, whereby it might appeare, who had carryed thēſelues vprightly in their office, & who otherwiſe, that the one might be retained, & the other diſcharged. The Duke of Glouceſter one of the kings vncles, had giuen them counſell & direction to frame their ſpeech

in this manner. But the King aſſoone as he heard their ſute, reiected it at the firſt, and would haue put of his aunſwere till another time. But the people ſtill vrged their demaund, and preſſed vpon him with more earneſtnes, becauſe many of the noble men about him did opēly allow of their petitiō. So at length he was contented, that within a few daies after an account ſhould be taken of all thoſe officers, and that his vncles and certaine other whome the people required, ſhould haue the examination of the matter. In many of the officers was found great fraud and extortion, all which the law condemned to death. Immediatly vppon receit of the accompts, the King accompanyed with his minion the Duke of Ireland, tooke his iourney into another part of the Realme. Where vnderſtanding that certaine of his houſhold were put to execution at London, he was exceedingly mooued to diſpleaſure both againſt the commons, and againſt his vncles. For the Duke of Ireland had as it were imprinted this conceit in his mind, that they went about to depoſe him from his crowne, and therefore neuer ceaſed to incenſe and prouoke him (who of himſelfe was too apprehenſiue of ſuch occaſions) till he had perſwaded him to make warre againſt them. So the Duke was made general, and by the Kings appointment leuied ſome fifteene thouſand men. But before he would march forward with his army, he ſent a certaine freind of his diſguiſed in the habite 
                     Sir Robert Treſilian. of a marchant, to London, where the kings vncles were aſſembled, to diſcouer their counſels and manner of proceedings. But this gentleman (moſt contrary to his expectation) I wot not by what misfortune, was diſcouered himſelfe, and when he had reuealed to the Lords certaine matters concerning the King, he was put to death. This occaſion as ye may well coniecture, did mightily aggrauate the kings diſpleaſure.
               Now, when the Duke of Ireland ſaw the power of his aduerſaries approching againſt him, as fierce and ſlout as he ſeemed before, yet performed he nothing worthy of a valiant

or diſcreet commaunder. For he was abſolutely perſwaded out of a ſelfe-guilty opinion of his own deſert, that if it were his fortune to be taken in battell, there would be no other way with him, but death. Therefore aſſoone as he had placed his men in order, he began to prouide for his own ſecurity, retyring into the rereward, to the intent that as occaſion ſhould ſerue, he might be the readyer to conuay himſelfe out of daunger. The ſouldiers hearing a ſuddaine rumor that their Generall had forſaken them, abandoned themſelues preſently to flight, without exchanging any ſtroke with their enemy. Very fewe were ſlaine, and 
                     Sir Robert Beachampe, ſir John Salisbury, ſir Nicholas Brambre. thoſe only in chaſe, certaine knights were taken and put to death at London. The Duke of Ireland accompanyed with one or two of his freinds, fled ouer the ſeas into Holland, whither he had long before cauſed all his treaſure to be conueyed. For albeit he had the King wholy on his ſide, yet he much miſtruſted and feared his vncles, of whome he had ſo well deſerued, that nothing but vtter enmity was to be expected at their hands. Theſe troubles being thus quieted, and the noble men yet hearing no newes of the King; it was thought conuenient, that the Archbiſhop of Canterburie ſhould be addreſſed vnto him in the name of his vncles & the people, ſignifying how they were al very deſirous of his preſence, and that if it pleaſed him to repaire to London, he ſhould be honourably and louingly receiued. For they ſought nothing but the wel-fare and tranquility of the kingdome, which it was impoſſible for him to maintaine without the good willes of his ſubiects▪ That it was not without cauſes of great importance, that ſome were openly puniſhed, and others driuen out of the realme; for as much as through the authority and ill gonernment of thoſe perſons, the honour of the kingdome was impaired. What the noblemen had done in that behalfe, was for the generall good of the common wealth, and as the ſtate then ſtood that it was a matter of neceſſity, and therefore he had no iuſt cauſe of diſpleaſure againſt them. Although the

King were highly offended with the occaſions which had paſſed before: yet vpon theſe and ſuch other reaſons as the Archbiſhop vſed, he was perſwaded to come to London. After he had remayned there a while, a Parliament was called at Weſtminſter, where the Lords and Prelates of the realme renued their othe of allegiance to him, which they had formerly ſworne to his vncles in his behalfe: for he was now attayned to the age of one and twenty yeeres, the age accuſtomably preſcribed for the adminiſtration of publicke affaires.
               In this meane while, the Duke of Lancaſter ſubdued may townes in Spaine, and the King of Portugall was not idle but in an other part of the country, brought much into his father in lawes ſubiection. And when they had practiſed this kind of warre-fare for a time, at length they ioyned their forces together, to giue their enemies battell in the field. The King of Spaine in the meane ſeaſon meruailed much at the Duke of Burbons long tariance and delay, whoſe only comming he had waited for all this while with ſo great expectation. The French mens aduiſe being againe demaunded, they perſiſted reſolute in their firſt opinion, holding it altogether vnexpedient to giue the Engliſhmen battell, though they had gotten many townes, for thoſe might eaſily be recouered hereafter: and it muſt needs come to paſſe, that the Engliſhmen being tyred with the continuall trauels of warre, ſometimes ouercome with extremity of heate, otherwhiles enfeebled through the ſubtiltie of the piercing ayre entring in at the open pores of their bodies, ſhould fall into ſundry diſeaſes and infirmities. And indeed ſo it happened. For by reaſon of the The Engliſhmens miſeries vnder the Duke of Lancaſter in Spaine.
                   vehement heat and ſuddaine cold, which they were forced to abide in the day time, through the Suns ſcorching violence and their owne trauell, in the night by occaſion of their watches, & open lodgings in the field, diuers peſ
                     •
                  ilent ſickneſſes were engendred amongſt them. Beſides this, moſt part of their horſes not finding wherewith to ſuſtaine

them in the country, periſhed for hunger. Herevppon roſe many ſorrowfull complaints amongſt the poore ſouldiers lamenting their misfortune. The King of Portugales counſell being asked in this neceſſity, he thought it beſt in regard of the intemperatenes of the ſeaſon, to withdraw into ſome of the townes which they had taken, and to diſcharge the army. The Duke on the other ſide feared leaſt when their ſouldiers were diſperſed, the Duke of Burbon whome he knew to be comming, ſhould ſurpriſe them vnawares. Wherevppon reſoluing as yet not to breake vp their campe, they continued ſtill in the field. But it was lamentable to behold the Engliſh, who being altogether vnaccuſtomed to the intollerable heat of that country, and the drinking of thoſe hot wines, were ſo afflicted with ſicknes, that the poore wretches with great miſery had much adoe to ſuſtaine their liues. Then the generall of the horſmen, who could both heare and diſcerne the ſtate of the 
                     Sir John Holland. army more neerly, by reaſon of his dayly entercourſe in all affaires, acquainted the Duke of Lancaſter with the calamity of his people, and ſhewed him how the caſe was ſuch as required both ſpeedy helpe and preſent reſolution. Herevppon it was concluded to diſmiſſe the army, at the tydings wherof, there was great reioycing through the whole cāpe. Neuertheles they ſaw no meanes how to returne into their country. By ſea they could not, they were to farre within land, and beſides, moſt of them were ſo feeble and diſeaſed, as they could not poſſibly brooke the violence of waues & tempeſts: by lād there was no going, for their paſſage muſt lye through Spaine, Nauarre and Arragon, king dōes confederate againſt them: what ſhould be done in this extremity? An herauld was ſent to the enemie, to require a ſafe conduct for certaine Engliſh gentlemen, to come and parly with the King. The Spanyard muſing what ſtraunge occaſion ſhould moue them, admitted their requeſt: the effect whereof was this: That for as much as their whole army was greeuouſly viſited with ſicknes, the King calling

to remembrance the miſeries of mankind, which are incident to all, would giue leaue to their ſicke perſons to withdraw themſelues into ſome of his townes, & to abide there till their health might be recouered. And for the reſt which were deſirous to returne into their countrey, that he would graunt them licence to paſſe quietly through his kingdome of Spaine, and withall to be a meanes to the kings of Arragon and Navarre, that they would likewiſe ſuffer them to trauel in ſafety through their dominions. The King of Spaine after deliberation, condiſcended to their requeſt vpon condition, that aſwel thoſe which went now directly towards their Countrey, as the reſt that ſtayed for recouery of their health, ſhould at their departure be ſolemnly ſworne, neither to returne any more to the Duke of Lancaſter, nor to come within the confines of Spaine vppon any occaſion of warre, for the ſpace of ſix yeeres after. Theſe conditions though they ſeemed greeuous vnto them, yet ſo earneſt was their deſire and affection home-wards, as they would willingly haue accepted them, had they beene much worſe. The Duke of Lancaſter who had compaſſed this matter by collaterall meanes in another mans name, leaſt he ſhould ſeeme to haue craued ought at his enemies handes, after the diſſoluing of his army, departed againe to Compoſtella, diſperſing his ſicke people into the townes and villages there adioyning. Of thoſe that went for England, diuers Lords and Gentlemen, beſide great numbers of the common ſort, being vnable to ſuſtaine the violence of their diſeaſe, and the trauell of their iourney, ended their liues in the way. In the meane time the Duke of Burbon who had lingred a long while, and fetched a great compaſſe (for he had viſited Pope Clement at Avinion) arriued in Spaine: and although he heard tydings of the diſſoluing of the Engliſh army, yet neuertheles in regard he had proceeded thus farre, he would not now goe out of the country before he had ſeen the King. The Spaniard was affrayde leaſt if the French ſouldiers ſhould make any long tariance, or at leaſtwiſe

be admitted, they would demaund entertainment, which if he ſhould deny them, they would rob and ſpoyle his country: therefore within few dayes after the Dukes comming thither (whome otherwiſe he receiued with all honour and curteſie) he declared vnto him, how at that time the enemy being deprarted of his owne accord, he had no further imployment for ſorraine ſouldiets. The Duke was not only nothing offended with this diſcharge, but very glad of the occaſion to be ſoone diſpatched, for he found the countrey did not agree with his peoples complexion. The Duke of Lancaſter lay ſicke a while at Compostella, and vppon the recouery of his ſtrength, hearing of the Duke of Burbons departure, he alſo ſet his mind vppon returning into his country: for he well perceiued, that by reaſon of theſe calamities and afflictions, he was vtterly diſabled from going through with his enterpriſe. Therefore borrowing both men and ſhipping of the King of Portugall, he ſet ſayles to the wind, and in fower houres after arriued at Bayon. Here may you ſee how ſtrange and lamentable The Duke of Lancaster returneth out of Spaine.
                   are the aduētures & caſualties of mans life, and how vncertain are the euents of all our actions, of all our cogitatiōs. For this Duke, who ſometimes through occaſion of forraine warres, and otherwhiles by reaſon of ciuill diſcord and rebellion, being reſtrayned from his purpoſe, could not when he would, accompliſh this voyage, which for many yeeres before he had ſo ardently deſired: now after ſuch time as vppon often inuitements and embaſſages from the King of Portugall, he was come into the kingdome which pertayned to his wiues inheritance, was at length compelled without atchieuing any memorable matter, and with the loſſe of his ſouldiers, vnder a colourable ſubmiſſion to his enemy, to leaue all his affayres and intents vnperformed, and to returne home into his owne country.
               We haue formerly made mention of the duke of Gelders which denounced warres againſt the realme of Fraunce; and that was done in a very proud and contemptuous faſhion,

contrary to the accuſtomed manner of defiance. Now for the better vnderſtanding of all circumſtances, obſerue this diſcourſe. Reynold Earle of Gelders through prod
                     •
                  
                  gality and ryot, had much impoueriſhed his eſtate; and when by reaſon of his wants, hee could hardly maintaine the reputation of his calling, in this diſtreſſe he repayred to his vncle the Archbiſhop of Colen for counſell. The Biſhop after ſo ſharpe reprehenſion, vſed theſe, or the like ſpeeches. Couſen, you ſee and perceiue wel-enough that there is not any Prince, nor noble man of ſo ſmall account, which will beſtowe his daughter with you in marriage, you haue ſo ſpent & conſumed your means, and ſet your ſelfe ſo exceedingly in debt. But there is a rich merchant, Bertold of Bertold of Machline. 
                  Machline, which you know hath but one only daughter, to whome in expectation of her large dowry, many great Lords haue beene ſuters. You cannot make a better match for your ſelfe than to ſeize vpon ſuch a booty. You ſhall do well therefore to make this offer to her father: that if hee will vndertake with his mony to redeeme thoſe townes and caſtles which you haue pawned to your creditors, and withall be contēted to releaſe ſuch bonds of debt as he hath of yours already, in conſideration hereof you will take his daughter to wife. This counſell was well accepted of the Earle, and ſo he ſent one to make the motion. When Bertold had receiued the meſſage, his anſwere was this: that he ſhould hold it a great honour both to himſelfe and all his houſe, if his daughter might ſeem worthy to be matched with ſuch a husband: the reſpects which he thought moued the Earle to deſire it, were that he might be diſcharged frō the danger of his creditors, and poſſeſſe his owne without controlment. Therefore he was well content to proceede with the marriage, and diſlikte not of the conditions profered, ſo as theſe likewiſe for his part might be added: that if it fortuned the Earle to dye firſt, leauing no iſſue, then all his poſſeſſions to remaine entirely to his wife during her life. And if it happened her to die firſt, leauing iſſue

by the Earle, that then her children ſhould be admitted to their fathers inheritance, and not be debarred of their fortune, though he ſhould afterward marry a woman of more honourable birth, and haue iſſue by her alſo. Theſe conditions being accepted, Marie the daughter of Bertold was marryed to the Earle of Gelders, and the fourth yeere after 
                     Reignold Earle of Gelders, marryed Mary daughter to Bertold of Machline.
                   deceaſed, leauing iſſue by her husband one daughter named Iſabell. After her deceaſe the Earle married againe, Iſabell ſiſter to that moſt worthy & prudent Prince, Edward King of England, by whom he had two ſonnes, Reignold and Edward, and one daughter called Ioane. It fortuned both the Reignolds, as wel the father as the ſon, deceaſed: Edward tooke to wife a daughter of Albert Duke of Bauier, and afterwards in a battell againſt Wenceſlaus Duke of Braband, was wounded to death, and departed without iſſue. Ioane therefore after the death of her brothers, preſumed the inheritance ſhould be hers; but Iſabell which was deſcended of the firſt marriage, maintained the contrary, affirming that herſelfe only had rightfull intereſt in the ſucceſſion. This Iſabell was ioyned in marriage to Iohn of Bloys, who had much alteration with his aduerſaries about the inheritance, and great contention was like to haue growne betweene them, ſo farre forth as the matter had ſurely come to tryall of the ſword, but that by his wiues departure in the mean ſeaſon, the controuerſie was decided. Then Ioane which was now the onely and vndoubted heyre of her father, being married to William Marques of Iuliers, bare to him a ſon called after his fathers name, William. This William made Duke of Gelders in the right of his mother, tooke to wife the daughter of Albert Duke of Bauier, the ſame which had beene formerly eſpouſed to Edward of Gelders his vnele, but by reaſon of her tender yeeres, remaining ſtill a mayden widdowe. Reignold Earle of Gelders which marryed the king of Englands ſiſter, in regard of his great league and allyance with King Edward, was highly fauoured

by Lewis of Bauier then Emperour, in ſo much that he aduanced both him and the Marqueſſe of Iuliers to a higher degree of honour, and created them both Dukes. Now the occaſion why this William the young Duke of Gelders made defiance to the French King, was both becauſe he bare good affection to the king of Engand▪
                   to whō he was alyed be faith and homage, and alſo for that Wenceſlaus Duke of Braband, whom he exceedingly hated, was confederate with the French men. The cauſe of his hatred againſt the Duke of Braband was this. Reignold which marryed firſt Mary of Machline, and afterward king Edwards ſiſter, being a man beyond all meaſure prodigall, morgaged three Caſtles to the Earle of Morſe, a rich Lord in Germany, for a great ſum of money. 
                     •
                  he Earle a long while after, ſeeing his debter vnable to redeeme his pledge, ſolde the caſtles to Wenceſlaus Duke of Braband. After the death of Reignold, Edward his ſonne addreſſing letters to Wenceſlaus, requeſted to haue the Caſtles againe and he would repay him all the money that he had diſburſed. Which when Wenceſlaus abſolutely refuſed, preparation was made for waries, which doubtles ſhould haue bene the concluſion, but that by intreatie of the Duke of Iuliers, and Albert of Bauier, the matter for that time was compounded. The ſame yeere Charles the Emperour appointed his brother Wenceſlaus as publik protectour Langue fride. of the high waies, for the puniſhment of theeues and robbers, that people might paſſe quietly from one place to another. Now it fortuned that certaine merchants of Flaunders and Braband, as they trauelled about their affaires into Germany were robbed of their money & ſpoyled of all their goods in the country of Iuliers, through which they made their journey. It was reported, that the offenders were receiued and foſtered by the Duke of Iuliers, who (as many more beſides himſelfe) was thought to repine at the giuing of ſo great an honour to Duke Wenceſlaus. The poore merchants that ſuſtained the loſſe,

made grieuous complaint to him which had the charge of redreſſing ſuch enormities: who thereuppon directing friendly letters to the Duke of Iuliers, preuailed ſo little, that he might plainly perceiue, he rather deſired warre, then peace. Wenceſlaus therefore leaſt the ſuffering of ſuch diſorders to eſcape vnpuniſhed, ſhould bring the authority of his office in contempt, leuyed an army. The Duke of Iuliers did the like, & was ayded by Edward Duke of G
                        •
                     lders. The battell was fought in Iuliers with great 
                     
                        Ʋ
                        Ʋenceſlaus Duke of Braband taken pri ſoner. Edward Duke of Gelders ſlaine in battell. fierceneſſe on both ſides: but the Brabanders were diſcō
                  fited and put to flight, and amongſt others the Duke himſelfe alſo taken priſoner. Edward Duke of Gelders was likewiſe mortally wounded, and dyed of the ſame. When the Dutcheſſe of Braband heard tidings of her husbands captiuity, by aduiſe of the French King ſhe reſorted to the Emperour at Confluence: who vppon her complaint being moued with his brothers miſfortune, prepared ſharp warres againſt the Duke of Iuliers, intending to haue made a notable ſpoile and deſtruction of his country, had he not bene pacifyed by the Princes electors, who thought it would be an ill preſident, that a fellowe of the Empire ſhould be ſo oppreſſed. The Duke therefore being by their meanes brought before the Emperors preſence, when he had voluntarily diſcharged his priſoner, after ſharpe reprehenſion, he was againe reconciled and reſtored to the Emperours fauour. Within fewe yeeres after, dyed Wenceſlaus Duke of Braband, then William the Duke of Iuliers ſonne, holding the ſeigniory of Gelders in right of his mother, claymed againe from the dutcheſſe of Braband theſe Caſtles which his vnckle Edward in his life time had challenged before. The reſtitution wherof being 1383. denyed, miniſtred newe occaſion whereby the olde grudge was againe reuiued. And becauſe Braband at that time was in league with Fraunce, and the Duke of Burgoine the French kings brother, was next heyre to the widdowe; the Duke of Gelders (who ſtudyed all the diſpleaſure

he could againſt the houſe of Fraunce) to the intent to ſhewe his loue towards the Engliſh nation, paſſed ouer the ſeas, and contracted great alliance with King Richard, receiuing from him a penſion of foure thouſand franks, as hath bene before declared, and afterward at his returne, defied the French king, and profeſſed open enmitie againſt the Brabanders: in ſo much that the Duke of Burgoigne vppon aduertiſement from the widdowe, of his daily incurſions, was conſtraimed to ſend thither certaine companies of horſemen, for defence of the frontyers.
               Mention is made before of the Duke of Lancaſter, who by reaſon of great plague and mortality in his army, was forced to diſcharge his ſoldiers and returne to the king of Portingale. Now when the Spanyards and French men The Spanyards recouer againe all that the Duke of Lancaſter had gotten in Caſtile.
                   ſawe their enemies diſperſed, they eaſily recouered all that was loſt, the Engliſhmen which remained in garriſons being either expelled by force, or diſmiſſed by compoſition. The king of Portugall perſwaded his father in lawe to ſend for a new ſupply out of England. But the Duke conſidering how it was farre of, and that the ſtate of England was at that time greatly encombred, made ſpeedy prouiſion for his departure, and ſayled (as we haue ſhewed you) to Bayon: from whence he wrote diuerſe letters both to the King, and to his brothers for ſuccour. But the Engliſhmens minds were ſo alienated from the wars of Portingall, by reaſon of the great miſeries they endured there, that ſcarce any man could be found which would enter his name to goe vppon that voyage. Beſides this, the troubles, ſeditions, and executions which had bene lately in the realme before, remayned ſtill ſo freſh in euery mans memory, as they had no leyſure to intend to forreine affaires. The French king vnderſtanding how the world went in England, to the intent to make vſe of his aduerſaries ill fortune, vpon great hopes and large promiſes, allured the Duke of Ireland out of the Neatherlands

into Fraunce.
               
               
                  Charles king of Nauarre about this time ſeſſing his people at a ſubſidy of two hundred thouſand franks, aſſembled the burgeſſes of his townes at Pampelone the chiefe Citty of his kingdome: and when he ſaw that they ſtucke vppon the matter, he ſhut them vp in a certaine court encloſed about with high walles, threatning that if they concluded not the ſooner, he would handle them according to their deſerts. But in the meane while happened a wonderfull accident. After he had left them in this angry moode, he gaue himſelfe to ſleepe: and becauſe he was aged, his ſeruants were accuſtomed to burne a perfume about him, to prouoke him to ſweat. Now it fortuned (by what negligence or miſchaunce at that time I know not) that ſome ſparke of fire caught hold of the bed; which by little and little encreaſing and gathering ſtrength, at 
                     Charles King of Nauarre, by a ſtrange misfortune burned in his bed. laſt brake forth in a burning ſiame about him: by means whereof the wretched king being alone and not able by reaſon of his age to helpe himſelfe, nor to winde out of the linnen which entangled him, was almoſt conſumed in the flames before any could come to his reſcue.
               Many Lords of Fraunce which were much diſpleaſed that the Duke of Gelders had made defiance to their king in ſuch proud termes, contrary to the cuſtome of other Princes, were of opinion, that if he ſhould eſcape cleerely away withall, it might perhaps hereafter be imputed as a blame and reproch to them which were now of the kings counſell. The king was forwarde enough to haue taken a courſe of reuenge, but in regard the Duke of Britaine attempted new troubles, ſolliciting the Engliſh to be partakers of his proceedings, the enterpriſe which both himſelfe and many other deſired, could not then be performed. The Duke of Berry ſent one priuately in his owne name, to deale with the Duke of Britaine in friendly manner, to drawe him to ſome reaſonable agreement: but it was in vaine, and that made the French men in greater

feare and ſuſpition. For they conſidered what perill it might be to the realme, if the King as he deſired him ſelfe, and was perſwaded by others, ſhould now addreſſe himſelfe into Germany, when the Duke of Britaine ſhewed ſo ſmall affection to peace as he ſeemd altogether deſirous of warre, attending but for opportunity to diſcouer his intention. When they had long varied in opinions, ſome thinking ſuch indignity was in no wiſe to be taken at ſo meane a Lords hands as the Duke of Gelders, & that the King now in his youth was to be enured to armes; others oppoſing againſt this counſell, the preſent ſtate of the kingdome, the charge of the warres, and the fierceneſſe of the Germanes: at length it was agreed, to contemne the Duke of Gelders as a young man, whom rather heate of youth, then any aduiſed iudgement had moued to that action: and if he proceeded to make warres as he had threatned, that then it ſhould be more honour for the king to aduance his forces againſt him. But by all means it was thought neceſſarie to fall to agrement with the Duke of Britaine. For he (as we ſaid before) ſeemed openly to practiſe with the King of England, and already certaine Engliſh ſhips ſcowred the Seas betweene Normandy and Britaine; which notwithſtanding they did no harme to Fraunce, yet becauſe they ſtill houe
                     •
                  ed about that coaſt, the French men alwaies miſtruſted the worſt. For theſe cauſes many thought it the fitteſt courſe by warr to chaſtize the Dukes preſumption. But the Kings Vncles and ſome others of ſadder diſcretion, who alwaies held the ſucceſſe of warre vncertaine, were of a contrary opinion. For it was eaſie to coniecture, that the warres with England would be renewed vppon this occaſion, which was the onely thing that the Duke of Britaine deſired. Commiſſioners were therefore directed vnto him to make a peaceable concluſion of the matter. Whereof the Duke beeing informed, before their comming, conſulted of his affaires at large. His counſell with weighty

reaſons perſwaded him, that hee ſhould deſiſt from his courſe, and reſtrayning his affections, ſubmitte himſelfe to the French King, whoſe puiſſance was ſuch, as hee had reſtored great Lords, yea, and Princes, to their honour and eſtates, and had driuen others againe to whome he bare diſpleaſure, out of their ſeigniories and dominions. Therefore their beſt aduiſe was, that he ſhould of his owne accord, reſtore againe to the Conſtable the caſtles which he had lately taken from him. For it would be more honourable for him to deliuer them now willingly, then hereafter by compulſion. The Duke following their counſell, The Duke of Britaine reſtoreth all that he had taken from the Conſtable. made reſtitution of all, and beſides, put euery officer in his place againe, as he found them when he firſt ſeized the caſtles into his poſſeſſion. The fame hereof being preſently ſpred into Fraunce, met the commiſſioners alſo vpon the confines of Britaine. Who when they came before the Duke, becauſe of his owne accord, he had already performed that which otherwiſe they ſhould haue requeſted at his handes, they proceeded to the other part of their commiſſion, which was, to require him, that at a day prefixed he would repaire to the towne of Bloys vppon the riuer Loire, there to meete and conferre with the Kings vncles. The Duke condiſcended, and being come thither accordingly, they exhorted and entreated him, that for aſſurance and confirmation of peace, he would ſpeake with the King himſelfe, and doe homage vnto him as all others had done, he only excepted. The Duke as one that was not ignorant how great enemies he had about the King, namely the Conſtable, and Iohn his Son lately ſet free out of England, diſcreetly and earneſtly excuſed himſelfe. Neuertheles after the Kings vncles had made him faithfull promiſe that he ſhould both goe and returne in ſafety, without any offence or interruption, he was contented at length to beare them company to Paris.
               
               When the Duke of Lancaſter had ſent many letters from Bayon into England for ſuccours, and could not preuaile, ſeing

all mens affections generally enſtranged from the voiage of Spaine, it was a mighty greefe and corroſiue to his heart, conſidering with himſelfe how ſtrong and well furniſhed an army he had brought forth againſt his enemy, through the puiſſance whereof, he had conquered no ſmall number of townes and fortreſſes: and afterward how cruelly fortune had dealt with him and his, ouerthrowing the whole courſe of his proceedings in ſuch ſort, as he ſawe no poſſible meanes left, how euer to obtaine his inheritance of the kingdōe of Caſtile. In muſing vpon this his misfortune, he compared it to that calamity which the Duke of Aniow ſuffered in Calabria, who being come into Italy vpon large hopes and great expectation, not only fayled of the endes whereto he aſpired, but ſpent his life alſo in the purſute of his enterpriſe. This only was a comfort to him in all his diſcouragements, that he had a daughter by his wife Conſtance, whome he thought ſome French Lord of high eſtate, eyther in reſpect of her birth or poſſibility, would deſire to haue in marriage. Now the Duke of Berry was at the ſame time a widdower, and his freinds now and then diſcourſing with him about a wife, amongſt others mentioned alſo the Duke of Lancaſters daughter. The Duke preſently began to conceiue ſome good affection that way, and therevppon aduertiſed the Duke of Lancaſter of his intent: whome when he had found nothing ſtrange in the matter, he ſent Cōmiſſioners againe to negotiate with him further in that behalfe. The Duke of Lancaſter in the meane time, politickly diſperſed the fame hereof into all countries far and neere, by ſending to his freinds inſtructed for the purpoſe, both the copyes of his owne and the Duke of Berries letters: for he was well aſſured that theſe tydings would meruailouſly trouble and diſquiet the King of Spaine. Who indeed aſſoone as he heard of the matter, began to enter into a deepe conſideration with himſelfe, how great inconuenience might redound vnto him by this marriage, namely, that peace being eſtabliſhed between England and Fraunce, both

thoſe nations vniting their forces together, would make warres vppon Spaine, and ſo conuey the poſſeſſion of the crowne to the Duke of Lancaſters wife. Wherefore, vpon aduiſe which his counſell, it was thought good to make a ſecret motion, that the Duke of Lancaſters daughter might be giuen in marriage to Henrie his ſonne, whome hee had by the King of Arragons daughter. Herevpon a ſew were ſent, and thoſe ſlenderly accompanyed, leaſt the French men by whoſe friendſhip he poſſeſſed his kingdome, ſhould come to any knowledge of the buſineſſe intended. The Duke gaue good eare to their meſſage. And yet he put the French commiſſioners ſtill in great hope, euer making this exception, that he would go through with nothing without the conſent and approbation of the King of England his nephew, to whome he had wholy referred the concluſion of theſe matters: and with this anſwere he diſmiſt them. But he carryed himſelfe much more familiarly towards the Spaniards, through his wiues procurement, who ſawe by this meanes, that her daughter without any empeachment or difficulty, ſhould orderly ſucceed in the inheritance of that flouriſhing kingdome, for the obtayning whereof ſo many travailes and painefull aduentures had been ſuſtained by her husband.
               The hatred kindled euery day more and more, betweene the Brabanders and Gelders; and the Brabanders aſſembling about fortie thouſand men, beſieged Graue a towne 
                     Graue beſieged by the Brabanders. neere adioyning to the riuer Maze. The duke of Gelders lying the ſame time at Nymmeghen, becauſe he had great confidence both in the townſemen and the Garriſon left at Graue, did not greatly paſſe for that ſiege. Neuertheleſſe he required ayde of the King of England, ſor ſo it was conditioned between them when he made his defiance to the French King. But the ſtate of England was ſo intangled with ciuill diſſention, and troubled with expectation of wars out of Scotland, that no ayd could be obtayned from thence. And the Brabanders ſeeing they waſted their time

in vaine, ſent ſome tenne thouſand of their men abroade to harry their enemies countrey. The Duke of Gelders being certified thereof, gathered together about three hundred horſemen, and contrary to the perſwaſions of almoſt all his Counſell, with that ſmall company marched towardes his enemy with great courage: eſteeming it better to die fighting manfully in the field, than to be ſhut vp within the walles of a towne, and beſieged. Therefore when hee had put his men in array, hee exhorted them to knightly proweſſe and valiant demea
                     •
                  our, giuing ſo great encouragement by example of his owne reſolution, that ſetting ſputres to their horſes, they all in one troupe ranne ſuriouſly The notable victory of the Duke of Gelders againſt the Brabanders. 1388. vpon their enemies, preuenting their expectation with ſuch a deſperat charge before they could ſettle themſelues to any orderly reſiſtance, that they eaſily ouercame them, and with ſmall loſſe obtained an honorable victorie. Many periſhed, ſome ſlaine in fight, others drowned in the riuer Maze: ſuch as eſcaped, fled with all the ſpeede they could make, and carried tidings of their ouerthrowe to the campe before Graue. Whereupon ſo great terrour roſe preſently amongſt them, that without further delay they abandoned the ſiege, and for haſte left all their prouiſion and baggage behinde them.
               The French king being exceedingly deſirous to take reuengement of the Duke of Gelders for thoſe arrogant and reprochfull Letters he had ſent him, raiſed a mighty armie. Many diſſwaded him from this voiage, and among the reſt, his vncles; but becauſe the duke of Brittaine was now fully concluded withall, inſomuch that he had repayd the money alſo that he had taken from the Conſtable, the King would not by any meanes omit the preſent occaſion of accompliſhing his purpoſe. And firſt he ſent ambaſſadors to the emperour to acquaint him with the cauſes of this warre: for ſo it be hooued him, in regard of certaine couenants and articles made formerly betwixt the Emperour and him. It was thought beſt to paſſe the army through Braband; and the

Dutcheſſe her ſelfe was well contented it ſhould be ſo; but all the people beſides, ſtoode ſtowtly againſt it, and were readie to defend their frontires from admitting ſuch a multitude, as being once receiued, would doe no leſſe harme and annoyance to the country, than if their enemies ſhould waſte and ſpoile it. Moreouer, they threatned the Dutcheſſe, that if ſhe gratified the Frenchmen in this behalfe, they would neuer take armes againſt the duke of Gelders. Then ſhe aduiſe dly excuſed her ſelfe to the King, imputing the blame to her people, and beſeeching him not to take anie offence at her deniall. Therefore taking his iourney through Champaigne, hee ſent three thouſand before to The French king goeth againſt the Duke of Gelders.
                   make way through the forreſt of Ardenne, which otherwiſe he could not haue paſſed. Moreouer he ſent vnto the Emperour, a coppie of the Letter which the duke of Gelders would haue had carried into France when he made his defiance. When the Emperour had ſeene that deſpightful and vnreuerent manner of writing, he gaue anſwer to the ambaſſadors in ſuch ſort as might wel aſſure thē he would be no hindrance to the Frenchmens proceedings. Who hewing their paſſage through the forreſt of Arden, entred into the territorie of Lutzemburge; and when they approched neere the country of Liege, the Biſhoppe (whoſe name was Arnold, of the houſe of the Earles of Horne) moued by the Archbiſhop of Colen, made interceſſion to the King for the duke of Iuliers, whoſe ſeigniory was like to be the firſt that ſhould haue taſted the violence of that warre. The King was not much againſt his requeſt, ſo the duke himſelfe would come and ſhew how the matters which he alleaged for his excuſe, were iuſt and reaſonable. The duke being brought to the Kings preſence, proteſted that hee neither counſelled his ſonne to make that defiance, nor had anie knowledge thereof before the letters were ſent. And for confirmation of his innocencie in this caſe, promiſed that hee would perſwade with his ſonne, to make his purgation aduiſedly before the King, and deſire him of pardon:

which thing if hee could not effect, hee would ſet open all his townes to the King, that by meanes thereof hee might accompliſh his warres with more aduantage. This condition was accepted, and the rather by the duke of Burgoigns perſwaſion. The duke of Iuliers therfore accompanied with the Archbiſhop of Collen, reſorted to his ſonne, and ye will not beleeue what trauell and endeuour hee vſed to alter his obſtinate minde. For all his diſcourſe ſauoured of nothing but meere fierceneſſe and contempt of the King, whoſe puiſſance he perſwaded himſelfe, that he ſhould be able to withſtand through the helpe of the Engliſh. At length after many rebukes and ſharp threatnings, with milde ſpeeches and gentle intreaties now and then intermingled betweene, being forced as it were by aſſault, hee condiſcended to his father. Then the duke drew him a forme of excuſe The Duke of Gelders ſubmits himſelfe to the French king. to this effect; that whatſoeuer hee had doone in this matter, was by counſell and procurement of the King of England. When the French King had ſeene the duke of Gelders, and heard what hee had ſpoken for himſelfe, his mindeſeemed to relent with a ſingular kinde of affection: for hee not onely pardoned his fault, but from thenceforth beganne to loue him, and that much more earneſtly, than if he had neuer offended him.
               When the Scottiſh men vnderſtoode that diſcord was hatching in England, and by continuance of time had gathered greater ſtrength, being daily more and more augmented, to the intent to reuenge olde iniuries, without acquainting the King with their purpoſe, they aſſembled to the number of fortie thouſand men. They thought likewiſe The Scottes inuade England.
                   to haue concealed it from their enemies by a pollicie, but they were deceiued. For the Engliſh hauing intelligence thereof, made preparation to with ſtand them. It came to a pitched field, and neuer was battell fought with greater force betweene them. The Scottiſh army being diuided in two partes, came not with equall puiſſance to the encounter, becauſe they were ſeparated one farre from an other:

neuertheleſſe they went away with victory.
               After the French mens departure, the Duke of Gelders being one that tooke no pleaſure in caſe and idleneſſe, rayſed certaine forces and tooke his iourney towards Pruſſia. It happened, that as he paſſed through Germany, hee was taken priſoner. But the Lordes of Pruſſia reſcued him againe The Duke of Gelders taken priſoner. by force, and cauſed the party which had taken him, to flie for his owne ſafety, leſt hee ſhould haue fallen into the like mi
                     •
                  fortune himſelfe. Now although he were ſet free by the helpe of his friends, and as hee loſt his libertie by the lawe of Armes, ſo hee had recouered it by the ſame meanes againe: yet bicauſe he would keepe faith with his enemy, he came at a certaine time to a place appointed, and compounded for his ranſome.
               The Duke of Lancaſter (as we ſhewed before) kept the duke of Berry ſtill a ſuter in great exſpectation, and yet he was all the while more affected to the Spaniard. Amongſt other doubts which he caſt, this was one: that if the Duke of Berry ſhould fortune to die, his daughter ſhould then remaine but a poore Lady in reſpect of her other ſiſters, for the duke had children by his firſt wife, which doubtleſſe would goe away with the greateſt part of his eſtate. When the French King vnderſtoode how the King of Spaine had put in a barre againſt the duke of Berrios proceedings, hee was wonderfully offended; ſo was the whole Counſell of Fraunce, who knew well how highly Spaine was bound to the Kings of Fraunce for great benefites receiued many ages together. For by the ayde of Charles the ſift, Henry the baſtard being ſet in poſſeſſion of the kingdome, left the ſame after his deceaſe, to his ſonne Iohn now raigning: yet not in ſuch ſort that he was able to defend it againſt the Engliſh men and their confederates the Portingales, if hee had not beene vpholden by the ſuccour of the French men.
               This ingratitude therefore being generally taken in very ill part, Ambaſſadours were addreſſed to the King of Spaine with this meſſage. That he ſhould take good aduiſement

and conſider well with himſelfe, what hee did, and with whome he contracted freindſhip: ſieldome any marriages were made, but there paſſed leagues and confederacies betweene the parties. There were yet extant counterpanes of the allyance between Henrie his father, and his poſterity on the one part, and the Kings of Fraunce on the other: Againſt the couenants whereof it were not good to tranſgreſſe: if he did, that he ſhould thinke no wronge done him by the French King in forſaking his freindſhip, which notwithſtanding was the thing that he ſtudied by all poſſible meanes to preſerue and continue. The King of Spaine anſwered, that indeed there had beene debating of certaine matters in his name with the duke of Lancaſter, but it ſhould be in no wiſe preiudiciall to the ſtate of Fraunce; and that he would neuer attempt any action, whereby in the leaſt degree he might ſeeme to haue broken the bondes of freindſhip and alliance between them. Aſſoone as he had diſmiſſed the ambaſſadours with this anſwere, immediatly 
                     Katherine the Duke of Lancaſters daughter, married to Henry Prince of Caſtile.
                   after he went through with the marriage, and therevppon the Lady Conſtance to put the matter out of queſtion, conueyed Katherine her daughter into Spaine, and there marryed her to Henrie the yong Prince of Castile. Which done, ſhee made diligent ſerch for her fathers bones, and when the place of his buriall at length was diſcouered, ſhe cauſed them to be taken vp, and honourably entumbed againe at Siuill.
               
               Through the trauell and induſtrie of certaine well diſpoſed perſons, communication was had concerning a truce betweene the Kings of England and Fraunce, with their Truce for three yeeres between England, Fraunce, & their confederates. confederates, viz. Spaine, Portugall, and Scotland. Now becauſe the Scottes lately before had ſome good ſucceſſe againſt the Engliſh, there was much adoe to draw them to any agreement: neuertheles their King being well inclined to quietnes, in the end they alſo changed their copie. So a truce was concluded for three yeeres, in ſuch ſort, that whoſoeuer ſhould by any meanes infringe it, ſhould be accounted,

as a wicked and periured perſon.
               We haue ſpoken before of the Duke of Ireland, who being driuen out of England, and lately through faire promiſes allured out of the low countries into Fraunce, remained there a while, but could not purchaſe any ſetled aboade or continuall reſting place. For the Lord Cow
                        •
                     y a man of great authority about the French King, vppon iuſt and weighty occaſions, hated him extreamely. For the Duke of Ireland hauing taken to wife this Lord Cow
                        •
                     yes daughter, fell afterwards in loue with an other woman, and by diſpenſation from Pope 
                     Ʋrbane, who was ready by all meanes to pleaſure the King of England, diuorced his wife and marryed his paramour. The Lord Cowey therefore, father of the wronged Lady, being deeply mooued with ſuch diſhonourable iniury, would neuer be in quiet, till he had bayted out of Fraunce this man, whome the world charged with more crimes, then that alone. See here the 
                     •
                  bbing and ſlowing of humain eſtates, the affections of Princes, and the ends of wicked perſons.
               The French King was perſwaded by ſome about him, to make a progreſſe into the furtheſt partes of his kingdōe, as a thing ſo acceptable to the people, as nothing could be more effectuall to winne their hartes. So he tooke his iourney through Campaigne, Burgoigne, and other prouinces till he came to Avinion: and when he had viſited the Pope, went from thence to Mountpelyer. Which Citty although by reaſon of traſicke and merchandize it be very wealthy, yet it had been ſo oppreſſed with tributes and exactions, that as then it was much impoueriſhed. For as long as king Charles the fift liued, the duke of Aniow had the rule of all thoſe countries, to the great enriching of his owne cofers. And at ſuch time as in purſute of greater fortunes, he vndertook his voyage towards Naples, by conſent of the Peeres the duke of Berry ſucceded in his gouernment. But aſſoone as the king came to one and twenty yeares of age, he diſplaced his vncles from their authority, and tooke the adminiſtration

of their offices into his owne hands. Now when he came into Prouince and the places adioyning, many grieuous complaints were preferred againſt his vncle of Berry, who had beyond meaſure polled the poore commons of their goods, and brought them in a manner to extreame deſperation. Yee might daily haue ſeene great numbers of ſuters putting vp petitions and ſupplications, complaining of deceyt, iniury, violence, rapes, extortions, and proſcriptions. It greiued the King exceedingly to ſee the The Duke of Berries treaſurer burned. miſeries of his people, and therefore for an example to terrify others, he cauſed the Duke of Berries treaſurer, the cheifeſt man in thoſe quarters, to be burned
                     •
                  ; for there came many accuſations againſt him, of great wrong and oppreſſion which he had done in the country. The Duke of Berry by his letters made earneſt interceſſion to ſaue his life, but he could not preuaile. When the King vndertooke this iourney, he would in no wiſe be accompanyed by his vncles, wherewith they were greatly offended, but eſpecially becauſe they ſawe ſome others of meane eſtate, to growe in great reputation about him.
               About this time departed Pope Vrbane out of this life, The death of Pope 
                        Ʋrbane.
                   whereof Clement being certified within ten dayes after, at Avinion, he earneſtly commended his cauſe to the French King, deſiring him that now vpon this occaſion he would vſe his credit with the Emperour, the King of Hungary, and other Princes, to the intent that all diſcord being remooued, peace and quietneſſe might at length be eſtabliſhed in the church. He was in good hope that now when his aduerſary was dead, the ſupremacy would entirely haue falne to him. But he was farre deceiued; for the Cardinalles created Boniface of Naples.
               
               The Moores and Barbarians made often excurſions vppon the Genowaies, and the Citties and Ilands vnder their ſubjection. Which thing they might more commodiouſly doe, becauſe vppon the confines, comming from Genoa
                  
towards their country, they held a very ſtrong and defenſible towne called Affricke. Out of this towne they iſſue forth againſt their enemies by ſea with great eaſe and aduantage, and if need require, they haue recourſe againe into the ſame, as a moſt ſafe harbor & receptacle. The Genowayes therfore enforced through the cōplaints & entreaty of their freinds, began to conſider how they might worke redreſſe. And becauſe they vnderſtood there was a truce lately concluded between Fraunce, England, and the kingdomes conconfederate, they ſent ambaſſadours to the French King, requiring him of ſuccour. The King was ſo inclinable to this warre, that he not only vndertooke it himſelfe, but ſolicited diuers of his neighbour Princes, to ſet their helping hands to performance of the enterpriſe. Therefore aſſembling 1390. The French King aydeth the Genowayes againſt the Moores and Barbarians. no ſmall power out of Fraunce, Britaine, Artoys, Flaunders, and England, he ſent it into Lombardy, vnder the conduct of Lewis Duke of Burbon, with whome he ioyned in commiſſion the Lord Cowcy, a man of moſt knowledge and experience, and in greateſt iudgement and direction in military affaires, that liued in thoſe times. Theſe taking ſhipping together at Genoa, at length ouercame the contrary waues and tempeſts which encountred them at ſea, and arriued ſafely in their enemies country. Now as the Moores were conſulting, becauſe they ſaw that the Genowayes vppon this redoubling of their puiſſance, by the comming of the french and other forraine nations to their ayd, would beſiege their Citty; a certaine graue old man amongſt them, deſcended of a noble family, gaue counſell in this manner. That they ſhould not giue battell to their enemies, in regard of their great number; but rather ſuffer them quietly to encampe and ſettle themſelues before the Citty; for it was ſtrong ynough to abide the violence of their ſiege for a long ſeaſon. Therefore let their enemies roaſt themſelues abroad in the heate of the ſcorching ſunne beames, whilſt they being fenced from the iniury of the weather, with houſes and ſhadowy places,

reſted at their eaſe within the Citty. For it would come to paſſe, that when their prouiſion by little and little was conſumed, themſelues tormented with heate, and tyred with a thouſand other diſcommodities, they would get home againe without ſpeeding of their purpoſe. The olde mans counſell was well liked, and the citty being beſieged both by ſea and land, many light skirmiſhes were daily interchanged. The Barbarians ſent an Ambaſſador deſiring to knowe for what cauſes this warre was mooued againſt them. The French men made anſwere, that the chiefe reaſon was, becauſe their forefathers had put the Sauiour of the world to a ſhameful death, for that they excluded baptiſme, were blaſphemers of God, and ſpake vnreuerently of the holy Virgine mother of Chriſt: theſe were the occaſions why they bent their forces againſt them, as the common enemies of chriſtendome. This anſwer ſeemed but a mockery to the Moores, ſo farre were they from any thoght of miſliking their religion. The Sicillians and other countries neere adioyning brought corne, wine and other prouiſion aboundantly into the campe of the beſiegers. But by reaſon of the hoteneſſe of thoſe countrey wines, and the extreame intemperateneſſe of the ayre, it could not be otherwiſe but that very many fell into moſt dangerous diſeaſes. Amongſt theſe inconueniences the duke of Burbon now altogether out of ſeaſon beeing haughty, prowde and cruell, and ſuch a one as no man almoſt might preſume into his preſence, would remitte no parte of his ſeueritie: inſomuch that through his default, ſhewing himſelfe alwaies rough and intractable, many notable exploits were omitted. After two moneths ſiege, when they had beſtowed all their labour in vaine, virtaile waxing ſcant, and ſcarcitie being feared, becauſe the winter approched and their watching grew painefull (for the Barbarians did continually moleſt them in the night) the peſtilence being alſo miſtruſted to hang ouer their heads, moſt were of opinion, that the beſt courſe was, to diſſolue the army. This alſo was

another thing which they ſuſpected, that the Genowayes perhaps might fall to agreement with their enemies, and ther was already ſuch a rumor ſpread through al the camp. Vpon theſe conſiderations therefore the French men rayſing their ſiege (which greatly diſpleſed the Genowais) addreſſed themſelues homeward. Wherupon the Barbarians reſuming greater courage, began to conceiue large hopes and to promiſe themſelues the performance of great matters heereafter. And that they might be able to repulſe their enemies with greater force another time, they ioyned in league with the Princes that bordered about them.
               
                  Iohn king of Spaine, within two yeares after his ſonne had The death of Iohn king of Caſtile.
                   married the duke of Lancaſters daughter, departed this life, leauing the ſucceſſion of the Crowne to Henry his ſonne. Moreouer at ſuch time as the marriage was concluded, this alſo was one couenant betwixt them: That the King of Spaine ſhould yearely pay to the Duke of Lancaſter and his wife, a hundred thouſand crownes, and for aſſurance therof, ſhould deliuer as pledges, foure of the chiefe Earles of his kingdome.
               
                  Galeas duke of Millaine ſurprized his vncle Barnabas by treaſon, and put him to death. The ſonne of this Barnabas tooke to wife the Earle of Arminackes ſiſter. And Lewis duke of Orleance brother to King Charles the ſixt, had maried 
                     Ʋalentine the daughter of Galeas. Now the Earle of The Earle of Arminacke paſſeth into Italy againſt the Duke of Millaine.
                   
                  Arminacke vpon the inceſſant importunity of his ſiſter, aſſembled an army of the companions in France, and leading them into Italy, layd ſiege to Alexandria, a towne pertaining to the Dutchy of Millaine. Galeas, who ſoiourned the ſame time at Pauy, ſent thither fiue hundred horſemen to lie there in garriſon: for his enemies were not then of ſo great number, that they could enuiron the towne round about. The Captaine of thoſe horſemen being a skilfull man of armes, after he had laine a while at Alexandria, iſſued forth one day with 300. horſe to draw his enemies to ſome diſaduantage: for he knew well they would proffer ſome

skirmiſh to the towneſ-men. Therfore at his going out he gaue commandement, that in their fight they ſhould retire from the enemy, and ſuffer him to purſue them, till they had drawne him within compaſſe of their danger. He was nothing deceiued in his opinion: for as they were skirmiſhing after their ordinary maner, the towneſmen gaue backe till they came to the place where their fellowes lay in ambuſh, who incontinently brake foorth with great violence. The French men thus vnexpectedly engaged, behaued themſelues with great courage and valour: but being ouerwearied with trauell, and faint with heate of the Sunne, they were vnable to ſuſtaine the reviewed force and fury of their enemies. The Earle himſelfe hauing gotten out of the preaſſe to take ayre, found a brooke there by, whereof he drunke ſo aboundantly, that he was ſodainely taken with ſuch a ſickneſſe, as both preſently bereft him of his ſpeech, and within few houres after, of his life. His ſouldiers by this means diſcouraged, made as much haſte as they could to get themſelues out of Italy. But many of them being intercepted & ſlaine in their paſſage, the reſt when they came to the confines of Fraunce, were by the Kings commaundement prohibited to enter.
               The Duke of Britaine, who had larely beene at Paris, and done his homage according to the cuſtome, being vnable to change the diſpoſition of his nature, though he had bin oftentimes reconciled to the French King, yet in his heart he could not chooſe but hate him, and loue the King of England At ſuch time as this attonement was made at Paris, hee promiſed from thencefoorth to become a Clementine. But aſſoone as hee was returned into his owne countrey, hee performed nothing leſſe. And when the Kings Officers were ſent vnto him, hee would not admit them to his preſence: carying himſelfe altogether in ſuch a faſhion, as it might plainely appeare hee ſought new occaſions of warre and contention. Many counſelled the King to leuie armes againſt him, to abate his pride and arrogancie, which

was in tollerable. But the Kings vncles, and eſpecially the Duke of Burgoigne (whoſe wife was the Duke of Britaines kinſwoman) employed their trauell to this effect, that a day certaine might be aſſigned for communication. So a meeting was had at Tours: and certaine pointes were there rehearſed, wherein the Duke might ſeeme to haue contemned the kings authority. The Duke anſwered reſpectiuely to euery of them, and ſharpely enough, glauncing couertly ſomtimes at certaine perſons of baſe linage in the Court, vpon whoſe counſell and opinions the King much depended. Such difference and alteration was about the matter, that it ſeemed not likely to be otherwiſe ended, than by the ſword. Neuertheleſſe, in concluſion a meanes was found to make amity and peace betweene them. The French king gaue his daughter in marriage to the Duke of Brittaines ſonne: and the ſonne of Iohn of Bloys (the Conſtables ſon in lawe) married the Duke of Britaines daughter. Verily, for the moſt part, to ſuch comicall concluſions, come the tragicall contentions of Princes.
               
                  Guy Earle of Bloys had rich and ample inheritance, both in Fraunce and other countries. But after the death of Lewis 
                  Guy Earle of Bloys. his ſonne, who deceaſed very yong, he had no one certaine heire, but diuerſe in diuerſe places, according as his lands lay ſeparated one farre from another. Now the duke of Touraine the French kings brother, by the meanes of his wife which was daughter to Gal
                        •
                     as Duke of Millaine, had a greatmaſſe of money lying by him. And becauſe he was deſirous to beſtow it to ſome benefite, he would neuer reſt till he had perſwaded the Earle to ſell him al the lands pertaining to the Earledome of Bloys. It was a hard matter to compaſſe, and good reaſon why: but being ouercome at laſt by the intreaty of his wife, the Duke of Berryes daughter (whom the French king had ſuborned) when he ſaw no hope of iſſue, he ſolde him the reuerſion of his Earledome for two hundred thouſand franks.
               
                  Gaſcone Earle of Foys, whoſe ſingular wiſedome and liberality

my Author dooth oftentimes commend, fell ſodainly The ſuddaine death of Gaſcone Earle of Foys.
                   downe dead one day when he was come home from hunting, as he waſhed his hands to go to dinner. By what miſchaunce his onely ſonne periſhed, we haue ſhewed before. Now of his baſe ſonnes he loued one ſo well, that he was earneſtly in hand with the French King for his legittimation, that he might haue made him his heyre: and if ſuddaine death had not preuented him, perhaps he might haue brought the matter to paſſe as he deſired. The next of his kinted to ſucceed him was the vicount of Chaſtillon, but as long as he liued, he alwaies hated him, & to the intent to doe him diſpleaſure, beſides his purpoſe and endeauour to haue conueyed the inheritance to his baſtard ſonne, he alſo borrowed of the French King (when he had no need) fiue hundred thouſand frankes, becauſe if euer he happened to become his heyre, he would be ſure to charge him with a heauy burthen. Aſſoone as the Earle was dead, there wanted not ſome to perſwade the King, that in regard he deceaſſed without iſſue, and was indebted to him ſo great a ſumme of money, he ſhould ſeize all the Earldome into his owne poſſeſſion. After the matter had been diuerſly debated, at length by inter ceſſion of the Duke of Berry, the King was contented to depart with the Earldome to the Vicount, vpon theſe conditions: that he ſhould pay vnto him threeſcore thouſand frankes, and twenty thouſand more to ſuch as had trauelled and taken paines in his behalfe for the obtainment of his ſute; and finally, that by the cenſure of indifferēt perſons, he ſhould deale friendly and honourably with the Earles two baſtard Sonnes that remayned.
               After the French men were returned out of Barbary, vppon relation which many made of the occurrents they had ſeene, the King was enflamed with a meruailous deſire to goe into thoſe countries to conquer the Barbarians: and there were diuers that prouoked and put him forward to the action, as an enterpriſe fitting a Prince of ſuch puiſſance.

But it was generally thought neceſſary, that the church ſhould firſt be ſetled in quiet, before this expedition were vndertaken. And that could not otherwiſe be brought to paſſe, then by ſuppreſſing the new Pope lately choſen at Rome: This counſell was well approoued, and there vppon proclamation made through all Fraunce, that the King would addreſſe himſelfe to the warres, at the beginning of the next ſpring. Now when this voyage was thus fully reſolued vppon, ambaſſadours arryued out of England, ſignifying how their King was very deſirous of peace. This newes wonderfully reioyced the French King, and therevppon a meeting was appointed at Amience. The King of England ſent thither two of his vncles the Dukes of Lancaſter, and Yorke, but the Duke of Glouceſter the great aduerſary of peace, he kept ſtill with himſelfe at Douer. The french King was preſent in perſon at this treaty. The Engliſhmen demaunded againe all Aquitaine, 
                  1391. A treaty of peace at Amience.
                   which King Iohn had departed from by the law of armes: and beſides, fourteene hundred thouſand frankes which remayned yet vnpayed for his raunſome. The French men offered them a part of Aquitaine, namely, that they had already in poſſeſſion, and nyne Biſhoprickes. For the payment of their money they required three yeares reſpit, and that Calice might be raced to the ground.
               The conditions were reiected on both ſides. For although the Engliſhmen enclind wonderfully to peace, yet without their kings conſent, they would not conclude vpon any thing, for that was beyond the limits of their commiſſion. It ſeemed the King of England did not greatly diſallow the reſt of the articles, ſauing only the racing of Calice. But the Duke of Gloucester, the diſturber of peace, and enemy to all agreement, made vehement oppoſition; affirming that it was impoſſible euer to drawe the French men to any accord which might be for the profit and honour of England.
               
               
                  
And becauſe in theſe affaires of ſo great conſequence, the King alone had not authority ſufficient to confirme the articles of peace, though he likte them neuer ſo well, without conſent of the three eſtates of his kingdome aſſembled in Parliament; it was agreed, that to the former, three yeeres truce, another tweluemonth ſhould be added, that in the meane time conuenient leiſure might be had, to conſider and determine of the matter at large. Neuertheleſſe at the Duke of Lancaſters departure, the French King diſcouering his minde, ſhewed him how earneſtly he was deſirous of peace, to the intent that by this meanes he might bend all his forces againſt the Turkes and Barbarians, who had lately both driuen the King of Armenia out of his country, and alſo entred with great cruelty into the Kingdome of Hungary. The Duke well diſpoſed of himſelfe, and mooued with the Kings moſt curteous and honourable diſcourſe, promiſed him his faithfull furtherance, and that he would neuer ceaſe the imploying of his beſt endeauours, till he had brought the matter to ſuch a concluſion, as by the King eſpecially, and by all well affected people was generally deſired.
               The french King made an exchange with his brother Lewis, for the Duke dome of Toureine, in liev whereof he gaue him the duke dome of Orleance which was much greater; but with this condition, that all his heyres and ſucceſſours ſhould do homage and fealty to the Kings of Fraunce for the ſame.
               A certaine gentleman of the Court called Peter of Craon, 
                  Sir Peter of Craon.
                   was highly in fauour with the Duke of Orleance, who beſides his wife, bare ſecret affection to another Lady of excellent beauty; and this matter was not vnknowne to that friend of his, whome he vſed ſo familiarly. It ſo fell out, that the Ducheſſe had intelligence of her husbands loue, and therevppon, ſending for the Lady, rebukte and threatned her very ſharpely. The Lady all a baſht and ſorrowfull, excuſed her ſelfe as well as ſhee could, and at her next meeting

with the Duke, told him all what had happened, and how the matter which he deſired to keepe moſt ſecret, was diſcouered to his wife. The Duke diſſembling his knowledge, carryed himſelfe ſo kindly towards his wife, that in the end he got notice from her, of the party which had betrayed him, namely, Peter of Craon: who by this meanes being brought both into the Dukes, and the Kings diſpleaſure, was ſhortly after baniſht the Court. And therevppon finding no quiet harbour in Fraunce, he reſorted to the Duke of Britaine; who burning with irteconcileable hatred towards the Conſtable, handled the matter in ſuch ſort, as Sir Peter of Craon was perſwaded, that the Conſtable through ſecret complaints and accuſations againſt him, had been the procurer of his baniſhment.
               Herevppon imagining with himſelfe by what meanes he might be reuenged of this iniury, he ſent certaine of his houſhold ſeruants at ſundry times to Paris, commaunding them to enter the towne diſguiſed, and to keepe themſelues priuate in a houſe of his: within a while he followed after himſelfe. And one day when he had learned certainly by his ſpies, what time the Conſtable would returne from Court, he ſet vppon him comming homeward in the night Sir Oliuer Cliſſon treacherouſly aſſaulted, and almoſt ſlaine by ſir Peter of Craon.
                   with ſmall attendants, and wounded him very grieuouſly: in ſo much that hauing ouerthrowne him from his horſe, he left him in the place for dead. Newes hereof was preſently brought to the King, who himſelfe came foorthwith to viſite the Conſtable, and gaue commaundement alſo to the Prouoſt of the Citty, that he ſhould make diligent ſearch with all poſſible ſpeed to find out the offenders. But it was to no purpoſe: For Saint Peter of Craon aſſoone as he had committed the fact, fled immediatly vpō the ſpur towards Britaine, through the gate of S. Anthony, 
                  Euer ſince the Pariſians met the King in armes at his returne out of which at that time ſtood open, & had done both night and day for many yeeres before. The King ſent a meſſenger to the Duke of Britaine, cōmanding him vpon his allegeance to apprehend Sir Peter of Craon and ſend him to Paris. The

Duke ſtifly denyed any ſuch to be there. But the King 
                     Flaunders, when to curb their boldnes, he cauſed all their armour to be taken from them, the chaines of the ſtreetes to bee carried away, and the foure principall gates of the citie from thence foorth to be left alwayes open. The French King falleth ſodaynly into a frenſie. helde that excuſe altogether vnſufficient: and therefore partly mooued with the heinouſneſſe of the offence, which in ſome ſorte he thought concerned his owne perſon, and likewiſe for that hee ſawe the Duke to be a continuall diſturber of the realme, he leuied a great army and marched towards Britaine. The Kings vncles for hatred they bare to the Conſtable, perſwaded him as much as they could, to deſiſt from his purpoſe. But when they could not preuaile, they themſelues alſo accompanied him in his iourney. At ſuch time as they approched the enemies frontiers, the king who had beene troubled before with a feauer, and certaine light fantaſies in his braine, being now diſtempered with ouermuch heate of the weather, and diſquieted with other matters, was ſodainely, as he rode vppon the way, depriued of all power and vſe of vnderſtanding. In ſuch ſort, that imagining hee had beene amongeſt his enemies, he drew out his ſword and ranne deſperately vpon the Lordes, and the reſt of the company which was about him, chaſing his owne brother and diuerſe others a great way together, ſo as for their better ſafety, they were forced to alight from their horſes; and ſhift as well away as they could on foote. At length, catching holde of him behinde, and diſarming him, they conueyed him to the next towne for a while, and afterwardes to a certaine caſtle of Fraunce more nearer to Paris. Which doone, when conſultation was had, to whom the gouernment of the commonwealth ſhould be committed, whether to the Kings vncles, or to his brother, it was thought fitteſt that his vncles ſhould haue the authoritie, becauſe the other was yet too yong to take the adminiſtration vpon him. Whileſt the king lay thus diſeaſed, his vncles hauing gotten power and opportunity to deale ſtraitly with thoſe that before had led the King as they liſted, droue the Conſtable out of France, and put diuerſe others in priſon and bondes. The Conſtable was not expulſed by force, but vpon ſome ſharp ſpeeches

giuen him by the Duke of Burgoigne, departed of his owne accord, holding it his ſafeſt courſe, by a timely flight to preuent future inconueniences. It grieued his enemies, that he had ſo eſcaped, and to the intent they might not ſeeme to proceede indirectly againſt him (for they knew the duke of Burbon and the Duke of Orleance wiſhed him well) they 1391. cited him after hee was gone, to the parliament of Paris. At the day prefixed when he made no appearance, he was condemned both of felony and treaſon. For at ſuch time as he lay dangerouſly ſicke of his wounds, vppon the making of his will, his mooueable goodes were found to be in value about ſeauenteene hundred thouſand frankes: which huge maſſe of money many were of opinion he had gotten by very vnlawfull meanes. The reſt that were holden in priſon, being bereft both of landes and goods, remained alſo in great daunger of their liues. Of this number, one or two, when they ſaw their innocence could not ſhield them 
                     Sir John Mericer. from extreamity of perill, conceiued ſo great ſorrow with the conſideration of their preſent eſtate compared to the glory of their former fortunes, that with weeping and lamenting they had almoſt made themſelues blinde.
            
            
               The fourth Booke.
               
                  AS well the French Kings vncles, as the Engliſh, labored very earneſtly, that at length a finall peace might be concluded betwixt them. The matter was negotiated by writing, to the intent euery circumſtance might be more diligently

examined and conſidered. It ſeemed to the Engliſhmen, and ſpecially to the Duke of Gloceſter, that the French men vſed certaine wordes of doubtfull ſignification, which afterward, as occaſion ſhould ſerue, they might interpret in another ſence for their owne aduantage. Therefore they were more circumſpect in diſcuſſing euery particular, and whereſoeuer any vncertainty or doubtful manner of ſpeech occurred, they would be reſolued in what conſtruction it ſhould be taken before they paſſed any further. All ſuch for the moſt part as had waſted their ſubſtance, and impoueriſhed their eſtates in time of peace, were now deſirous of warre; but the two Kings were exceedingly inclined to concord: and eſpecially the French King, in regard of the occaſions before mentioned. The baniſhed King of Armenia alſo, by diſcourſing with how inſatiable deſire, and what mighty puiſſance the barbarous nations gap
                     •
                  d, not onely after the kingdome of Hungary; but in a maner for all Chriſtendome, gaue great furtherance to the matter in handling. In concluſion, a truce was taken for foure yeares A truce for foure yeeres between England & France
                   both by ſea and land, it being further agreed, that certaine ſeigniories ſhould be reſtored on either party, as well to the Engliſh as the French, and all the ſouldiers which liued by ſpoile and pillage, to be diſmiſſed. The French king who lately before, by the helpe of a certaine skilfull Phyſitian, had recouered both his vnderſtanding, and his ſpeech, about this time relapſed againe into his former extreamitie.
               Pope Clement (who had ſuſtained the oppoſition of two The death of pope Clement
                   aduerſaries, firſt Vrbane, then Boniface newly erected) being dead at Avinion, the Cardinalles ſubſtituted Benedict in his place, conditionally, that if the French King did not ratifie his election, another ſhould be choſen. Both the Popes ſent their Legates to the French King, and he gaue them both friendly audience, howbeit by the counſell of his diuines, he inclind neither to the one, nor the other, but rather ſought meanes how to take a way all ground of diſſention, and to eſtabliſh quietneſſe in the Church. Therefore

ſending Ambaſſadours to the Emperour, whoſe authoritie, care, and diligence ought to be chiefe in that behalfe, and likewiſe to the Kings of Bohemia, Hungary and England, he beſought them earneſtly, that they would help to further the publike welfare and tranquillitie of chriſtendome.
               The King of England at this time, by conſent of the King Richard giueth all Aquitaine to the duke of 
                        
                           •
                        ancaster.
                   whole ſtate of his realme, gaue all the Dutchie of Aquitaine entirely and freely to the Duke of Lancaſter, and to his heires for euer. The Duke therefore diſpoſing of his affaires in England, ſailed ouer into Aquitaine, and at Burdeaux ſhewed the graunt which King Richard had giuen him. The towneſmen made him anſwere, That of his preſence and comming thither they were glad and ioyful: but to admit his gouernement, and acknowledge him for their ſoueraigne Lord, that could they not yet reſolue vpon. Let him firſt deale and agree with the reſt of the Citties, whome it equally concerned, and if they would be content to ratifie the Kings graunt, neither ſhould their part of duety be vnperformed. The men of Bayon aunſwered him after the ſame faſhion. And when hee aſſayed the diſpoſition of ſeuerall perſons, the noblemen and gentlemen being aſſembled together, gaue this determination: That in regarde the Aquitaines were ſo linked, and as it were engraffed together with the Engliſh, that they might by no meanes be ſeparated or conueyed ouer to any other Lorde, therefore they were of opinion, that this gift of the Kings muſt neceſſarily be voide and fruſtrate. At length it was thought good, that commiſſioners ſhould be ſent to pleade the matter before the King himſelfe. Who when they came thither, boldely maintained their right; affirming that their The Gaſcones refuſe to accept the duke of Lancaſter for their ſoueraigne. ſeigniory ought not to be alienated from the Crowne of England, neither by gift, marriage, compoſition, nor any other meanes whatſoeuer. That the Kings of England were accuſtomed at their coronation, to promiſe by ſolemne oth that it ſhould be ſo, and that the King there preſent had

done the ſame: and there withall they produced their charter. They alleadged further, that it was moſt neceſſarie and behoouefull for the realme, that this cuſtome authorized by the wiſedome of graue counſellors, and eſtabliſhed by continuance of long time, ſhould ſtill be kept firme and inuiolate. For howſoeuer the Duke of Lancaſter at this preſent were a faithfull and aſſured friend to the Engliſh men, yet things could not alwayes continue at one ſtay: and it might happen heereafter, that hee ſhould conclude ſome league, or agree vpon ſome marriage with the Frenchmen, Britons, Burgonions, or others, according as time ſhould ſerue, and his owne affaires require: whereby it might come to paſſe, that the Dukedome of Aquitaine, which by a certaine peculiar prerogatiue was now annexed to the crown of England, ſhould be transferred to a ſtrange Lord, and from thenceforth loſt all their ancient aliance and ſocietie with the Engliſh nation. When they had finiſhed their ſpeech to this purpoſe, many were mooued by their reaſons to be of the ſame opinion. But the Duke of Glouceſter with great vehemencie of ſpirite oppoſed himſelfe againſt them, not ſo much for any affection to his brother, as for that hee wiſht him by this meanes to be remooued further off from the realme, to the intent himſelfe might the more commodiouſly rule all things as he liſted. After much debating, the Gaſcones requeſt preuailed; and therevppon word was ſent to the Duke of Lancaſter, that hee ſhoulde ſurceaſe from his enterpriſe, and inſiſt vpon his graunt no further. Whilſt the Duke was abſent in the partes of Aquitaine, King Richard rayſing an army of thirty thouſand K. Richards voyage into Ireland.
                   Archers, and foure thouſand horſemen, paſſed ouer into Ireland: for the conqueſt whereof, in former times great warres had beene made by his aunceſtors. Nine moneths after his arriuall, the country was yeelded into his ſubiection, and their foure petty kings taken priſoners, in framing whoſe faſhions to ciuillity and good manners, no arte nor diligence was omitted: but hardly may a barbarous minde

and ſauage nature be reduced to ciuill conuerſation.
               After the death of Queene Anne daughter to Charles the Emperour, the King of England becauſe he had no iſſue, reſolued 1394. vpon a ſecond marriage. But eſpecially aboue all other nations, he deſired to linke himſelfe with Fraunce in a moſt ſtedfaſt bond of amity. Herevpō he began to be a ſuter for Iſabell the French kings daughter, which had lately before been betrothed to the Duke of Britaines Sonne, at Tours. This motion did greatly diſpleaſe the Duke of Glouceſter, who deſired nothing but warres. The French men for the moſt part were of opinion, that nothing was to be determined in this matter, before peace were throughly concluded and eſtabliſhed.
               
                  Henrie King of Hungary, brother to Charles the Emperor, Otherwiſe called Lamorabaquy.
                   being threatned with warres from Baſam a mighty and puiſſant Prince of the Turkes, required ayde of the French king: who ſent two thouſand young Gentlemen to his ſuccour. Iohn the ſonne of Phillip Duke of Burgoigne a young 
                     Iohn the duke of Burgoignes ſonne ſent by the French king to ayde the King of Hangary againſt the Turkes. Lord of the age of two and twenty yeares, aſſociated for his better direction, with that worthy and valiant ſouldier the Lord Cowcy, was appointed generall of theſe forces. They paſſed out of France into Auſtria, and from thence to Buda in Hurgary, where being arriued, although the enemie before had prefixed a day of battell, yet heard they no newes of his comming; therefore it was thought beſt to paſſe the army ouer Danubius, and to aſſaile him in his owne countrey. They were almoſt an hundred thouſand ſtrong, the greater parte of them being horſemen▪ Now when the
                     •
                   were entred into the Turkes dominion, after the taking of ſome townes, they layd ſiege to the citty of Nicopolis, the principall and ſtrongeſt in thoſe quarters. The ſiege continuing ſomewhat long, and affoording more vacant 
                     Nicopolis beſieged. time than was conuenient for ſouldiers, the Lorde Cowcy deſirous to aduaunce his honour and the reputation of his name, accompanied with fiue hundred launces, and as many archers, all on horſe-backe, ranged abroad ſomewhat

farther into the countrey, to ſee if hee could meete with any enemy vpon whome he might aduenture his fortune. It happened according to his deſire. For the enemy vnderſtanding that there were forragers abroade, aſſembled to the number of twenty thouſand, and marched directly againſt them. When the French men had intelligence thereof, they practiſed a deuiſe as the time then ſerued not vnfitting for their purpoſe. Entring all into a wood, they ſent about ſome hundreth horſemen to entice the Turkes out of their ſtrength where they lay at the defence of a certaine paſſage, to come foorth and skirmiſh with them. The Turkes ſuppoſing there had bin no more of their ennemies than they ſawe, iſſued preſently out againſt them: and the French men purpoſely retired vntill ſuch time as they had drawne them to the wood, within compaſſe of their ambuſh, which ſodainely brake foorth, and inuaded them on all ſides. By this meanes the Turkes being intercepted and Fifteen thouſand Turkes 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſlaine by one thouſand chriſtians vnder the conduct of the Lorde Cow
                           •
                        y.
                   cut off, as well by thoſe that freſhly aſſailed them, as by the other which before made countenaunce to flie, but now turned furiouſly vppon them, were ſlaine to the number of fifteene thouſand, and the reſt hardly ſaued themſelues by flight. Baſan the Turkiſh king, howſoeuer hee ſeemed ſlacke in his affaires, yet had he perfect intelligence of all his enemies proceedings. For hee was continually certified thereof by Galeas Duke of Millaine, with whome he had great entercourſe of friendſhip. Therefore hee aſſembled a huge army, the Souldan of Babylon, the Medes, and the King of Perſia, ſending great forces to aide him.
               Concerning the Duke of Millaine, ye ſhall vnderſtand, A diſcourſe ot the Duke of Millaine.
                   that there were ſometimes three brothers, Manfred, Galeas, and Barnabas. The vncle of theſe was Archbiſhop of Millaine. Lewis of Bauier being elected Emperour, when he could not obtaine his confirmation from the Pope, went to Rome, and there of his owne authority creating another Pope, and certaine Cardinalles, was by him inueſted in his imperiall dignity: and afterward permitted

his ſouldiers to take the payment of their wages out of the ſpoyle of the Citty. Charles King of Bohemia, the Sonne of Henry of Lutzemburge, was created Emperour againſt this Lewis. Which Charles cōming newly into Italy from Aquiſgraue where he had receiued his cōſecratiō of the Pope, this Archbiſhop of Millaine entertayned him with great curteſie, and did him all the honour he could, lending him mony alſo at his departure, to the ſum of an hundred thouſand crownes. The Emperour in conſideration hereof, and to ſhew his gratefull mind, created the Archbiſhop, Vicount of Millaine, and gaue to him and to his nephews after him, all that ſeigniory, to hold and enioy the ſame, till ſuch time as the Emperour ſhould redeeme it againe by repaiment of the whole ſum which he had borrowed. After the Archbiſhops death, Manfred his eldeſt nephew by the Emperours conſentand good liking, ſucceeded in the ſeigniory of Millaine. But his brothers for enuy diſpatched him out of the way, concluding with themſelues to ſeize vppon his eſtate, and afterward to confirme their authority by alliance in marriage with other Princes. So when they had 
                     •
                  idde their elder brother of his life, they made equall partitiō between them, and rayned puiſſantly by force and policy. Galeas in regard he was the elder, had tenne townes, and Barnabas had nine. Millaine it ſelfe was indifferently allotted to them both, the one to haue it one yeare, and the other another, by turnes. They leuyed ſubſidies and taxes of their people from time to time, by moſt vniuſt and violent meanes. Such fortreſſes as either of them held, they furniniſhed with Garriſons of forraine ſouldiers, of all nations but their own, whome they principally diſtruſted. Through compulſion and rigour they kept the people in great awe and ſubiection, exacting moſt cruell puniſhment vpon ſuch as ſtirred neuer ſo little againſt them, to the intent to terrify others by their example. They purchaſed the alliance of Princes with great ſummes of mony. Galeas paid to the Earle of Sauoy whoſe ſiſter he married, an 100000 crowns.

This Galeas had like wiſe a ſonne of his own name that marryed the daughter of Iohn King of Fraunce, who in conſideration hereof, departed with ſix hundred thouſand frankes towards the payment of his father in lawes ranſome, to the King of England. Ʋalentine the daughter of this younger Galeas, was marryed to Lewis Duke of Orleans, brother to the French King Charles the ſixt: but her father firſt paied to him that ſhould be his ſonne in law, tenne hundred thouſand franks, ſurely a wonderfull ſumme of mony: with part whereof the Earledome of Bloys was purchaſed, as we haue heretofore declared.
               Betweene the two brothers there was no contention, as long as they liued together. But the younger Galeas after his fathers deceaſſe, ſurpriſed his vncle Barnabas by treaſon, and ſlew him.
               One of this Barnabas daughters was married to Stephon Duke of Bauier, and brought forth a daughter named Iſabell, who afterward became the wife of Charles King of Fraunce, as is mentioned in this hiſtory already. Galeas 
                  Pag. 127. hauing thus trecherouſly ſlaine his vncle, was not ſo contented, but perſecuted euen his childrens children, and all their generation, ſeizing into his hands all their goods and poſſeſſions. Alſo he burthened the people with grieuous and continuall exactions.
               Beſides this, he held a wicked and vnreuerent opinion concerning the Godhead. So he might enrich himſelfe and aduance his authority, he regarded not by what means it were effected. Amongſt other precepts of good doctrine wherewith he was plentifully inſtructed, he was alſo miſ-led in this opinion, and tooke it as hereditary from his anceſtors, vtterly ro deſpiſe the Popes authority, and to reioyce exceedingly when any diſſention happened in the church. Now the Duke of Orleance wife being a very ambitious woman, was not a little faine and deſirous that her husband might attaine to the Crowne, by what meanes ſhee did not greatly regard. Herevppon many ſuſpected

that the kings mind had beene all this while enchaunted by her witch-craft. The ground of the ſuſpition grew vppon this occaſion. Shee had a Sonne by her husband, a fayre young child, much about the age of the Dolphin. As theſe two children were ſporting together in a chamber, a poyſoned appell was caſt in amongſt them, on that ſide where the kings ſonne was: but the child (which may ſeeme a wonder) refuſed to meddle withall. Then the other when no body perceiued him, caught it vp, and within a little while after he had eaten of it, through the violent operation of the poyſon, yeelded vp the ghoſt. The report hereof was preſently carried to the Court, and ſoone diſperſed ouer all the country. This alſo was another thing which encreaſed the ſuſpition, that during all the time of the Kings ſicknes, he would endure neyther the Queene, nor any other woman to come about him, but only this Ducheſſe of Orleans. By theſe occaſions, mens minds being meruailouſly incenſed, ſhee was conueyed from the Court to a certaine caſtle not farre from Paris, and there reſtrayned of her liberty. Beſides, her husband conceiued great diſpleaſure againſt her about the death of his ſonne. When Galeas of Millaine vnderſtood how his daughter was entreated, he was highly offended, and ſent ambaſſadours forthwith into Fraunce, where they found nothing ſo friendly entertainment as he expected. Therefore about ſuch time as the voyage was vndertaken into Hungarie, he proclaymed warres againſt the French King: and the more to grieue his enemy, entred in league with Baſan the Turke, and made him acquainted both with his owne affaires, and with the ſtate of Fraunce.
               
               
                  Albert Earle of Henault, whereas William his ſonne was purpoſed to haue gone this expedition againſt the Turkes, ceaſſed not to exhort him that he ſhould rather make warre vppon the Phriſoners, which contrary to all right withdrew themſelues from his obedience. The young Earle obeying his fathers commaund, aſſembled his men of warre

from all parts adioyning, and being likewiſe aſſiſted both with French and Engliſh ſuccours, tooke ſhipping together and ſayled into Friſ
                        •
                     land. Within few daies after their arriuall, endeuouring to paſſe ouer the banks and ditches wherewith that country is ſtrongly fenced, the wilde Fri
                     •
                  oners hauing intelligence of their enemies approche, made ſtout oppoſition againſt them. But after long conflict, through the valour and proweſſe of the horſemen and archers, who by a ſecret paſſage had conueyed themſelues neerer vnto them, they were ſuddainely ouer-charged and many of them ſlaine. Little elſe was performed at that time, by reaſon the winter was ſo neere at hand. But about 
                     Friſeland ſubdewed by the Earle of Henault.
                   twoo yeares after, the warres being renued there againe, thoſe haughty and prowd ſtomacks of theirs, were forced to yeild vnder his ſubiection, and to acknowledge him for their Lord, whome alwaies before they had contemned.
               After the King of England had long ſolicited his marriage with the French kings daughter, and that many ambaſſadours had paſſed betweene them, at length it was concluded, that both the kings ſhould meet in perſon at a certaine town which was the mid way between the French territory & Calice. This agreement took effect. and the french King himſelfe deliuered his daughter by the hand to the 1396. King Richard marrieth Iſabel the french kings daughter. King of England. But before the matter could be brought to this concluſion, king Richard was faine to feed his vncle the Duke of Gloucester both with gifts andlarge promiſes. For he hated peace extreamly, and was of ſo peruerſe and proude diſpoſition, that the King ſtood in great feare leaſt he ſhould haue raiſed his commons againſt him, and therefore held it his beſt courſe 
                     •
                  o aſſure himſelfe of his friendſhip. After the conſummation of theſe nuptialles the French King was purpoſed to haue made inuaſion vppon the Dukedome of Millaine; and the King of England had already promiſed to ayde him with ſix thouſand archers. But there happened a matter in the mean time, which gaue

occaſion of new deliberation.
               The Hungarians and French men together had ſtrongly beſieged Nicopolis, and conceiued good hope, that in ſhort ſpace they ſhould become Lords of the Citty. In the meane while Baſam the Turkiſh King, aſſembled out of his owne dominions and the countries of Princes adioyning, about two hundred thouſand men. He ſent almoſt eight thouſand before, and deuided the reſt of his whole army into two battelles. Aſſoone as our men were aduertiſed of their comming, they preſently prepared to meete them. And becauſe the ſcowtes which they had ſent forth to diſcouer, reported that the enemies were but a ſmall number, (for they had ſeene no more then thoſe eight thouſand fore-riders) the French men in great heate made haſt to the encounter. As they were thus in a readineſſe, the King of Hungary ſent them word, that they ſhould not be too forward, for he miſtruſted the ſcowts had not taken a ful view of their enemies forces: and that he had ſent out ſome others better acquainted with the coaſts of the country, who within few houres would aſſuredly returne and bring more certain intelligēce. The Lord Cowcy & many others alowed this aduise, and thought it neceſſary by all meanes to be followed. But the Conſtable Phillip of Artoys, becauſe his opinion was not firſt demaunded, prowdly and peruerſly One mans pride, cauſeth many mens deſtruction. miſconſtrued the kings profitable counſell, as if his intent had beene to bereaue the French men of their oportunity, (beeing already raunged in battell,) and to aſſume the honour of the victory to himſelfe.
               To this effect he vttered many idle words; nor for that he was ſo perſwaded himſelfe, or could by any good reaſon diſſallow of the King of Hungaries counſell, but becauſe he enuyed the Lord Cowcyes late honourable exployt, and the reputation he had gained by defeating ſo great number of enemies with ſo ſmall forces. And he diſdained not a little, that himſelfe being both for dignity and reuenue one of the greateſt ſubiects i
                     •
                   
                  France, any other ſhould be preferred

before him: preſuming that his opinion and authority in ſuch caſes ought principally to take place, and to be reſpected aboue the reſt. Therefore reiecting the King of Hungaries aduiſe which the reſidue approoued, and ſuppoſing there was no delay to be made in the matter, without expecting the ayde of his aſſociates, he marched forward againſt the enemy. By occaſion whereof, the reſt were likewiſe enforced to ioyne their powers with his, vnleſſe they would bee accounted betrayers of their company.
               See what miſchiefe comes of pride and emulation. Now were their enemies vppon them, and the French men ſo beſette on all ſides with huge numbers which encompaſt them about, that they ſaw no way to eſcape. And although they were very few in compariſon of their enemies, yet in this diſtreſſe they ſhewed proofs of invincible corage: but they were ſo oppreſt with multitude, that it was impoſſible for them to auoyd a lamentable deſtruction. The Lords for The ſiege before Nicopolis raiſed, and all the Frenchmen ſlaine or taken priſoners. the moſt part were all taken priſoners, the beauty and richnes of their armour diſcouering them to the Barbarous people, who ſaued their liues in hope to make great commodity of their ranſoms. After the victory, king Baſam cauſed a view of the dead bodyes to be taken, and when he vnderſtood that there were many more ſlaine of his part, then of his enemies, being enraged with great fury, he commanded 300. gentlemen of diuers nations that remained priſoners, ſhould be all cruelly ſlaine, & cut in peeces. The King of Hungary when he ſaw how the french men without further expectation, would raſhly aduenture againſt the enemy, was exceedingly ſory: and when he beheld their miſerable ouerthrowe, by perſwaſion of ſuch as were about him, not ſeeing any other remedy, he himſelfe alſo fled and paſſed ouer Danubius. Vndoubtedly the pride and enuy of the French men gaue the enemy that daies victory. Baſam the Turkiſh King, after he vnderſtood the eſtate of his priſoners, ſuch I meane as were of greater birth and calling

then the reſt, determined no violence againſt them, but ſent a meſſenger into Fraunce to giue notice of their captiuity and the ouerthrowe of the Chriſtian army. Phillip Duke of Burgoigne who tooke his ſonnes misfortune very heauily, perſwaded the French King, that he ſhould ſend ſome rich preſents to the barbarous tyrant, whereby he might be moued to deale more fauorably with his priſoners.
               Of all others the Lord Cowcyes noble ſpirit was moſt deiected with this calamity: For entring into a deepe conſideration with himſelfe how hee had alwayes heeretofore beene very fortunate in warrelike affaires, and now hauing receiued ſo great a charge from a mighty prince, could not hold his place and execute his office for the enuy of his aduerſary, but was brought in danger of his life through another mans raſhneſſe in a barbarous countrey, with the loſſe and ſlaughter of a great number of his friendes, vppon the conceit heereof, he died for ſorrowe. To the like end alſo came the party, that by his folly and indiſcretion drew The Lord Cowcies death ſo many thouſand people, and ſo many honourable perſonages into deſtruction and extreame miſerie.
               The Duke of Burgoigne, to the intent to redeeme his 1397. ſonne, and the reſt of his fellow priſoners from captiuitie, dealt with the Merchants of 
                     Ʋenice (which trauell into all parts of the world for commodities) that ioyning with the other Ambaſſadors ſent by the French King, they ſhoulde compound with the Turkes for their ranſome. The compoſition which they made, was to this effect, that the Lords and Gentlemen that remayned priſoners, to the number of fiue and twenty, ſhould pay for their ranſome two hundred thouſand crownes: and for this ſumme the Merchants became ſureties. From that time forth Baſam beganne to vſe the French men more curteouſly than he had done: and at their departure, taking occaſion to ſpeake to the Duke of Burgoignes ſonne, I perceiue (ſaide he) that thou arte deſcended of high and noble parentage, & liueſt in great expectation

of honour: it can not be but a great griefe and oppreſſion to thy minde, thus in the flower of thy youth, to be ſubiected to this misfortune; for recouery of which diſgrace, and to put away the ſad remembraunce of this aduenture, perhappes thou wilt one day come in battell againſt me againe. And although by the lawe of armes I haue now power to binde both thee and thy fellowes from euer bearing armes againſt mee heereafter, yet will I not doe it, but freely giue leaue both to thee and the reſt, that being returned into your countries, yee ſhall aſſemble your vttermoſt forces, and make warres vpon me againe whenſoeuer ye are diſpoſed. For I am of that courage and puiſſaunce, and withall ſo confident in my fortunes, as I dread not the power of any enemy whatſoeuer: And this that I ſpeake, thou mayeſt boldely make report to whome thou thinkeſt good, in my name. Soone after, the French men being diſcharged, ſailed with the Venetians to Rhodes, and departing from thence, after a long and trouble ſome paſſage, at length arriued ſafely at Venice. During the time they ſoiourned there, the King of Hungary ſent a meſſenger to congratulate their deliuerance, ſignifying how much he reioyced at their happy enlargement: withall, how hee vnderſtoode they were to pay a great maſſe of money for their ranſome: and he heartily wiſhed his eſtate were ſuch, that he were able to ſupply their defect therof in ſuch plentifull manner as he deſired. But as now by reaſon of the late vnfortunate ouerthrow, hee was much impoueriſhed, and the yearely reuenues of his Crowne not a little impayred. Neuertheleſſe, for ſome teſtimony of his good affection, whereas the State of Venice was to pay him yearely ſeauen thouſand crownes, hee had giuen commiſſion to his meſſengers to ſell that annuity, and the money riſing thereof to beſtow vpon them towards the furniſhing of their wants and maintenance of their neceſſary expences. The French men thankefully accepted this kindneſſe, but the Venetians anſwered ſubtilly and vncertainely to the matter; and

there were ſome that ſuſpected it was handled in ſuch ſort, of ſet purpoſe between them and the ambaſſadors of Hungary.
               
               The Duke of Burgoigne obtayning a friendly beneuolence of his people, not without helpe of the French kings liberalitie, diſcharged his credite with the Merchants. His ſonne being returned into Fraunce, made a large relation to the king of ſuch things as he had obſerued through the whole courſe of his voyage: in concluſion adding thus much, how it was not vnknowne to the Turkes, that thorow the ciuill diſſention of the Popes, the generall quiet, not onely of the Church, but alſo of all Chriſtendome, was diſturbed; and that it ſeemed a wonder to them, how euer Kings and Princes could ſuffer ſuch licentious libertie and vnbridled ambition of one or two perſons to remaine vncontrolled. The kings mind was exceedingly moued with this diſcourſe, ſo as from that time forward he intended to the eſtabliſhing of peace more earneſtly than euer before.
               The Duke of Glouceſter being altogether of a turbulent At the marriage of King Richard to the French Kings daughter, a truce was agreed vpon for thirtie yeeres. and feditious nature, was not alittle angrie and diſcontented in his minde, that ſo many yeares truce was taken betweene the two Kings, who were now ſo linked and vnited together by marriage, as there was no other expectation, but that a finall peace ſhould be concluded betwixt them. Heereùpon he cauſed ſeditious rumors to be ſpread abroade, and ſuch as imported danger to the Kings perſon, whome hee had now purpoſed in his mind to put beſides the gouernement of the kingdome. And knowing himſelfe to be in great fauour and authority with the Londoners, hee perſwaded them that from thencefoorth they ſhould refuſe the payment of the taxe which was impoſed vppon all kindes of merchandiſe certaine yeares ſince, for maintenaunce of the warres, and defence of the Countrey, ſeeing now all was quiet againe; and a truce taken with the enemy: for ſuch kinde of exactions hee ſaide were vniuſt, and contrary to reaſon. The people by petition mooued

this matter to the King, who referred his anſwer till the Parliament at Weſtminſter, which being come, the Duke of Lancaſter made publike declaration of the Kings minde, in ſuch ſort as they were all well pacified for that time, and departed without further trouble. Not long after, the earle of Saint Paule ſent from the French king to viſite the new The Earle of Saint Paul.
                   married Queene, arriued at the Court of England: who vnderſtanding of the Duke of Glouceſters treacherous practiſes, exhorted the King to prouide a timely remedie for ſuch inconueniences. After his departure, a generall brute was raiſed, that the king would reſtore Calice to the French men, and that hee had already concluded vpon the matter with the earle, whome the French king had ſent Ambaſſadour for the ſame purpoſe. There was not any thing whatſoeuer that could more vehemently haue in cenſed all England againſt the King, than this. And the Duke of Glouceſter taking occaſion hereat, perſwaded the people, that they ſhould expoſtulate the matter with the king, to know certainely his intention. The king anſwered in ſuch ſort as any ſound and indifferent iudgement might well haue been ſatisfied, and eaſily haue ſeene that this rumour was meerely contriued by enuie and detraction. Theſe falſe reportes and malitious ſuggeſtions greatly troubled the kings mind, and when hee vnderſtoode that his vncle aſpired to the Crowne, and ſtudied how to bring his purpoſe to effect, not without bewayling the preſent ſtate of his countrey, he asked counſell of the Duke of Lancaſter and ſome others, (whoſe diſpoſitions hee miſtruſted not) what courſe they would aduiſe him to in this behalfe. The Duke and the reſt as well as they could, endeuoured to quiet his thoughts, and to remooue all feare and ſuſpition out of his minde, aſſuring him, that their loue and good affection ſhould neuer faile to doe him faithfull ſeruice. But in the end, the matter proceeded ſo farre, that ſuch as were moſt familiar with the King, and neareſt about him, being vnable to brooke the pride and ouerdaring inſolencie of the Duke of Glouceſter
                  
(for he hated all thoſe whom the King fauoured) proteſted plainely, that in regarde of his ſeditious practiſes, they could no longer continue their places without great daunger of their liues, and hazard of their eſtates. And therevppon diuerſe were ſeene, and thoſe of the chiefer ſort, to abandon the Court, and retire themſelues to their country dwellings: for it was no hard matter to foreſee to what iſſue all things tended. To be ſhort, the King moued with with theſe ſpeeches concurring with ſo manifeſt preſumptions, after much deliberation, vnder a politicke pretence of great kindneſſe, allured his vncle from his owne houſe to ride abroade with him a hunting. Who being by this meanes trayned foorth with a ſmall company, was by the Earle Marſhall ſodainely arreſted in the Kings name, and conueyed in great ſecrecie to the Caſtle of Calice. When hee had remained there a while, much miſtruſting what ſhould become of him, one day as hee was entred into the great chamber, and about to waſh his handes before dinner, foure luſty fellowes, appoynted by the Kings commaundement, caſt a towell about his necke, and winding it ſtrongly a croſſe two at the one end, and two at the other, ouerthrew him to the ground, and ſtrangled him. Then ſtripping off his clothes, and cloſing his eyes, they layd him The duke of Glow eſter murdered in the caſtle of Calice. 1397. in his bed, and preſently gaue it foorth in the Caſtle, how the Duke that night died ſodainely of an apoplexy. Within two dayes after, his death was publiſhed: but there were few or none, either in Fraunce or England that greatly bewailed him. For ſuch was his deſert, as he had long ſince purchaſed euery mans ill affection, by reaſon of his turbulent ſpirite, which was altogether bent to mooue vnquietneſſe and contention. Neuertheleſſe the Londoners tooke his death in very ill parte, and ſo did the kings other vncles, eſpecially the Duke of Lancaſter, who could well haue found in his heart to reuenge this cruell outrage committed vppon his brother, but that hee feared the kings puiſſance, now greatly increaſed by reaſon of his marriage.

After the murther of the duke of Gloucester, certaine others alſo were executed at London as acceſſary to his treaſon and 
                     Richard earle of Arundell.
                   conſpiracie. The Earle of Warwicke a man much reſpected in the common-wealth, ſhould likewiſe haue taſted of the ſame cup, but that by interceſſion of his friends, the kings rigour was ſomewhat mitigated, and ſo he was baniſhed into the Ile of Wight. The duke of Glouceſter left a ſonne vnder age, and therefore the king tooke all his landes into his owne cuſtodie, and appoynted his mother to giue attendance vppon the Queene. It is the cuſtome of England, that the king hath the wardſhip of all Noble mens heires, and the vſe of their landes till they come to one and twenty yeares of age. The king who knew well how greeuouſly he had offended his vncles by killing their brother, growing now ſuſpitious of all men, kept continually a Guarde of two thouſand archers about him for the defence of his perſon.
               
                  Henry Earle of Derby the Duke of Lancaſters ſonne, a man highly in fauour of the people, in priuate and familiar conference between him and the Earle Marſhall, caſt forth certaine ſpeeches ouer-liberally againſt the king. The Marſhall, to winne fauour with the king, vttered all their communication Thomas Mow bray Duke of Norffolke. in an aſſembly of the Lordes, appeaching him of treaſon, and proffering the combate. The Earle on the contrary parte, retorted the treaſon vppon himſelfe, and accepted his challenge. The King in whoſe preſence all this had paſſed, was meruailouſly diſpleaſed, and leauing the company, with drew himſelfe into his chamber. Many thought the King much too blame, in that hee ſuffered the matter to proceede ſo farre (for the Champions were at great charge to furniſh themſelues againſt the day of combate) eſteeming it his peculiar duty, to haue vſed his authoritie for r
                     •
                  ſtraining of ſuch quarrells as theſe, whereby occaſions of much trouble might enſue afterward. When the King vnderſtoode that ſuch ſpeeches were giuen foorth, and withall, how it was generally ill taken in the behalfe of

the Earle of Derby, to the intent to giue ſatisfaction both to the Lordes and the Commons who loued not the Earle Marſhall, he tooke the matter into his owne handes, and gaue ſentence, that the duke of Lancasters ſonne ſhould be The Earle of Derby & the Erle Marſhall baniſhed. baniſhed for tenne yeares, and the Earle Marſhall for euer. At the Earle of Derbies departure, the King of his owne accord, releaſed foure yeares of his baniſhment: and the Earle following his fathers counſell, repaired to the french king, who gaue him very curteous and honourable entertainment. Great ſorrow and diſcontentment was ſhewed by the Londoners when he departed, and from that time forward all things there tended to a bloudy and ſorrowfull concluſion.
               After the Lordes of Fraunce were raunſomed from the Turkes and returned into their countrey, the French King much mooued with the Earle of Neuers diſcourſe, to the The Duke of Burgoignes ſonne. intent to eſtabliſh concord in the Church, addreſſed Letters foorthwith to the Emperour, earneſtly requeſting his aſſiſtaunce in that behalfe. By mutuall conſent a day was appoynted for their meeting at Rhemes. Other matters were deuiſed and giuen forth for the occaſion of their comming thither, that the true cauſe of that aſſembly, which they were deſirous to conceale, might for a time be kept ſecret. After a ſolemne enterview and great conſultation, it was agreed, that the Biſhop of Cambray ſhould be directed to Pope Boniface then lying at Rome to exhort him, that for the generall quiet and welfare of the Church, he would be content to reſigne his office, not for euer, but onely till ſuch time as by the determination of Princes and learned Diuines, a reſolution of all controuerſies might be eſtabliſhed. The Pope anſwered gently, that he would take the aduiſe of his Cardinalles. But the people of Rome in the meane while hauing learned the cauſe of the Ambaſſadors comming, and perceiuing it would turne greatly to their diſcommoditie, perſwaded the Pope that hee ſhould not for any reſpect of Kings or Princes whoſoeuer, abaſe himſelfe

ſo much, but rather ſtand in defence of his right to the vttermoſt. The Pope therefore diſſembling his purpoſe, at his next communication with the Ambaſſadour, told him, that for his part he would not refuſe to accompliſh the Emperours and the Kings requeſt, ſo as his aduerſary would be content to doe the like. Being diſmiſſed with this aunſwere, the Ambaſſadour returned to the Emperour, whom he found at Confluence, and when he had deliuered his meſſage, departed from thence into Fraunce.
               
               The Diuines there were of opinion, that the like motion ſhould be made to Benedict, as had bin before to Boniface. And vpon this determination the ſame Biſhop beeing ſent by the King to Avinion, declared the mindes and intentions of the Princes to the Pope. Who aunſwered plainely and peremptorily, that hee would condiſcend to no ſuch matter. Notwithſtanding when he had propounded it to his Cardinalles, they were of ſundry opinions, according as they were mooued by their ſeuerall diſpoſitions and affections. And when no certaintic could be concluded, by reaſon of the difference amongeſt them, their aſſembly brake vp. Then the Ambaſſadour preſſing into the Popes preſence, required his reſolution. The Pope prowdly anſwered, how he was lawfully and orderly promoted to that holy dignity, which hee would in no wiſe forgoe as long as he liued, neyther was any man liuing ſo deere vnto him for whoſe pleaſure hee would departe from his right, and much leſſe did he feare any force or violence in that behalf. The Ambaſſador ſeeing no other anſwere could be gotten, returned homewardes, and by the way ſhewed the ſucceſſe of his affaires to the Marſhall of Fraunce, whome the king had ſent with an army to ſecond his proceedings. The Marſhall as ſoone as hee vnderſtoode the Popes obſtinate reſolution, made haſte to Avinion, and forraged all the country about, diuiding his forces into diuerſe companies, to keepe all conueiance of victuall from the towne. He him ſelfe encamped before the Citty, threatning the inhabitants

to deſtroy all their houſes, and their vineyardes which they had abroad in the countrey, vnleſſe they yeelded. The towneſmen well conſidering there was little helpe in the Pope, and that the King was of great puiſſaunce, tooke counſell with certaine French Cardinalles, and by their aduiſe ſet open their gates. The Pope ſuffered himſelfe to Pope Benedict beſieged, and taken priſoner by the Frenchmen. be beſieged in his pallace, hoping to haue beene reſcued by his couſine the King of Arragon: but the King of Arragon was too wiſe to incurre the offence of ſo mighty a Prince for the Popes pleaſure, from whom he could expect ſmall ſuccour againe if occaſion ſhould ſerue heereafter. Many of his Cardinalles exhorted him to a milder kinde of carriage, but the Pope full of pride and arrogancie ſtoode firme in his firſt reſolution, ſeeming as it were ſecure of his eſtate, and altogether careleſſe what ſhould become of him. Hee was plentifully furniſhed of all neceſſaries, ſauing onely fewell, the want whereof, together with the inceſſant importunity of the Cardinalles, compelled him at length to yeelde vp the place. The Marſhall bound him by othe, that hee ſhould not departe out of the Citty before ſuch time as an vnion were eſtabliſhed in the Church, and to be ſure he ſhould not falſifie his promiſe, appoynted a ſufficient guarde to attend him, and cauſed the Cardinalles and rich Cittizens of Avinion to become ſureties for his foorth-comming. The French King hauing written the whole diſcourſe of theſe proceedings to the Emperour, ſolicited the King of England, that following their example, he ſhould likewiſe take parte with neyther of the Popes, but ſtand indifferent for a time, till ſome remedy might be prouided. The King was very willing to haue ſatisfied his father in lawes requeſt. But when the matter was propounded in parliament, hee not onely effected nothing of his deſire, but more and more vehemently incenſed the people againſt him, whome it exceedingly offended, that he ſhould be ſo addicted to the French men, that to doe them a pleaſure, it ſeemed hee would haue condiſcended to anie

thing. And they told him, that howſoeuer they had beene otherwiſe well contented to ſet aſide all partialitie of affection, either to the one partie, or the other, yet in regarde the French King ſo earneſtly deſired it, they would not agree to his requeſt, nor in any wiſe allow that hee ſhoulde preſcribe articles of religion in England.
               
               About this time died the Duke of Lancaſter, a vertuous The death of John of Gaūt Duke of Lancaſter. 1399. and prudent prince; of whoſe death as a thing deſired, the king of England very ioyfully ſent newes into Fraunce. As for his ſonne, who ſoiourned the ſame time in the French court, he was ſo farre from recalling him againe to receiue his fathers inheritance, that hee alſo ſeiſed it into his owne hands, as appertaining to himſelfe till the time of the earles baniſhment were expired. And not content heerewith, he diſtributed many of the Duke of Lancaſters goodes among ſuch perſons as no man loued, but himſelfe. The Earle of Derby was highly fauoured and reſpected by the French King, in regarde of his noble carriage and generous diſpoſition. And becauſe hee was alſo a man of great poſſeſſions, there was a match motioned betweene him and the Duke of Berries daughter which was then a widow. Wherof as ſoone as the King of England had intelligence, he ſent an Ambaſſador foorthwith to interrupt their proceedings; informing his father in law and his vncles, that hee with whome they intended to contract affinitie, was a wicked perſon and a traitour. The Earle from whome all this was kept ſecret, to the intent to learne what the Ambaſſadour had doone (for he miſtruſted ſomewhat becauſe he had not ſeene him all the time of his being there) fell in communication againe with the French King and his brothers, concerning the marriage. And they not thinking good to hold him longer in ſuſpence, declared what reporte they hadde heard of him from the King of England. How much the Earle was grieued and diſcontented heerewithall, any man out of his owne iudgement may eaſily coniecture. All the nobilitie of England for the moſt part, with the Londoners,

were exceedingly diſpleaſed at this his vnworthy and iniurious accuſation, for they knew aſſuredly it proceeded of mere malice & hatred. King Richard the ſame time made preparation for another voyage into Ireland, aſſembling to the number of tenne thouſand archers, and two thouſand horſemen: and hee baniſhed twoonoble men of great account, 
                     Henry P
                           •
                        rcie earle of Northumberland and his ſonne becauſe they refuſed to accompany him in that iourney. For thoſe Lordes hauing ſpoken ſomewhat boldely of the King, when they vnderſtoode by their friends that he had knowledge thereof, they thought it better to diſobey his commaund, than, by comming when he ſent for them, to put their liues and eſtates in manifeſt perill: and therevppon ſentence of baniſhment was pronounced againſt them. To be ſhort, many cauſes concurred together at one time to aggrauate the peoples hatred againſt the King. By occaſion whereof, certaine ill diſpoſed perſons taking aduantage of the time, when they ſaw the king both buſied in warre, and irrecouerably depriued of the loue of his ſubiects, aſſembling together in rowts and companies, made ſpoyle of the husbandmen, robbed the Merchants, and ranged ouer all the countrey, doing great violence and miſchiefe, inſomuch that many to auoyde the daunger of their outrage, were forced to conuey themſelues into London, and other places of ſecuritie.
               When the king had thus vtterly loſt the harts of his people, Thomas Arundell. the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, by generall conſent of the State, was addreſſed to the Erle of Derby, to bring him againe into England, vpon moſt aſſured hope and expectation of the Crowne. The Biſhop vndertooke and perfourmed this charge ſo ſecretly, that none knew of his going, ſaue thoſe that were intereſſed in the action, and when he came into Fraunce, not any man there could coniecture the true cauſe of his comming. The Earle of Derby politikely diſſembling the matter, requeſted leaue of the French King to goe into Britaine to viſite the Duke, with whome he made no long tarriance, but tooke ſhipping, and within

few dayes after arriued in England. By reaſon of the Archbiſhops preſence and authoritie, hee found no interruption in his paſſage, but trauelled along towards London. And when they approched neare the citty, they ſent a meſſenger before to giue notice of their comming. At which tidings the Cittizens ſodainely ſurpriſed with ioy; came flocking out of the gates in great companies to welcome the Earle; from thencefoorth couenaunting to receiue him for King of England. Soone after, a certaine number well appointed were ſent foorth againſt king Richard, to apprehend him and bring him to London. Many of the Kings followers when they vnderſtood of the Londoners comming, ſoone changed their ſeruice, and choſe them new Maſters. At firſt the King made ſome ſhew of reſiſtance, but ſeeing his people forſake him, by counſell of his friends, hee retired into the caſtle of Flint. When the Earle drewnigh, accompanied with ſome two hundreth men and the reſt of his army following after, he approched the Caſtle gate and ſent word to the king how he required to ſpeake with him, wherevpon himſelfe onely and twelue more were admitted entraunce. As ſoone as hee ſawe the King, without yeelding him any reuerence; Sir (ſaide he) you muſt this Hee ſhould haue vſde the benefit of oportunity. day prepare towardes London, for ſo the people are fully purpoſed. What ſhould hee doe in this diſtreſſe? Being deſtitute of ſuccour and beholding his enemies forces before his face, to eſcape the fury of the people, he yeelded him ſelfe to the Earles mercie. As they carried him towardes London, he requeſted one thing very earneſtly, which was, that hee might not be led through the Citty. His requeſt was graunted, but the people much offended. As ſoone as he came thither, he was conueyed to priſon. New officers and ſeruants were placed about the Queene, and other Ladies and Gentlewomen appointed to attend her, all the French being diſmiſſed, and ſent home into their countrey. The Earle hauing brought his matters to this paſſe, the firſt thing hee did, hee recalled the Earle of Warwicke
                  
and certaine others that were baniſhed. And ſhortly after hee cauſed to be beheaded foure of the chiefe that had bin about King Richard, by whoſe counſell hee confeſſed himſelfe to haue been principally ruled in thoſe matters which were obiected againſt him. They were drawne to their execution vnder the proſpect of his windowe, of purpoſe that he might ſee them. The Lords that accompanied him in priſon bewailed their miſerable eſtates, and the King himſelfe with the conſideration of his heauie misfortune, burſt foorth into aboundaunce of teares, and with bitter ſighes curſed the day and houre that euer hee was borne, to come to ſuch an end as now entred into his cogitation. He was perſwaded by his partners in miſery, that to appeaſe his aduerſary, and to purchaſe the aſſuraunce of his owne ſafety, and ſuch as were about him, hee ſhould renounce his royall ſtate and dignity. Herevpon he required to haue communication with the Earle, to whome when hee had declared his mind, after the acceptance of his offer, the Erle fell into a bitter reproofe of his former life, making a large repetition of his offences, and beſides, vpbrayded him with baſtardy: for many reported that he was begotten by a Prieſt. Within few dayes after King Richard in open aſſembly 1399. King Richard depoſed. of the Lordes at the Tower of London, with all ceremonies and ſolemnities incident to ſuch occaſions, reſigned the Crowne and Scepter, with all his right and intereſt in the kingdome, to Henry of Lancaſter, reducing himſelfe into a priuate eſtate, without aſſurance of his life, after he had raigned two and twenty yeares. This alteration of the State in England ſo troubled the French King, that hee fell againe into his olde diſeaſe. But the Counſaile of Fraunce ſent certaine Ambaſſadors to viſite the Queene his daughter, and to vnderſtand in what ſtate ſhee remained. The Duke of Burbon was likewiſe ſent into the country of Burdeloys: which ſeigniory, ſince King Richard (to whome the people in thoſe partes were wonderfully affected) was fallen into this calamity, the French men went about to recouer

againe to themſelues. But when the chiefe of the Citties had propounded the matter to the Commons, they could not preuaile. For the people feared much to be oppreſſed againe with the often taxes and 
                     •
                  allages which they had endured of olde t
                     •
                  me vnder the French men. Certaine great Lords of England had ſecretly conſpired againſt Henry their new King, but their practiſe being diſcouered, they were all put to death.
               The French King raiſing a puiſſant army, determined to haue inuaded England. But it hapned about the ſame time that King Richard ended his life at London. My Authour reporteth that he could not learne certainly by what means he came to his death: but that Henry the late crowned king was inceſſantly called vpon by the people to diſpatch him out of the way, becauſe otherwiſe the realme ſhould neuer want matter of trouble and diſſention. Neuertheleſſe he addeth further, that the King in regarde hee had giuen him a faithfull promiſe of his life, would not condiſcend to their requeſts. Now when the matters betweene Fraunce and England ſeemed thus to tend toward a ſorrow full iſſue, by mediation of good men a truce was obtained and confirmed for ſixe and twenty yeares. The French men were the rather inclined to peace, by reaſon of their Kings infirmitie.
               Mention hath beene made of the earle Marſhall of England baniſhed by king Richard, vpon occaſion of his quarrell with the Earle of Derby. As ſoone as he vnderſtoode that Henry of Lancaſter had obtained the Cr
                     •
                  wn
                     •
                  e, and that King Richard was dead, hee conceiued ſo great griefe and diſpleaſure therevppon, that incontinently he fell ſicke and died, at 
                     Ʋenice. Moreouer Pope Benedict, becauſe that after ſo many advertiſements he would not incline to the will of the Princes, was depriued of his honor and Pontificall dignitie.
            
         
      
   