
      
         
            
            
            
               A diſcourſe of the Ciuile warres late troubles in Fraunce, drawn into Engliſhe by Geffray Fenton, and deuided into three bookes, Wherof The firſt beginneth from the breach of peace in March. 1568. & cōtinueth till the death of the Prince of Conde.
            
            The ſecond, from his death till the battell at Mongontour, which was the firſt of October. 1569.
            The third, conteineth varietie of matters chauncing in ſundry places ſince that tyme.
            
               Seene and allowed.
            
            
               MON HEVR VIENDRA.
            
            
               Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for Lucas Harriſon and George Biſhop.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            To the right honourable my ſinguler good Lord, Sir Henry Sidney, knight of the order, the Q. Maieſties deputy gouernour in her realme of
                Ireland, & Lord Preſidēt of her highneſſe Coūtrey and Marches of Wales in Englande.
            
               NOtwithſtādyng (right honorable) my preſent inſufficiencie to write things woorthy any generall view, and much leſſe to ſtand afore your peculiar & graue iudgement, yet, in reſpect of your naturall affabilitie inclinable to honeſt indeuours, I am bolde (vnder this argument) to exhibite a ſimple effect of my ſeruiceable mynde ſo long tyme vowed to you & yours, as partly encouraged by the honourable regard of your vertuous Lady and wyfe to my firſt dedication, and partly induced by your name of ſinguler merite to all ſortes, but moſt of all by an auncient & ſetled deſire

leading me (as it were) in an aſpiring imaginacion, to bring forth ſomewhat worthy your honorable view & protectiō: wherin hauing as yet nothing of mine own to preſent your honor withal, it may like you (in the meane while) to receiue this ſhort report of the third and late French troubles, the ſame as they were lately writtē by a diligent eye witnes, aſſiſting all their actuall procedings vntill Ianuary laſt: ſo, not vnmeet
                  •
                to be reuealed to our countrey, no leſſe for the qualitie or freſheneſſe of the matter, which is very graue in it ſelfe, than for the truth and indifferencie of the author, who certeinly in either part, procedes with great modeſty, obſeruing with al ſuch ſinguler integritie as both the good ſorte may ſettle and confirme, & the reſt ſuffice & ſatiſfie without cauſe of offence, vnleſſe temperance and truth be offences to ſuch whoſe taſtes can abide no better diſpoſitions thā their own: And this as it is a moſt commendable order in writing, ſo hath it no ſmal grace in an hiſtory, and as carefully to be imitated of all ſortes, as the contrary is contemnable in any: beſides, if there be any dignitie (next after the ſacred word

of God) to wiſe writings on earth, a true hiſtory may iuſtly chalenge a firſt place, being (in dede) no ſmall parcel of the ſame ſacred word it ſelfe. If we alſo diſcend into Philoſophy, Hiſtory is her chiefeſt part in what degree ſo euer wiſe men wil place her, which Plato forgets not to affirme in reckening ſuch cities and people very happy, whoſe princes and ſoueraigne gouernours be Philoſophers, as though no parte of Philoſophy did more liuely and generally inſtruct a vertuous lyfe, thā hiſtories, who as with a certaine harmonie & ſweteneſſe to draw men to good by ali
                  ••
               ing examples of good mē, ſo, of the contrary expreſſing terrible ſucceſſes of the wycked with their tragicall endes, do euen hale vs from the cuill to the better: the ſame happening moſt whē writers be vpright ſpeakers of the truth, & ſincere hable iudges of the ſame, likewiſe moderate praiſers, but free reprehenders, without affectation accordyng to the indifferent deſertes of the parties: which ſo much the more becomes the hiſtories of our tyme to be thus ſeaſoned, when we our ſelues be profeſſours of that heauenly and deuine Philoſophye,

which, in teaching vs the chiefe and hygh truthe, willes vs alſo to bee leſſe negligent of our own eſtimation, than (in ſwaruing from that which is honeſt and true) eyther to bleamiſh the one or ſlaunder the other in our chriſtian pietie, and that with ſuch a notable blot for euer, as liuing men, obiecting our faultes, as witneſſes eyther of malice or falshode, may alſo cōmende them to a perpetuall poſteritie. Such therefore is the excellent Maieſtie of a true hiſtorie, as nothing in humayne things is to bee preferred before it, and ſuch the neceſsitie of it both in priuate and publicke, as well in all ſtates and pollicies, as alſo conducible to Religion, directing withall euerie degree in his duetie and true vſe of the ſame. And laſtly, it is the liuely Image of time and ſeaſons, whiche vnder God, moſt abſolutely, doth gouerne and: eſolue oure tranſitorie endeuours and actions: A moſt true looking glaſſe for the ſoueraigne to beholde continually, and a ſound ſtudie for the ſubiect to bee had ſtill in vſe. Wherein (right honorable) if I haue indutifully abuſed your wiſdom and graue experiēce, and by

to much ſpeach and circūſtance ſlipt into Phormyos faulte, when he red to Hannibal, de re militari, It may like you to meaſure with my vehemencie to the cauſe, my reſpectiue deſire to your honour, who albeit is not (I know) without your deepe ſight and excellent iudgement in the tunges, yet it may pleaſe you to ſuffer this ſmall treatiſe (by your mediation) to becommunicated to others, to a publik benefit of many, and ſpeciall deface of ſlaunderers, who in this cōſpiring tyme do labour to confound both deuine and humayne things, leauing nothing vnſtayned which they may bring within the compaſſe of their carping natures.
            And lykewyſe for my parte, albeit I am bolde to vſe this breefe diſcourſe, to ſollicite rather in my vnfayned faith and diſpoſition to your honour, than in any worthyneſſe in the trauayle, yet if youre honoure vouchſafe too receyue me and my meaning vvith that vertue vvhiche ſurely is peculiar in you: I ſhall not onely bee encouraged too greater things hereafter, but alſo others of woorthie

ſkill in dede, wil labour to honour you for this example, wherin I moſt humbly and faithfully commend vnto you my hart & deuotion, as alſo if I had any other thyng more deare or precious, I preſent it with an vnfained will to be commaunded as it beſt pleaſeth your honour, whom God long preſerue to your prince, country, and frendes. At London the xxiiij. of May. 1570.
            
               Your honors humbly to commaund
Geffray Fenton.
            
         
         
            
            THE TABLE.
            
               A
               AEſſe vpon Vienne, fol. 89
               The Lord of Acier, fo. 13
               deuideth his horſmē, fo. 14
               the numbre of his armye, fo. 19
               the order of the ſame fol. 19
               his ſicknes. fol. 137
               The Duke of Alba a Spanyard. Fol. 5
               Ales at Seuennes fol. 15
               The Lord Admirall ſicke. fol. 137.
               he ſendeth Monſieur de la Noue, & Monſieur de la Loue to Montgontour, fol. 153
               Monſieur de Amazey ſlain & hewen in peeces. fol. 6
               The Lord de Andelot, fol. 11.
               his death. fol. 74
               Angouleſme beſeeged, fol. 20
               and taken, fol. 20.
               and ſommoned. fol. 77
               The Duke of Angiou the kings brother, fol. 12.
               ſeeke the reſt in the name of Monſieur.
               The Armye of the Duke of Sweburg or Deux Ponts. fol. 87
               Argence. fo 62
               The Aſſembly of Catholikes. fo 10
               The Aſſembly of the Prince of Condey. fol. 10
               Aubeterre a towne. fo. 30
               Aubeterre a caſtle takē fo. 
                     •
                  1
               The Duke of Aumal wryteth to the duke of Swebrug 
                     •
                  8
               The duke of Aumal is in 
                     ••
                  
                  ra
                     •
                  e. fol. 33
               The Prince of Autaigne and his ſonne, fo. 87▪
               
               the departure of the ſaid Prince from Fay la Vineuſe. fol 145
               Auuergne and 
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  thonnois exempt from preaching. 5
            
            
               B
               BAis vpon Pais. fol. 15
               Baron of Adrets, fo 53
               the furniture for his retourne. fol 101
               Baſſac a village. fol 58
               Battaile of Mongontour. 154
               The lord of Baudine hurt. 28
               Beauuoir vpon Matta. 56
               Bearne a countrey of the Q. of Nauarre taken, 127.
               won againe. 127
               Bertis a village in Perigueux. 31
               
                  Bergerac a toune. 
                     •
                  1.
               taken. 50
               la 
                     〈…〉
                   a c
                     •
                  ptaine. 45.
               killed at 
                     ••
                  reb
                     •
                  au. 46
               the ar
                     •
                  e of Briſſac ſlaine. 73
               the Lord of Bo
                     ••
                  uel takē. 227
               the Lord of Bouccard. 31.
               his death 75
               la Boutonne a riuer in Santonge. 66
               Bourbonnois and Auuergne without preaching 5
               Bourſaut diſcomfited. 51
               Branthomme a toun taken. 96
               Bricquemau the vo
                     •
                  ger, cheefe captaine of the fotemen. 87
               B
                     •
                  il
                     •
                  a
                     •
                   a Ga
                     •
                  con captaine. 92
               a Bridge built againe by the kings brother ouer Char 58
               a B
                     •
                  udge of boates on Char 63
               B
                     ••
                  des of Frenche men of the Princes, depart frō Poitou & Tou
                     •
                  am and withdrue thē ſelues to la Charite. 26
            
            
               C
               CAluerat a captaine ſlayne. 125
               Cariage of Guiſe and Briſſac taken. 36
               the Campe of thoſe of the religion called the campe of the Princes. 27
               Captaines beeing within Poytiers. 117
               many Captaines ſlaine wythin Poitiers 134
               Cardinall of Lorraine and his a herents. 105
               Catholikes licenced to weare armor. 4
               Chāpigny beſiegd & taken. 43
               Chabanay a caſtle taken. 96
               Chaſtele
                     •
                  ault a toune. 32
               Chaſtelerault taken. 98.
               after beſieged. 140
               Chaſtelier Porta
                     •
                  t ſlaine. 62
               Caſtles taken nigh to Poit. 118
               la Charite beſieged & takē. 84
               la Charite beſieged by the lord of Sanſac. 99
               Chauuigny vppon Vienne. 33.
               the taking thereof. 34
               Chaſteau Leueſque in Perigueux. 96
               La Chapelle a caſtle taken. 96
               the nōbring of Catholikes. 7
               Charge or onſet on the Earl of Briſſacs footemen. 40
               onſet of the Admiral at larnac. 62
               of the Prince of Condey. 62.
               on the captain Chaumont & other. 70.
               on the lord of Mowy, nigh to Mongont. 154
               Chaſteau-neuf on Charante taken. 57
               
                  the Lord Changy ſlaine. 134
               Saint Chaſtie in Perigueux 28
               Challus a toun of Limoſin. 86
               Chinon a toun in Tourain. 47
               S. Chriſtopher a ſteple takē. 19
               Capieres hewne in pecces. 5
               La Coche a captaine. 16.
               is diſcōfited. 33.
               hewn in peces. 49
               Coignae in Santonge, 57
               Colombine a captaine. 75
               Councel of the duke de Alba 5
               Courſes vnto the gates of Poitiers. 119
               the third Ciuill warre. 2
            
            
               D
               the Dauphinois are valiaunt men. 36
               Daunoux came to reſcue Poitiers. 122
               the Lord Deſternay. 88
               the Deuiſe of the cornet of the Lord of Acier. 14
               Dominico Dalbe & his iudgement. 145.
               put to death. 152
               Dordonne a riuer. 19
               Duke of Swebrug or Deux ponts. 78
               aſſembleth warriors. 79.
               writeth to the king. 79
               maketh his proteſtatiōs and offers. 83.
               entreth into France and taketh la Charite. 84.
               Paſſeth the Riuer of Vienne. 86.
               dieth. 86.
               the deſcription of his armie. 7
            
            
               E
               EDicte of the king. 17.
               touching offices. 18
               Eiſ
                     •
                  elles a caſtle taken. 75
               Enterpriſe on the caſtle of Luſignan 53.
               on S. Iohns d'Angely. 67.
               on Angouleſm. 69
               Entrich
                     •
                  t a captain killed. 155
               Eſpondillan captaine. 14
               Encontre before Lodun. 4
                     •
                  .
               at 
                     •
                  arnac. 61
               an Enterpriſe on Bourges in Berry. 
            
            
               F
               FAy la Vineuſe a toun▪ 144
               the earle of S. Fiour. 88
               S. Flowrant an Abbey. 50
               Fort of Mouuans. 15
               S. Poy taken. 46
            
            
               G
               Garniſō in the towns yelded. 2
               Gaſcour a captaine ſlaine. 136
               Gran Villars cheefe captaine of the footemen. 87
               Guerin Ganſgorffe chiefe captaine of the footemen. 87
               the Duke of Guiſe arriueth at Port. 117.
               thē departeth. 103
               the Lord of Guron. 100
            
            
               
               H
               HAns of Theres. 87
               Hans Boucke. 87
               Henry de Eſtaine. 87
               Hercules the Princes ſeruaunt hewne in peeces. 6
               Hewing to peces of the Lord of Cipieres and his train. 5
               of the Lord of Amanzey. 6
               of the Lord of Rapin, and others. 6
            
            
               I
               IAnlis death. 49
               Iarnac beſieged. 56.
               takē 56
               at Iazena
                     •
                  l an encounter 35.
               the numbre of the dead. 36
               the Earle of Ioyeuſe. 44
               Iudgements executed againſt thoſe of the religion. 210
            
            
               K
               The King commeth to Amboiſe 125
               gathereth force. 126
               The King, Queene mother, and Cardinal come to Nyort. 168
               The Kings comming to Angiers. 188
            
            
               L
               LAnceknights diſcomfited at Montgontour. 160
               Lendurean a captaine reuolteth. 68
               Letters of the king repugnat to the Edict of peace. 4
               Letters of the Marſhall of Mommorency. 116
               Letters of the Queene of Nauarre to the king. 20
               to the Queene mother. 24.
               to my Lord the kings brother. 26.
               to the cardinal of Bourbon. 26
               to the Queene of England. 38
               Letters of the Admirall. 116
               Leylle a ryuer. 28
               Lille Bouchard vpon Vienne. 44
               Lodowicke and Henry earles of Naſſaw, brethren. 87
               Lodune a toune. 45.
               ſomned to yelde 45.
               an encounter before the ſame. 46.
               la Loue marſhall of the campe. 89
               The Earl of Lude beſieged in the caſtle of Mirebeau. 45.
               then taketh it. 46.
               beſieged at Nyort. 46
               Luſignan. 53.
               taken. 99.
               yelded vp againe. 168
            
            
               M
               Manſfield earl an Alman. 87
               
                  Marſhall of Montmorencye writeth to the admirall, 116
               Marquis of Mezieres. 20
               The Lady Marqueſſe of Rottelin. 77
               a Meſſenger ſent to the prince of Condey for peace. 41
               the Lord of Martigues. 12
               Mazillac a toune taken. 18
               Medoc an Iſle taken. 76
               Melle a toune in Poitou taken 57
               Melluſigne. 100
               Menigours a village. 35
               la Merie a captaine ſlaine. 93
               Meſtrall a captain. 101
               Millan in Roargues. 16
               Mirebeau in Poictiers yelded 37.
               then beſieged and taken. 45
               Mongontoue in Poitou. 153.
               a battaile before the toune. 157
               Monſieur the Kings brother chefe of the Catholikes. 27
               gathereth power at Orleans and Toures. 28.
               departeth from Poitiers. 28
               commeth to Chaſtelleraut. 32.
               draweth towardes Chynon. 47.
               receyueth Rutters for hys aid. 54.
               preſenteth himſelfe in battaile before Coignae. 58.
               paſſeth ouer the Riuer Charante. 59.
               diſchargeth part of his armie. 98.
               beſiegeth Chaſteleraut. 140.
               thā raiſeth his ſiege. 142.
               gathereth new power at Chynon. 152.
               thē departeth. 152
               determineth to giue aſſault to Montgontour. 157.
               he encourageth his men. 158
               general Muſter of the Catholikes. 8
               Monluc a knight entreth into Perigueux. 86.
               will ſuccour Poitiers. 125
               Montauban. 2
               Monteſquieu a Gaſcon. 62
               Montgomery an Earle. 12.
               ſet vppon atla Motte. 52.
               ſent into Angouleſme 69.
               ſetteth the ſayd towne in order. 70.
               is ſent into Gaſcony. 85
               gathereth togither the forces of the Vicounts. 127.
               diſcor fiteth the lord of Tarides. 128
               The Lorde of Moruilliers death. 94
               La Motte captaine, a Gaſcon. The lord of Mouuans. 14.
               his fort. 15.
               he paſſeth the Rhoſ

ne. 16
               his diſcomfiture. 29
               the lord of Mouy. 88.
               hurte at the comming forthe of Nyort. 167
               his death 167
               Mucidan taken. 72
               Muſtring of the Princes horſmen 67.
               of the fotemen. 74
               Montbrun and Mirabel lords, depart frō their cāp with the diſcourſe of their viage. 170
               Martigues death. 211
            
            
               N
               the ſiege raiſed from Nauerreis. 127
               Earles of Naſlau▪ Lodouic, and Henry brethren. 87
               the Nobilitie of Daulphinois. 7.
               excuſe them ſelues of taking othe. 7
               Noutron a toune taken. 85
               the Lord de la Noue 60
               Noyers in Burgondy. 9.
               the ſame taken. 185
               Nyort beſieged. 94.
               giuē ouer Nimes the toune and caſtle taken. 201
            
            
               O
               Oiſans a borough. 16
               Ordering of the princes army. 32
               Ordering of the armye at La Roche. 90
               Orleās aſſēbly of catholiks. 28
               Ouerthrow of the Lorde of Mouuaus. 29
               Othe to the king. 6
               Oth of the prince of Nauar. 68
            
            
               P
               Peace made. 1
               Peace more hurtful thā war. 8
               Pāprow a vilage in Poitou. 34
               the Lord of Pardillan. 59
               Pope ſendeth ſuccour. 88
               Parley of Angouleſme. 70
               Paſquier a captaine. 14
               Paſlage ouer Lot. 18
               the Lorde of Pierre Gourd. 15.
               his diſcomfiture. 29
               Peter Viret priſoner. 97
               Perrol a captaine ſlainae. 93
               the Lord of Pilles taketh the ile of Medoc. 76
               the Lord of Pluueau. 59
               Pluueas regimēt of fotemē. 62
               the earl of Pampadon ſlain. 73
               Pons in Santonge beſieged. 3
                     •
                  
               
               taken. 34
               Poitiers beſieged. 120.
               all the diſcourſe til the raiſing of the ſiege. 142
               Prince of Cōde diſarmeth him ſelf. 1.
               watched by ſpies. 8.
               departeth from Noyers. 9.
               with draweth himſelfe to Rochell. 10.
               anſwereth a meſſenger ſēt vnto him for peace. 41.
               hys

death before Iarnac. 62.
               his horſlemen flee. 63.
               a notable deu
                     ••
                  e in his enſigne. 65
               Prince of Nauar ſweareth. 68
               Princes depart from Nyort. 55
               Princes conſtrayned to take armes. 82
               Princes marche to ioyne with the Almans. 84
               Princes army deſcribed. 88
               Partenay in Poitou loſt. 166
            
            
               Q
               the Queene mother at Limoges. 88.
               encourageth the ſoldiors. 89
               the Queene of Nauarre and hir childrē arriue at the cāp. 20
               hir cōming to Thony Charante 65
               hir departure from thence. 66
            
            
               R
               RAncon an Italian Marquis taken.
               Rapin hewn in peeces. 6
               Regiments of Dolphine, wyth the names of their chefe captaines. 13
               Rutters come to ayd the kings brother. 54
               Remedy to conſerue the kingdome 103
               Reynold Cracco. 87
               Renell a Marquis, 88
               Requeſt of thoſe of the religion to the king. 101
               Roannois a Duke taken. 13.
               after ſet at libertie. 71
               la Roche f
                     •
                  ucaut. 9
               
                  
                     •
                  a Roche a village in Limoſin. 90
               Rochelle. 1
               the Lord of Rouray. 77
               Ruffe
                     •
                   a caſtle taken. 57
               Requeſt made to the Princes by thoſe of Daulphine, and their anſwer. 170
            
            
               S
               SAinctes in Saintonge. 37
               Saint Genais a toun in Poitou taken. 97
               Saint Titier la Perche a toune in Limoſin. 99
               Sanſerre a toune. 1
               Sauigny a caſtle taken. 44
               Saulmur a toune. 11
               Sanzay entreth into Poitiers with bands of men. 145
               Succour from the duke of Aumale to late. 84
               the Lord of Seſſac taken 52
               Siege of Angoule
                     •
                  me 20.
               of Ponts. 30.
               of Mirebeau. 45.
               of Sanzarre 53
               of Mucidan. 72
               of Bourge in Bourdel
                     ••
                  s. 76.
               of la Charite. 83.
               
                  of Nyort. 94.
               of la Charite by Sanſac. 99.
               of Luſignan, 99
               of Poitiers. 120.
               of Nauerre
                     ••
                  . 227.
               of Chaſtelleraut. 140
               Siege raiſed frō Poitiers. 142.
               from Chaſtelleraut. 140
               the Lord of Soubize. 59
               the Lord Stroſſy taken. 92
               the lord ſteward S
                     •••
                   ſlain. 62
               Skirmiſhes at Iazenail. 25.
               at Beaudo
                     〈…〉
                   on Marca. 56.
               at Baſſac. 60.
               at Coignac. 64.
               at Aeſle in Lymoſia, 89.
               at Port de Pille. 143.
               at Montgontour. 154
               S. Iohn d'Angely ſomoned to yelde, with all the diſcourſe of the ſiege. 176
               the Lord of S. Heran hurt. 193
            
            
               T
               TAllard in Daulphine takē vnwares. 11
               the Parle of Tandes. 53
               Tanlay in Burgonie. 9
               the Lord of Tarrides. 127.
               hys ouerthrow. 128
               the Lord of Tauanies. 154
               the Lorde of Teligny ſent to Nyort. 65.
               leadeth men to ſuccour Chaſtellerault. 142
               the Temporall goodes of the church men ſold. 51
               the Territories of the Quene mother exempt from preaching and the territories of the kings brother. 5
               at Tours the kings brothers aſſembly. 28
               the Third ciuill warres. 2
               Towns takē by the prince. 10
            
            
               V
               VAcherie a captaine ſlaine 122
               the Lord of Vallauoire. 14
               Valfreniere a captain ſlain. 76
               Villages burnt in Perigueux. 32
               the Lord of Villiers. 98
               Vill et lord of ſ. Mary ſlain 71
               Viret a miniſter enpriſond. 97
               the Vicountes. 85
               Viſere a riuer. 28
               La Viue a riuer of Montgontour. 156
               Wolfgange duke of Swebrug 78.
               the duke of Aumal writeth to him. 9
               Wolrard of Manſfield. 87
               the third ciuill Warre. 2
               Warle in Bearne. 127
            
            
               Y
               The Lord of Iuoye. 49
            
            
               ❧ FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ A shorte Diſcourſe of the Ciuill warres and laſt troubles in Fraunce, vnder Charles the ninth.
            
               The fyrſte Booke.
               
                  
                     IMmediatly vppon the peace in Marche. 1568. and the ſame publiſhed in the Princes armie, afore Chartres, the ſayd Prince, the better to aduouch his ready obedienceThe prince of Conde diſarmeth him ſelfe. to the Kyng, did not only diſarme himſelf and people, with preſent diſmiſſe of ſuche ſtrangers as were come to his ſuccours, but alſo diſgarryſoned with a ready and dutyfull ſpéede, euery towne and village, which he eyther held or gouerned, wherin he was reuerently obeyed vpon the very fyrſt motion: onely the towne of Rochell was exempted, as in reſpecte of their auncient priuiledge, pretendyng frée diſpence that waye: The townes alſo of Montauban & Sanſerre delayed their conſentes, as ſéeing matters not ſo ſurely quieted as the caſe required. This peace gaue great hope

of perpetuall benefit to ſuche as ſeeke and embrace the quiet of Fraunce, albeeit, it broughte foorthe a contrarie iſſue, for as it was, in ſome ſingular parte, a confirmation of a former peace in the yeareThe third cyuill warre. 1562. So is it alſo the begynning and originall cauſe of a third ciuill warre incenſed in this realme, whereof we meane to giue preſent report.
               Immediatly that the ſaid towns were ſurrendred, & the Prince abſolutely diſarmed, ye gouerners of the prouinces (which be all of the Romiſh religion) ſeaſed vpon all the towns, ports, paſſages & for treſſes in Frāce, beſtowing therin huge & mighty garriſons at their pleſure, and ſuch as reſembled themſelues in condition touchingGariſons put in the towns ſurrendred. the general cauſe & quarel, by which mean many of the reformed religiō, abiding ſtil within thoſe townes, hapned into ſundry heauy diſquiets & troubles bothe in theyr goods and prouiſions for reléef, deſcending to their enimies as praie & ſpoiles, & alſo in their perſons violentely enduring the inciuil diſpoſition of murdrous ſouldiors, enclined altogither to bloud: wherin notwithſtanding his maieſtie diſpatched ordinarie

cōmandements by letters patents, and other expeditions to the gouerners & people directers of his iuſtice, aſwel to ſuffer them of the Religion to remayn within the townes of their naturall dwelling, as alſo to communicate in a generall vſe and exerciſe of their religion, goods honors charges and eſtates, according to the edict of peace, yet there was either nothing don at all, or elſe to ſmall purpoſe of redreſſe: for if they ſuffred any to reenter the ſaydeThoſe of the religion ſhut out of towns townes, they were ſuch as they eſteemed of leaſt affection to the ſayde religion, and they bothe conſtrayned in the very entrie into the townes to yelde vp ſuche armes and weapons as they then had, & alſo ſuch as neyther had, nor neuer proued the vſe of any, were enforced to bye and delyuer them to the officers, otherwyſe they ſhold not haue ben receiued, the ſame being anMeanes to diſarme thē of the religion. expreſſe & manifeſt way to diſarme them, & being once naked, the eaſier to run vpon and deuoure them, as it was truly ſuppoſed: themſelues in this mean while & their faction bare weapons, and rayſed greater garde than in the tyme of warre.
               This ſyngular licence or libertie to

beare armes amongſt themſelues (without that the Proteſtantes durſte eyther wear any or argue with them) did ſo whet theyr ſharpe and eyger diſpoſitions, that they attempted vppon the naked Proteſtantes many actual and violent wrongs, the ſame thundering indifferently as wel vpon the troupes retyred within the townes, as ſuche as were denyed to enter, whoſe ſtate was ſo muche the more miſerable, as eyther they wandred in preſent perill, or were incerteyne of any aſſured place or ſafe ſtaye of aboade. The matter thus diuoluing from euyll to worſſe, the enimies of the religion ſéeing themſelues come almoſt to the laſt and extreme limit and end of their entent, began to raiſe and doo many diſorders altogyther contrary to the Edict of peace, yea and albeit the king did expreſly auouche his vnfained wil and pleaſure to the execution of the ſayd Edict ſimply and purely without any modification or reſtraynte, yet his maieſtie afterward, gaue out a contrary declaration, encloſedLetters of the king cō
                     trary to the Edicte of peace. in certeyn letters, ſent to the lords of Montare and Sainct Heram, to whom he ſignified, y• it was neuer his meaning that

the Edict ſhold take place, or tolerate prechings in the countreys of Auuergne, and Bourhonois, nor in any lands belonging to the Quéene his mother, the lords of Aniou and Allen
                        •
                     on, his brothers, the L. Cardinal of Bourbon and Duke of Montpenſier, the ſame impugning manyfeſtly the ſayde Edict, which did only reſerue and exempt the Prouoſtie and Vicontie of Parys.
               There reſted nowe no more to the enimies of the Religion, but procéede to the execution of their enterpriſe in deuouring the cōtrary part, albeit folowing the counſelCounſell of the duke of Alba. of the duke of Alba ſent to the King, to ſeaſe firſt on the chiefe and principall profeſſers of the Religion, to the ende to ſubdue with more eaſe the meaner ſort, vſing this phraſe, (that the head of one Salmon was of greater value than fiue hundreth Creuiſes) they reſolued to entrap in euery Prouince the hygheſt proppes and pillers of the ſayd Religion, executing their fyrſt effect on the Lorde de Cipieres, ſonne to the Counte of Tande in Prouence, who returning from Piedmount, where he had viſited with reuerence the Duke of Sauoy, and lodging in Ferieux, a towne in Prouence,
                  
was there murdred with .xxx. gētlemenAmanzay. of his traine. The Lord d'Amanzey lieutenant to the lord d'Andelot of his cō
                  panyes of 
                     ••
                  ē at arms, ſtanding at ye gate of his houſe with one of his litle childrē in his hande, was alſo murdred: many other murders and bloudy ſlaughters were horribly thundred vpon the ſyde of the religion during this time, as the bouchery done at Blandy vpon Hercules, houſhold ſeruantHercules houſhold ſeruant to the prince. to the prince of Conde, and the Lorde de Rapyn, who being diſpatched into Langue dock for the ſeruice, and vnder ſafe conduct of the king, by the court of of parlyament of 
                     
                        •
                     houlouſ
                        •
                     
                   was ſent headleſſe out of this world: ye murders alſo doone at Roan, Amyens, 
                        •
                     ſsoudun, Bourges, we infinite other places, wherin diuers ſorts & numbers of the ſayde religion haue bin vnnaturally cut in pieces, and yet neither iuſtice done, nor remedie applyed how ſoeuer they haue bin ſolicited by vehement ſute.
               In this meane whyle in the moneth of July, the gouerners of the prouinces werRequeſt to offer an oth to the King. earneſt ſuters to the Nobilitie profeſſours of the religion, to offer an othe of fidelitie, according to a forme ſent by them, which

they ſayde his maieſtie had already receyued, whereof the ſayde ſtates of Nobilitie, and ſpecially they of Dauphyne excuſed thē ſelues, bicauſe (ſayd they) if wee only ſhold doo it, and not they of the Romiſhe opinion, they might charge vs ſecretly with the crime of Infidelitie, as hauyng aſſiſted the parte of the Prince of Conde, and that for that cauſe ſuche othe ſhould be required of them and not of others, the contrary wherof was fully verified by the Edict of peace, the king declaring yt whatſoeuer was don in the ſayd warre by the prince, was done for his ſeruice. By this mean & cauſe they excuſed to tender any ſuch othe, offering notwithſtāding to doo it, if they of the Romiſh ſide wold toyne with them, & ſo to be ſuters to his maieſtie that it might bée ſo.
               Now notwithſtāding ye edict, & in place to enterteine & obſerue the purpoſe & meaning of it, ye gouerners of ye prouinces ſent cōmandement to all yt were caſtle kepers within their charge, to ſuruey & make nū
                  bers of all ſuch of the Romiſh religiō only as were apt & able to beare armes, wherin they were redily obeyed: with this further & expreſſe charge, that ſuche as had no

armoure ſhould forthwith prouide them, remayning all in a perfect readineſſe vppon their firſt ſommons or warning.
               In ye next Auguſt after this view, grewGenerall muſters. generall muſters withoute enhabling or allowing any of the reformed Religion, which made thē ſuſpect the ſequele, with feare that all was raiſed for their ruyne, and to reſtore and incenſe an other Ciuill warre, ſéeing withal, that they were handled worſe and worſe, as charged with ſuch intollerable exactions, that in common likelihode and truthe, ſuche time of peace was more perillous, heauy & hurtfull to them, than the furie of an open warre, whoſe violence they myght by meanes eyther auoyde or qualefie.
               The Prince him ſelfe (being thus diſarmed)The Prince and the Admiral watched. was not without his high perill, for that neyther hée nor the Lord Admiral could haue ſuche ſuretie in any of their owne houſes, as eyther their doings or lyues were without daunger, ſo that being watched and warded in & about their Caſtels and capitall places, were dryuen to go from houſe to houſe with their wyues and children in their armes, and finally

the ſayd Prince was conſtrayned to retire to Noyers in Burgongne, and the LordeNoyers. Tanley. Admirall to Tanley, a houſe of the Lorde d'Andelot his brother.
               There were ſent alſo ſundrie eſpialles to meaſure and iudge the heighte of the walles of Noyers▪
                   and conſpire meanes to take the Prince, wherin, leaſt they ſhould fayle in the effect of their enterpriſe, there marched thither alſo diuers troupes of mē of warre. The ſame, albeit not ſo couertlie done, but came to the knowledge of the Prince, who (after he had giuen the King knowledge of it) departed from Noyers the .xxiij. daye of Auguſte with the Princeſſe his wyfe great with childe, the yong Princes his children, the Lord Admirall, Madame d'Andelot, with their ſeuerall traines, taking their waye into Angoulmois towardes the houſe of the Lorde De la Rochefoucaut. And albeit all the Portes,Countie Rochefoucaut. Bridges, and Townes vppon 
                     
                        •
                     oere were eyther abſolutely ſeaſed, or ſo directed as they became impedimentes to their paſſage, yet ſuch was their neceſſitie and perill, as they aduentured to paſſe the ſayd Riuer by vnknowne foordes comming at

laſt not without extréeme hazarde, to the place of Rochefoucaut, from whence, in reſpecte of the doubtfull ſecuritie of that place, they retired to Rochel. ImmediatlyRochell. vpon the brute of their retire to Rochel, was generall amaſſe and leuies of men
                     
                        •
                     ſſemblie 
                        •
                     f the Ca
                     
                        ••
                     olikes. of warre on al ſydes, reaſſēbling alſo the camp, not altogither diſmiſſed, albeit diſperſed ſince the former warre: the ſame threatning no leſſe malice and peril to the Prince, than preciſe warning to enter into garde to reſiſte their imminent violēce, whereuppon he cauſed to come to him the Lord d'Andelot which was then in Bryt
                     
                        •
                     ayn
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſſemblie 
                        ••
                      the 
                        •
                     rince. with ſuch force as he could any way leuie, diſpatching the like ſommons to all the Lordes, Knightes, Gentlemen, and Captaynes of the reformed Religion.
               The Nobilitie of the countreys of Poitou, Sa
                        〈…〉
                     ge, Perigueu
                        •
                     , Angoulmois, with other their frōtier neighbors, were forthwith with ye ſaid Prince with certeyn cō
                  panies of footmē of the ſaid coūtreis, with whom he put himſelf to the fielde, & tooke the townes of Saintes. Coigna
                        •
                     , & S. Iean d'Angely in Sainctonge, Niort, Partenay, Fō
                     tenay le Conte, Saint-meſent, Montagu, and

                  Melle in Poytou▪
                   & by meane of certeyn intelligence ſeaſed vpon Blaye, and therein was planted in garriſon the regiment of footemen of the Lord de Pluueau.
               
               It happened not many dayes afore thatTallard taken. thoſe of y• religiō were not only chaſed out of ye town of T
                        •
                     llard in Dauphine, but alſo oppreſſed with many priuat wrongs by ye cōtrary ſyde, who made ſtronger watch & warde within ye town, thā during y• war: the ſame kindling ſuch indifferent feare & ſtomack in ye oppreſſed proteſtāts, as they drew into aſſemblie with certeyne of Prouence, and retired to Gapenſoys (as hauing no aboade of furetie in their own Countrey) with whō vpon ye end of this Auguſt they preſented thēſelues in battaill afore Tallard in ye very dauning of the day, & entring forthwith the town by force & mean of the Captayne of the Caſtell, they killed about .lx. men which they found in armes.
               In this meane whyle the Lorde d'Andelot marching towards the Prince, directed his waye to Saulmur, as of purpoſe to paſſe there the Riuer of 
                     
                        ••
                     ere, enforcing (as it were) ſo harde a paſſage, the rather to ioyne with the Prince:

There were with him at that tyme the Counte Mongomery, with many other great Lordes, with diuerſe numbers of horſemen and certeyne enſeignes of footmen.
               The Duke of Anjou brother to the
                     
                        〈…〉
                     uke of 
                        〈…〉
                     njou, bro
                     
                        〈…〉
                     er to the 
                        〈…〉
                     ing. King, being vnfainedly informed of the place where the Dandelot ment to paſſe, diſpatched the Lord Martignes to preuent him, who putting himſelf within Saulmur thought ſo to withſtand his paſſage ouer the Riuer. Afore d'Andelot was within iij. leages of Saulmur, & at his bayt, the ſaid Martignes departed frō 
                  Ang
                        •
                     ers, with .ij. hūdreth horſemen, & .iiij. hundred harquebuſears on foote, whom he made to marche along the cauſſey in this order: two hundreth ſhot before, and the reſt behind. And albeit ye 
                  d'Andelot had warning of his cō
                  ming, yet, he forced his own paſſage as it were in deſpite of his ſuffraunce, & ſo with the diſcomfite of certeyne footemen, he entred Saulmur, wherin there was no garriſon afore: By this meanes ye 
                  d'Andelot was defeated in purpoſe, & his paſſage alſo ſo intercepted as he was driuē to wade the riuer, & with great perill aduenter his

people thorow ye fourdes thrée leagues beneath Saulmur: a thing which earſt was neuer ſought nor attēpted of any. He directed thē his way by Poytou, & in paſſing by Loudun he tooke priſoner the Duke of Roauuoys
                  Duke de Roauuo
                        ••
                      priſoner. great Eſquter of Fraunce, being in his houſe at Oyron, whom he ſent after to Rochel, and ſo ioyned his force with the Princes armie in the countrey of Poytou, about the beginning of October. 1568.
               The Lord d'Acyer by warrant from ye
                  The Lord d'Acier. Prince, raiſed in Dauphyne. vij. regimēts of footmen, and al of the proteſtants of tho ſayd Countrey, diuiding them into theſe many numbers & gouernours: The Lord de Montbrun had ten enſeignes and one Cornette of horſſemen. The charge of the Lord d'Aucoune was eight enſeignes & one Cornet of Horſſemen. The Lorde de Sainct Romain, being ioyned with the L. of Virieu his vncle had .xvij. enſeignes & one Cornet of horſemen. The cōpanie of the Lord of Blacous was only xiiij. enſeignes of footemen: the Lorde de Mirabell ten enſeignes, the L. du Chelard. xij. enſeignes, and the L. d'Oroſe only iiij. enſeignes. Beſides, the ſaid L. d'Acyer made leuie

in Prouence of one regimen of footmen conteyning x. enſeignes, vnder charge of y• L. Paule de Mou
                        •
                     ans, togither with▪ ij cō
                  panies
                     
                        •
                     he Lord 
                        •
                     e Mou
                     
                        •
                     ans. of horſemen, the one led by the L. Vallauoire, Captayne of a hundred light horſemen, and the other harquebuſiers on horſebacke, vnder Capteyne Paſquier.
               
               He rayſed alſo in ye coūtrey of 
                     
                        •
                     aguedoc
                  
                     
                        •
                     euies of 
                        •
                     en in Lā
                     
                     
                        •
                     uedoc. iiij. regiments of footmē, cōteyning .xxxv. enſeignes, & bequeathed thē to ye cōduct of ye Lords de Baudine his brother, ye Knight d'Ambres, la Mouſson, & Bouillargues, togither with .ij. cōpanies of light horſmen: the one of the L. d'Acier himſelfe, & the other of the L. d'Eſpondillan. There were alſo in the cōpanie of the L. d'Acier about ij. hundreth Gentlemen well appoynted: his Cornet was greene, drawne in forme of a Hidra, with many heads of Cardinals and diuerſe ſortes of Monkes, bearing the figure of a Hercules fighting with thē, wt
                  
                     
                        •
                     eui
                        •
                     e of 
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     d'A
                        〈…〉
                     r in his Corner. this inſcription aboue, Qui caſſo crudeles: conteyning the number and ſelfe letters of hys name intricately reuerſed: laques du Cruſſol.
               
               In the countryes of Viuarez & Roargues, the ſayd L. d▪Acier dreſſed alſo .ij. regimēts

of footemen, the one of the Lorde Pierregourde, conteyning .xiij. enſeignes, & the other of the vicont de Pannat bearing .v. enſeignes, beſydes the companie of the L. de Thoras Capteyn of .C. light horſemen: the general aſſemblie and meeting of the armie was at Allés, a town in anguedoc.
               
               It was harde to them of Dauphiné to paſſe the Roſne and ſo ioyne with the reſt of ye armie, bycauſe their enimies had ſeaſed al the bridges vpon the ſayd riuer: albeit ye L. de Mouuans (who was formoſt in theſe companies) came to the ſhoare of Roſne on the ſyde of Bais-ſur-Bais, & there with a wonderful diligēce & ſpeede within leſſe than .xxiiij. houres, he rayſed a defenſible fort, the better to repulſe ye enimie ye elſe would trouble his paſſage: by ye ayde of this fort his cōpanie gained ye other ſide of the riuer, & ſo cōſequently all the reſte one after an other, excepte the Lorde de Saint Romain, who paſſed ouer at P
                        •
                     irau
                        •
                     . This paſſage was made about the .x. and xj. of September. 1568. and the ſayde Fort called Le fort de Mouuans.
               
               The L. de la Coche, a gētlemā of Dauphiné had like charge to erect a regimē of

footemen, albeit béeing diſcouered by the garriſon of Grenoble, by whom he endured certeyn waſpiſh ſkirmiſhes, and after enforced to retire aboue an ordinarie ſpeede to the territories of the duke of Sauoy, leauing his lieutenant De ſainct Marie in the borow D'oyſons, the ſame being wonne by hym not many dayes afore, and nowe enforced to leaue it and accompany the ſayd Lord de la Cloche into Sauoye, And ſeeyng beſides the difficultie to ioyne with the L. D'acyer, he wandred with his cōpanies, & & diuiding them into .viij. enſeignes of footmen & certein horſmen, marched towards Almayney, the ſame Regiment being for the moſt part al of Lyonnoys and Dauphynoys, and thether retired to eſchue the perſecutions of their owne countries.
               The Regimēts of Dauphyne being paſſed the riuer of Roſne (as is ſayd) the Lord D'acyer began then to marche with ſuche ſpéede and happy trauell, that about the xxiij. of September the armie arriued at the ſaid All'es, and from thence drew a direct way to Myllan in Roargnes, deuiding notwithſtanding his companies into ſeueralties in reſpect of the ſterilitie of the

countrey of victuals and other neceſſities for warre, and ſo came to the ſaid Myllaw the laſt of the ſayd September.
               The▪ xxviij. of the ſame moneth wasKyngs edict. publiſhed at Paris an edict, wherin ye king drawes out at length al chaunces hapned and paſſed within his realme for the matter of Religion, preferring amongeſt the reſt, that the Edict of Januarie gyuing the firſte ſufferaunce or leaue to the Proteſtants to vſe an exerciſe of their religion, was but prouiſionall vntill his full age, and that his maieſtie had no meanyng to force obſeruation of any Edicte made touching the ſayd Religion, and therefore being nowe at the age of maioritie, he pronounced general defence ageynſt all vſe & exerciſe of the ſame religion thorough all his realm and contreys of his obedience, charging by an areſt irreuocable, and that vpon peyne of confiſcation of body & gods, not to haue any other practiſe of Religion within any of his ſayd countreys and landes than according to the catholike church of Rome, which bothe he and his pred
                     •
                   eſſours, haue ſo long tyme helde and maynteined, enioyning preciſely vpon like p
                     •
                  in

al miniſters of the ſayd reformed re ligion to auoyde his ſayd realme within .xv. days with this prouiſion at laſt, that they of the ſayd religon ſhould not be in any ſort cyfted or ſearched in their conſciences, albeit both after and notwithſtanding the ſayde Edict, they haue ben oppreſſed more than afore, and that with ſuch violēce as diuers haue reuolted.
               The ſame day alſo was publiſhed anotherAnother edict of the King. edict in the ſayde parlyament at Parys wherein the king gaue abſolute order that not only from thenſforth he wold not be ſerued with any officers profeſſing that religion, but alſo they ſhoulde be immediately ſuſpended of their eſtates and charges, with cōmaundement to reſigne them into his handes within .xv. dayes, otherways he wold prouide ſupplies of the Romiſh ſort: it is long ſince theſe edicts were vppon the preſſe, albeit they were not proclaymed afore now.
               Now the Lorde d'Acyer parting from Myllaw the v. of October tooke his way too Cadenat, as of purpoſe to paſſe there the riuer of Lot, and in his waye cauſed to ſommon the towne of Marzillac the whiche

without great denyall, and vnder certeine conditions ſet open her gates, and the morow after he tooke the tower called Sainct Chriſtophle, with a pretie gariſon of prieſtsMarz taken and the towre Sainct Chriſtophle. in it. And ſo marching further he ariued at the ſaid Cadenat the .x. of October, with entent to paſſe the ryuer of Dordone at Solliac, where in reſpect the Lord de Mont-lu
                        •
                     
                   coaſted him to withſtād his paſſage, he aſſembled all his armie in a place called 
                     
                        •
                     erac in Quercy, finding vpō that view▪ xvij. thouſand harquebuſiers, and vij. thouſandNumber of of the L. Daeiers armie. Pykes, and nyne hundred horſmen in good poynt, and well diſpoſed to fight.
               In the ſame place he deuided his armie into two parts, the auantgard & battaile
                     •
                   in the vantgarde he ſet .vj. regimens of the Dauphynoys, with the horſmen of the ſame countrey, and in the mayne battayle hée beſtowed the regimens of Languedoc, Prouence, Ʋiu
                        •
                     rez, and Roargues, with the regimen of the Lord d'Oroſe Dauphynois,
                   al which cōpanies paſſed by force ouer ye ſaid riuer of Dordone on the ſide of Solliac, frō whence the ſayde Lord of Mont-luc was departed the day before, as hauing ſounded the ſayd ryuer, and founde it paſſable

almoſt in euery place, and he not ſtrong ynough to hinder the paſſage of ſuche an armie: his was the xiiij. day of the ſayde October in the yeare aboueſayd.
               Now that the Prince of Conde had receyuedAngouleſme beſieged. the force and troupes whiche the Lorde Dandelot brought to hym, he came to beſiege the towne of Angouleſme, cauſing to be drawne thither from Rochel. iiij. canons and. i
                     •
                  . Culuerins, with the which he made a breache on that ſyde towarde Perigueux, the ſame albeit not ſufficient, and therfore remoued his batterie on that ſyde which they cal the Park: and bicauſe they that wer within vſed great diligence to fill vp the breache, he made to be mounted vpō the vault of the temple of S. Claire, two culuerins to beat within the breach, the ſame diſtreſſing ſo ſtraytly them within, that in the end hauing mainteyned theAngouleſme taken. ſiege aboute. vii
                     •
                  . dayes, the Marquiſe of M
                        •
                     zieres their gouerner, yeldes the town by compoſition to the Prince.
               Duryng this ſiege arriued the QuéeneThe Quene of Nauarre & his ſonne and yong prince of Nauarre her ſon, with madame Catherine her daughter, accompanied with .iij. regiments of Gaſcoyn footmen,

the one vnder charge of the Lord De Pilles, conteyning▪ xxiij. enſeigns, an other gouerned by the Vicount de Montamma, of .x. enſeignes, and the third of .ix. enſeignes, led by the Vicount de Sainct Magrin, with. vii
                     •
                   cornets of light horſmen of the the ſame countrey.
               The ſayd Queene being at Bergerac vponRegiment of 
                        •
                     a
                        •••
                     yn. her waye diſpatched to the Maieſties of the king and Queene, the kings brother and Cardinall of Burbon, ſeuerall letters vpō the occaſions y• moued hir to come to the Camp with her ſon and daughter, and ioyne them ſelues to the generall cauſeLetters of the Q of Nauarre. with the Prince of Conde her brother, the expedition was by the Lord De la Motte, who afore was ſente to her by their Maieſties: In her Letters to the Kyng ſhée complayned chiefly of the rage and paſſion of the enemie, ſtretched already ſo far that in effect it had confounded the hope of quiet promiſed in the edict of pacification, not only euill obſerued, but altogither reuerſed, contrary to the royall promyſes of his maieſtie to all his poore ſubiects of the reformed ſyde, the ſame mouyng by the ſyniſter inuentiōs of the Cardinal of Lorain,
                  
as hauing, by general letters to the parlyaments, and others writen in particular, (wherof her ſelf was witneſſe in Guyenne) brought the effects of the ſayd edicts bothe vain and without execution: beſides whileſt he kept matters in ſuſpence, he had procured ſuche horrible and infinite murders and abuſed ſo long the milde pacience of the proteſtantes, as thinking vppon no bridle to gouerne his furie, he woulde not ſtick to lay hāds of the princes of the blood, whereof ſhe commended a preſent and lamentable experience in his conſpiracie agaynſt the Prince her brother, whom his crueltie hath enforced to ſéeke ſuccours amongſt his parentes and allies: ſo that for her part, ſhe and her ſon reſembling the Prince ſo neere and dearely in proximitie of bloud, coulde do no leſſe than offer him that which the direct law of frendſhip and cōſanguinitie did demaund, and therefore as ſhee didde aſſuredly ſtay and repoſe hir ſelfe vpon the goodneſſe & natural affectiō of his maieſtie enclined rather to noriſh & preſerue than teare & rent them vp by the rootes: ſo ſhe beſought him with al humilitie to tolerate in the beſt part their depar

ture from their houſes of entent to ſerue God, the kyng, & their adherents in bloud, and to impugne to the vttermoſt of theyr lyues and power, the violente malice of ſuch as publikely haue entred into conſpiracie agaynſt them: and laſtely to beléeue that for theſe thrée cauſes onely, they had put their weapons betwéene their hands, leaſt they ſhoulde bée vtterly extermined from the view and face of the earth, according to their ſiniſter reſolutiōs, like as alſo y• ſayd Cardinall deuyſed to rauyſh her ſon from betwéen her armes, peruerting the power & authoritie of his maieſtie into vnnatural violēce, as though the ſimple commandement of his maieſtie could not ſufficiently gouerne her & her ſon his maieſties moſt humble & obedient ſeruants, & ſo finally if his maieſtie wold waigh in indifferēt balance y• faith of them, and infidelitie of the ſayd Cardinal (meaſuring y• one & other by a direct & ſtraight lyne) his maieſtie ſhold fynde more truthe in their effects, than in the wordes of the other.
               In her letters to the Quéene ſhe ſtoode vppon thrée poyntes that moued her to leaue her houſes, and offer her lyfe, goodes

and all her poſſible meanes to aduaunce the cauſe of Religion: The fyrſt was in reſpecte of the ſeruice of GOD, ſeeing the Cardinall and his confederates ſtudied to roote vp from the earth ſuche as made profeſſion of the true Religion: ſecondly to doo ſeruice to the ſouerayntie of the King, and with mayne lyfe and goodes to helpe that the Edicte of pacification may be obſerued, and that Fraunce, the mother coū
                  trey and nurſſe of ſo many ſorts of people become not barreyn, and ſo ſuffer her children to die: Thirdly that bloud and cōſanguinitie did call her to offer ſuccoure and ayde to her brother, harryed and purſued (ageynſt the Kyngs will) by the malice of ſuche as poſſeſſe aboute his perſon ſuch place, as no waye is due to them: neyther can ſhée better paynte out the Cardinall than by hys owne colours, that is to ſay, as well by a number of tragicall and lamētable murders, whoſe complaint doo ſorowfully ſounde in euery religious eare, as alſo to ſee ſo many deſolate ſoules hoping by the edict of pacification to enioy a plauſible quiet and reſt in their houſes, miſerably diſperſed to their aduenture,

and cruelly excluded from their ſoyle of naturall and auncient aboade: The ſame Cardinall alſo and his wicked adherentes puffed vp with a generall pacience, that euery one hath vſed to their barbarous tirannie, attempted ageinſt the Princes of the bloude, with intent (in common likelihod) to roote vp the mayne grafte & ſtock after they had wickedly defaced and ſpoyled y• tender braunches. And bycauſe the zeale of their Religion did in no ſorte induce them (as they haue affirmed) ſhe ſolicited the Queene to a remēbraunce of the conſpiracie done the laſte tyme ſhee was ſicke, from the whiche the Cardinall of Bourbon her brother was not exempted, albeit he was a Catholike. So that it is only the bloude of Fraunce whiche gripes them ſo at hart, wherof what better experience and example can be aduouched, thā their vngodly purſuite againſt ye Prince of Conde and his little children, to whoſe ſuccours (according to the dutifull office of bloude and kynred) ſhe would neuer fayle, deſiring notwithſtanding aboue all things, a good peace and ſo well aſſured, as the Cardinall of Lorayne nor his adherents

could eyther diſſolue or corrupte it.
               She declared in her letters to the kings brother, how iuſtly ſhe was enticed to her iourney to Bergerac, with hope to purſue the ful voyage for the ſeruice of their Maieſties, with requeſte that it would pleaſe him in good earneſt, to put his hand to the worke, and helpe to defend the poore countrey of Fraūce againſt the pollicies of ſuch as ſéeke to aſpire to confounde it, with a thirſte and deſire (as it ſemes) to buylde their greatneſſe and authoritie vppon the decayed and ruinouſe ſtones of ſuch, as (like firme pillers) do, and haue ſuſteyned it.
               By her letters to y• Cardinal of Bourbon her brother, that it was nowe more than tyme, (if there were any at all) to gather ſtomacke to hym, and laye afore their Maieſties the lamentable ſtate and deſolation of Fraunce, whereunto he was bound aboue the reſte, in reſpect of the honour he bare to bee a Prince of the bloud: Shée ſommoned him alſo to remember the ſhame and outrage thundred vppon the perſone of his proper Brother, Syſters,

and Nephews, and all by a Cardinall of Lorraine, who alſo abuſed him, as one of his ſuffragans. If all theſe could not moue him topitifull conſideration of their caſe, at leaſt, let him remember Veſpra Siciliana, pretended by hys coadherentes the laſte tyme the Queene was ſicke: And laſtly, notwithſtanding the ſeparation of Religion, ſhee coniured him by the proper office of friendſhip and dutie of nature and bloud concurring togyther, to conſider their preſent purſute againſt the Prince his brother. All theſe letters were written and dated at Bergerac, the .xv
                     •
                  . of September. 1568.
               After the ſiege of Angouleſme, the ſaydThe Princes Camp. Quéene with the yong Ladye her daughter retired to Rochel, leauing the Prince her ſonne in the Campe, whiche afterwardes was called The Campe of the Princes, bycauſe the ſayd Princes of Nauarre and Conde commaunded togither in the Armie.
               Whyles theſe things were thus ordered, the Duke of Aniou, brother to the King and Chief ouer the Catholykes, forbare neyther diligence nor meanes to

aduaunce his force and erect his Camp at O
                        〈…〉
                     . and other places there about, wherewith he diffended towardes Poyti
                        ••
                     
                   where vnderſtanding of the comming of the Lord 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     er 
                  
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ching with the ſuccoures he brought determined to fight with 
                     •••
                  , and 
                     •
                  o 
                     •••
                  der him to ioyne with the Prince of Conde, and for that purpoſe departed from Poytiers with .iiij. thouſand horſemen & .iiij. enſeignes of footmen, and entred with great iourneys the towne of Perigueux: in like ſort the Lord d'Acier marched euery day paſſing the ryuers of Leyll
                        •
                     
                   and 
                     Ʋ
                     
                        •
                     ſer
                        •
                     
                   in the ſayd countrey, and ſo the xxv. of October being neer the town of Perigueux and lodged in a village called S. Chastie, with the regiments of 
                     
                        •
                     anguedock: as he departed in the morning, the Lordes of Montpenſier, Guyſe, & Bri
                        •
                     sac ſet vpon him both behinde and before, albeit they were repulſed and ſo retired, the Lorde of Baudine being hurte inBaudine hurt. that ſkirmiſhe with a harquebuſhot in the arme.
               Being thus repulſed they went to the village not farre frō 
                  Chastie where were lodged the Lordes of Mouuens & Pierregourde
                  
with their companies, from whēce thei were alſo repulſed bicauſe they were ſomewhat entrenched, and ſo retired attending their foolemen whiche were not yet come. The L. d Acier diſpatched preſent word to y• Lorde of Mouuans & Pierregourde by the Lords d Oroſe to fortifie thēſelues within the village, promiſing them ſuccours all the day of his ſtrength: All the Captaynes were of opinion to entrenche themſelues within the village, ſauing the Lord of Mouuans, who ſpred him ſelfe forth with vppon the fields, and then made marche foorth his cariage, and immediatly after the .ij. regimentes, albeit not farre from the village he found thoſe that had affailed him in the morning attending his cōming ready ringed and ſet in batta
                     •
                  le: The ſayd Lorde of Mouuans ſaing theſe troupes, & gathering by their view and ſet order, their reſolute mynds, chooſed fyue hundreth harquebuſhers as forlorne hope, whom he tooke vppon him to leade againſt the Catholykes (leauing the Lord Pierregourd with their battail.) Theſe, after certeyne great and ſharpe volues of ſhotte were broken in a 
                     •
                  aye

and put to flighte by the horſſemen of the enimie.
               Immediatly vppon the diſaray of theſeOuerthrew of the L. of Mouuans & P. Gourde. forlorne hopes, the battaill began both to feare and doute: and being hoatly charged with the horſmen and Launces, pearcing amongſt the enſeignes, al was diſordered and put to flight, leauing the ſayd Lordes of Mouuans and Gourde with .v. or vj. hū
                  dred ſouldiours dead on the place: on the Kings ſyde dyed certeyne, but none of mark, nor in great number: the peaſants did both foyle and kill more proteſtantes, than the ſouldiours. The Regimentes of Longuedo
                        •
                     
                   purſued ſtill their way to ioyn with the vantgarde, and ſo to returne togither to the ſuccours of the Lord of Mouuans and Pierregourde, whō they thought to be entrenched within the ſayd Village, albeit encountring contrary newes of the ouerthrow, they tooke waye to Aubeterre, where they arriued the morrow after togither with thoſe that remayned of the ſayd conflict.
               After the taking of Angouleſme, thePons beſieged, ſayde Princes drue toward Saintonge, to beſiege the Towne and Caſtell of Pons,
                  
within whiche the Lorde of the place had garriſons of footemen, whiche greatly oppreſſed thoſe of the Religion. They began foorth with to batter the Towne, and ſo by a breache, the Towne was taken without much reſiſtaunce, albeit thoſe of the Caſtel maynteined the matter, whervppon the Proteſtantes were enforced to a new batterie. Nowe, the Prince hearing of the Lorde d Aciers comming to Aubeterre, and of his ouerthrowe, left all their footemen with certeyne Cornettes of horſmen to cōtinue the ſiege, vnder the charge of the Lord de Boccard, great maiſter of their artillerie, and with the reſt of their horſſemen they came to Aubeterre.
               
               The firſt of Nouember the L. Admiral with the horſemē of the vauntgard, went from Aubeterre to go to Berry, whether the Kings brother was come, and to this end all the harquebuſhears brought by ye Lorde d Acier, were commaunded to attende the enterpriſe of the Admirall, who hearing news of ye departure of ye enimie from yt place, retired himſelf to Aubeterre, to deliberate with the princes, & euery of his companie into his quarters, without

any thing doing. Their generall and reſolute aduiſe was to purſue the Kings brother whereſoeuer he went, and that as neare as might bee, the rather to entice him to battell, vppon which deuiſe and to which effect the arme ſet forwarde in orderly marche the next morning: the regiments of Languedoc, Roargues with them of the Lorde d'Oroſe, and the reſte of the prouincials were made the vauntgarde, & the remeynder of the Dauphinoys in the mayne battell.
               The Kings brother in this meane whyle haſted to Chastelleraut where the reſte of his Armie was aſſembled, purſued continually in the tayle by the Princes power till they gotte a Village called Angiers, two leagues from Chastelleraut, where were lodged parte of their footemen of the vauntgarde.
               The Kings brother finding great companies of footemen and horſſemen aſſembled at Chastelleraut, togyther with the Suyzers who brought ſixteen Canone and certeyne Coluerines with fielde pieces, determined to entrenche himſelf ſtrongly afore y• town (as in deed he did) & tary there

the comming of the Princes. Whereof the lord Admirall the x. of Nouember euen from the point of the day, renged his men of armes in battaile and ſquadrons hoping to fight, wherof he diſpatched ſpedie aduertiſement to the other Princes then at Chauuignie vpon Vien, who likewiſe ſent towardes him forthwith the harquebuſers of the battell, and themſelues leading the horſemen of the ſame battell, founde when they were neare the place, the Admirall retiring, & could not that day geue battaile, whether it were by reaſon of the trenches wherewith the Catholikes campe was ſtrongly enuironed, or by reaſon of the thicke miſtes and cloudes which ſo darkned the morning, that hardly one could diſcerne an other.
               The Princes being thus come afore Chauuignie, they ſommoned the garde and garriſon of the Caſtell which were footemē, to yeld themſelues and charge, whereunto they condiſcended without difficultie vpon compoſition to departe the caſtell, their liues ſaued, which was truely performed, euery one bearyng in

his hand a white rodde, and in that order went to Poytiers. And ſo aſſoone as it was purged of the Papiſts, it was burned, to the end they ſhould not thether returne, and bée impediments to the paſſage ouer 
                     Ʋienne.
               
               All this whyle the Duke d'Aumalle was vpon the coaſt and countrey of Lorraine with certeine force by him aſſembled of purpoſe to hinder the entrye of ſtraungers into the realme for the aid of the princes. He vnderſtode that the Lord de la Cloche was paſſing by that Countrey, to go into Almanie, and was already vppon the landes of the Byſhop of Straſbourge Whereupon his footemen began to charge him the .xij. of Nouembre in the morning: the Lord de la Cloche made valyant reſiſtance, and repulſed diuers tymes the ſayd charge, greeuing great numbers of them. Albeit being ouerlayde with freſhe ſupply of companies, after he had long endured the encounter, was in the end put to chaſe, and taken with diuers of his troupe, and ſo led to Metz in Lorraine: this ſkirmiſh denoured of his people about a hundred or

ſixe ſcore, not without great loſſe of bot Souldioures and Captaines of the ſay d'Aumalle.
               
               The Princes now not able to haue battel with the kings brother by the reaſons aforeſaid, reuerſed their way and went from thence to 
                     Ʋienne, of purpoſe only to prouoke him into the ſield, and ſo giue him battaile.
               The Lord of Boccard, whom (as youThe caſtle of Pons taken. hard) the Princes left at the ſiege of Pons hauing taken the Caſtel by compoſition, and ſent the Lord and Ladye of the place priſonners to Rochel, marched with his Artillerie to ioyne with the Princes campe, which the kings brother thought to intercept, and for that cauſe paſſed 
                     Ʋienne by a Bridge of boates which he cauſed to be made at Chaſtellerant, drawing directly to Pamprou, néere vnto which his vauntgarde gouerned by the Lorde Montpenſier, came the .xvij. of Nouembre. The Princes campe likewiſe marched to ioyne with the Lord de Boccard, arriuing the ſame day ſomewhat late at Pamprou, néere the Lord de Montpenſier,
                  
the ſame euening there were offred and receiued certaine ſhorte ſkirmiſhes, by reaſon the night gaue let to their longer fight: the army of the Princes camped nere the very houſes of Pamprou, halfe a league from the lord Mountpenſier, who cauſed to kindle great fires as though he would encampe there, ſtealing away albeit about midnight, and went to Jazenail to ioyne with ye kinges brother that was there with the battell.
               The morrow after being the xviij. of the ſame month, the Princes army was ready ringed in battel at the firſt appearing of the day, who hoping to finde eftſones the lord Mountpenſier, where they left him the day before, determined to bidde him battell, but ſéeing he was ſo gone, as neither forme nor figure remained of his being there, the Prince ſpedde him ſo ſwiftly in the purſuite, that he ariued at Jazenail almoſt as ſoone as he, & there began a warme ſkirmiſhe from noone till night: the Admirall was not there at the beginning, as following the chaſe of certaine troupes drawing towardes Menigours, where he toke about

lx. chariotes charged with baggage of the kings brothers campe, and amongeſt others, the baggage of the duke of Guyſe, and the Countie Bryſſack, with the moſt parte of their ſiluer veſſell, all being a pray to the ſouldioures. In the euening the Admirall arriued with the troupes which he led. Immediatly after whoſe comming, the ſkirmiſhe qualified, the Princes army retiring into a wood nere to that place towarde Menigours. This was the firſt proofe and experience of the Dauphynoys which were in the Princes campe, who not withſtanding did ſo wel as they deſerued and had high commendacion: they driue the Catholikes from thrée or foure of their trenches, and enforced them to leaue the next towne to their campe, albeit they had ſundry aduauntages of the Princes footemen, aſwell by the multitude and numbers of ſhotte which thundred violently to defēd their trenches, as alſo that their horſemen were alwayes a redy and ſinguler ſuccour to their footemē, which the princes horſemen could not do by reaſon of hedges and maine ditches, beſides the

naturall and troubleſome ſituation of the place.
               In this ſkirmiſh were brought to the earth on both ſides about thrée hundreth bodies, and almoſt all footemen, the number notwythſtanding of the dead being farre greater of the Papiſts than Proteſtants, whoſe armie being now in great néede to be refreſhed, as hauing had neyther reſt nor releeſe for two dayes for horſſe nor man, cauſed their footemen to marche the morning after to Menigours, to recreate themſelues, and ioyne with the Lord de Boccard, and all the horſemen after they had preſented themſelues in order of battell at the place where they were the day before, retired alſo thither without any thing doing.
               The Kings brother after thys ſkirmiſhe, tooke his way to Poytiers, and the Princes drewe towardes Mirebeau a Towne in Poictou, foure leagues from Poytiers, which was rendred wythout reſiſtance
                     
                        〈…〉
                     ebeau 
                        〈…〉
                     endred. to the Princes, who with theyr armie ſoiourned there aboute eyghte dayes.
               The Quéene of Nauarre being now at

                  Rochel, wrote to the Quéenes Maieſtie of England, the reaſons of her departure from her owne and ſoueraign countreis: in the firſt ſhe preferred the cauſe of Religion, ſo oppreſſed with the inueterate and barbarous tyrannie of the Cardinall of Loraine. aſſiſted by people of his owne humor, that ſhée accompted in ſhame to bée numbred amongſt the faithfull, if ſhe did not oppugne that horrible error with all ſuch helpes as God would ſturre vp, confederating her ſelfe and ſonne with ſo holy and honorable ſocieties of Princes, reſolued (vnder the fauoure of the great God of Armes) to ſpare neyther bloud, lyfe nor goodes, to effect ſo bleſſed a purpoſe. Her ſecond reaſon (reſemblyng alſo the firſt) was in reſpect of her Seruice to the king, making the ruine of the church the confuſion of him and his kingdome, with whome becauſe ſhe and hir ſonne hadde the neareſt affinitie, they thoughte it alſo theyr firſte and propre office of duetie to intercept ſuche, as vſurping vppon the naturall goodneſſe and enclynation of theyr King, woulde make hymſelfe the Author of

his owne deſtruction, with ſuborned impoſition (albeit he is one of the moſt true princes of the world) to be a falſer of his promiſe, and that by inuentions of their owne contriuing, to infringe the edict of pacification, which ſo long as it was preſerued, enterteined a ioyfull peace betwene the king and his faithful ſubiects, and now being broken, doth conuert the ſaid fidelitie of his people to a lamentable warre, and ſo inforced as there is not any one of them which hath not bene drawne into armes by violence. The third cauſe, peculiar to her ſelfe & ſonne, was, in that ſhe ſawe the auncient enemies of God & her houſe, with a ſhameleſſe and perillous malice, bent vtterly to exterminate their race: Beſides, as ſhe behelde on the one ſide with pitifull eyes the Prince her brother, who to eſc
                     •
                  ue the mortal peril pretended againſt him, was conſtrained (afore hée entred into armes) with his biggebellied wife and little children, to ſearche places of ſecuritie and that in ſuch deſolation, as the very remembraunce is able to kindle remorſe in any chriſtian harte: ſo on

the other ſide, being credibly informed of diuers expeditions and traines to rauiſh from betwene her handes her dere and onely ſonne, ſhe could do no leſſe thā to imparte her ſelfe and ſonne, with the ſaid conſociaciō, and to ſhare with them in their generall fortunes, according to the due office and bonde of blood: and yet not to vndertake armes to contende againſt heauen (as the good catholikes do ſuggeſt) and much leſſe to warre vpon the ſoueraigne maieſtie of the king, but rather to confront thoſe who with their auncient ſpite to the generall cauſe, do conioyne that wherof they haue geuen ſo many particular and publike effectes.
               About the ende of Nouember the Admirall departed from Mirebeau in the night, with all the horſemen and ſhot of the vauntgarde, drawing towarde Pontd'Auzance, as hauing aduertiſemēt that there wer at that place certain troupes of the ſoueraigne lieuetenaunts campe. And being there, he founde in deede the Regiment of footemen of the Counte Briſſack, whom he charged and put them in part to flight, killing two or thre hundred

of them: he was in minde to charge their horſemen which were alſo there, ſauing for the vehement rayne which enforced them to retire to Mirebeau, beſides he had no certaintie whether the Prince of Conde were neare enough to ſuccoure him or not: the ſayde Prince was withdrawne the ſame euening with the horſemen and ſhotte of the battell on that ſide of the three ſ
                     ••
                  ples, thinking there to finde certayne other trowpes, where of he had had aduertiſement, notwithſtanding, finding the place abandoned, he bended towardes Auzance, & met in the way the vauntgarde returnyng, which he did alſo.
               As the Prince was in a caſtell of the Biſhops of Poictiers, ſkarce a league from Mirebeau, there came to him a Currier or Meſſenger from the Quéene mother, with charge chieflye to induce him to demaunde peace as a matter wherein it belonged to him of duetie to preuent his maieſtie, to whom he aunſwered that he was forced to enter into armes as his ſureſt warraunte agaynſt the oppreſſion of his enemies, and not to attempte

any matter preiudiciall to the Maieſtie royall, or his ſoueraigne eſtate, whome he reuerently helde for his king ordayned of God, beſides, the attempt of hym and his, intended no further than to entertaine a charitable quiete in their conſcience, a ſafe exerciſe of their religion, and laſtly, a tollerable defence of their liues, honours, and poſſeſſions againſt the tiranny of an vngodly Cardinall of Lorayne and other the enemies and commō troublers of the publike ſtate of this Realme, and preciſely of the poore profeſſours of the Goſpell, contrary to the will and meanyng of his Maieſtie auouched by ſo many general edictes and other particular expedicions diſcending from himſelfe: for which cauſes they reſted vpon reſolucion to maintaine perticularly ageinſt the ſaid Cardinal & his adherents, as the ſpring, roote, & original of the ruine and thretning ſubuerſion of the croune, and them to purſue as periured & infringers of the cōmon faith, cōiured enemies to this eſtate & vnitie of the realme: laſtly touching himſelf, he hath giuē ſufficiēt proofe and experience to the whole world

of his humble deſire and inclination to peace, wherin his facilitie and ready cō
                  ſent to y• laſt peace do both beſt approue him, and alſo argue to the worlde the ſtraunge perils offring to whelme him and the faction of his religion. And therfore bicauſe his maieſty is preſently enuironned with his enemies, whoſe principall condition is to cloſe his eares againſt the lamentable complaintes of his oppreſſed people, he determined to be the reporter of their doinges in hys owne perſon.
               This was the aunſwer which the Prince gaue the meſſenger in the Hall of the caſtell, and that in the preſence of a great number of Lordes, knights, gentlemen, and captaines of his army: it was ſuppoſed in the campe that he came to other ende, as to eſpy the force of the Princes.
               In the beginning of December, the Princes departed from Myrebeau, and drew to wardes Champigni, a Caſtell belonging to the Lorde de Mountpenſier, garded with vij. or viij. ſkore ſouldiours: they battred the caſtell on that ſide towardes

the church, making a breache in the wall before the Hale of the ſaid place: they that were within rendred by compoſition, and in their place entered the Captaine Spondillan with certain numbers of ſhotte, who immediatly for ſooke it by commaundement of the Princes, and left it at libertie: The morrowe after the artillerie marched before the caſtle of the Lord de Sauigny, which without great reſiſtaunce ſauing certain volies or ſhot of the canon, was takē, they within put to the edge of the ſword, and the caſtell burned. During the ſiege of theſe two caſtels, the regiments of footmen of the Lordes of Mountbrun and Myrebean, were at Lyllebouchard vpō 
                  Vien, ſtriuing to winne the paſſage, wherin as they profited little, ſo they ſpedely retired. The kings brother being gone from Poictiers, and hauing the ſuccoures brought him by the counte de Loyeuſe gouernour of the country of Languidock, in the abſence of the lord d'Anuille marſhall of France (which were heſides the Regimen of the Lord of Serlebourg, certain companies as well on foote as horſbacke)

beſieged the towne of Mirebeau not long ſince rendred to the Princes: This towne was defended by thrée companies of footemen, wherof two were gouerned by the captaine la Borde, and the other by the Captaine of the caſtell. At the beginning they battered the towne which was abandoned for want of ſufficient ſupplies to furniſh the walles, all retiring within the ſayd caſtell.
               The towne being taken, about the xij. of December, the kings brother left the Counte du Lude, gouernour of Poyctou, to continue the ſtege of the caſtel, with two canons, two culuerines, and one regiment of footemen: he taking his way to Lodun a towne in Poyctou, the which not many dayes afore was rendred to the obedience of the Princes, ſommoned it forthwith by a trūpet, to whom the lord d'Acyer gouernour there, anſwered, that as he was ſet in charge of y• town by the Prince of Nauarre. lieutenant general for y• king in Guyen, ſo he would not only kepeit to his vſe without further rēder or reſtituciō, but alſo (to his beſt) repulſe what violēce or force ſo euer were offred. This

anſwer reported to the kings deputie, he made his army marche neere the ſayde towne to a place called the Roches.
               
               The ſiege continuing ſtill afore the caſtellThe caſtell of Mirebeau taken. of Mirebeau by the ſayd Counte of Lude, in the ende procuring a parley, hée entred ſubtillie about the xvj. of December 1568. The Capitaine la Borde with certain ſouldiours were there killed, the reſt were ſaued.
               As ſoone as the kings Lieuetenant had giuen ſommons to render Lodun, the lord d'Acyer aduertiſed the Princes of his ſtate, who departed forthwith from Towars with the battel, and the Lord Admirall from Monſtrueil-belay, with the vantgarde to geue ſuccours to the ſayd Lord d'Acyer. The xvj. of December they preſented their whole cāpe in battell before Lodun, about halfe a quarter of a league from y• kings camp, who likewiſe was in battel in the ſayd place of Roches, whereThe meeting of the two armies wer great numbers of artillery diſcharged aſwel of the one as other ſide, neither was there any other thing all the day, except ſome litle & light ſkirmiſh which deuoured no man: in the euening euery one

retired into his quarter vntill the morrowe that the two campes did efteſoones diſcouer in order of battaile at the ſame place, fulfilling alſo the like the .iij. day without other thing doing than certeyn vnhurtfull ſkirmiſhes.
               The .xix. of December the Kings brother diſcāped, who albeit drue towards Chynon, yet ſuch was the ſlowneſſe of his marche that daye, as the nexte morning the two armies were all day in battaill order on that ſyde towarde Chynon, ſending only certeyne ſhot of artillerie one againſt an other without hurt of eyther ſyde: the ſame (as it may be preſumed) mouing by a vehement and ſlipperie colde, that the horſemen could not aduaunce: it was a wonder to ſée two armies in camp in ſuch a hard and diuerſe ſeaſon, the winter being ſo extréeme as hath not bin ſéene in many yeares afore, whick kindled ſundrie ſortes of diſeaſes in diuerſe ſouldiours on both ſydes, and after dyed in lamentable numbers: towardes the euening the Kings Lieuetenaunt retired to Chynon, albeit certeyne Captaynes of the Princes armie charging

vpon their tayle, diſcomfited aboute vij. or .viij. ſcore Suyzers, and thrée enſeignes of footemen ſodeynly ſet vpon as they were refreſhing them ſelues in the village.
               The Princes returned to Touars, and the Admirall to Monstrueit-beley, to winter there, leauyng the Lorde d'Yuoy brother to the Lorde de Ianlis, as gouerner within the towne of Loudun, and for the garde of the ſame, the regimens of the L. of Mont-brun & Mirabel, with .ij. cornets of horſemen: the Lorde Ianlis not long after dyed of a diſeaſe in Almayne.
               
               The Lord de la Coche who (as is ſayd) was led priſoner to Metz, was this .v. of January. 1569. murdered by certein garriſon ſoldiours of the towne, who taking him out of priſon and bynding him with Mychallon his enſigne bearer, tolde him they were commaunded from the King to leade them to the Court, and ſo exchange them for other priſoners within the princes Campe: albeit they wer no ſooner cut of the town than they were ſtabbed with daggers, and ſo murdered
               Néere vnto Saulmur is an abbey called

                  Sainct Florent, wherin were two hundredAbbay S. florent taken. footemen, as a garriſon to the Catholikes, who wt their abbay were beſieged in this moneth of January by the vauntgarde of the Princes, and they after they had beatē a breach entred by force-putting al that were beſeeged to the mercy of the ſworde: immediatly after the garriſon of Saulmur
                  The Abbay recouered. recouering the ſayde Abbay, vſed the like execution of all that they found.
               Whiles the princes ſoiorned at Towars, they diſpatched into Gaſcoyne the Lorde de Pilles, aſwell to leuie newe force, as other matters of ſpeciall charge: At his firſt arriuall he toke Bergerac and Saintfoy, and hauing ſpéedily erected certaine forces of horſmen and footmen, he beſtowed his footmen, and drew towards Perigueux with his horſemen, and paſſing along the place where the Lords of Mouuans and Pierregourde were diſcomfited, hée fyred many villages, and killed as many peiſauntes as hée mette, as a reuenge of the bloud of ſo manye Souldioures whiche they hadde ouercome and ſlayne in the ſame ouerthrow.
               The Kinges armye wintred at Chynon,
                  
                  Saulmur, Poyctiers and other places thereabout: the princes armie in the beginning of February departed from Towars and Monſtrueu-beley, diſcending lower intoo the countrey to fynde vittells: the vauntgarde drew to Partenay and the battell to Niort, harbouring in the places thereabout.
               The thirde day of this moneth, the Lord de Bourſaut captayne of a hundred lyghts horſmen and his company, were ſodeinly ſet vpon within a village néere to Towars, by the Counte Briſſac, accompanyed with vij. or .viij. hundred horſmen preſently iſſued out of Saulmur. There were many of them taken, and many killed and the reſt, as the Lord de Bourſaut and others, ſaued themſelues by help of the dark night.
               In the beginning of February y quene of Nauarre came to 
                     
                        ••
                     or
                        •
                     , where ſhee founde the Princes, wyth dyuerſe other greate Lordes, with whome ſhee entredA ſale of the principall goods of the Churche. into Counſell for the affaires and diſpoſition of the warre: There was agreed a ſale of temporal goods of the Churchmen, toward the mayntenaunce of the generall cauſe, & for y• purpoſe wer drſpatched preſēt

letters vnder the names and authoritie of the ſayd Quéene, Princes of Nauarre and Gonde, the Lorde Admirall, Dandelot, & Rochefoucaut, with wordes of ample power giuen to their procurors and commiſſaries to promiſe and binde them for warrant requiſite in ſuche caſe: Theſe comiſſions were publiſhed in towns holden vnder their obedience, with preſent ſale and alyenation made accordingly, the ſame rayſing great ſummes of money.
               Whileſt the ſaid Quéene, Princes and other ſtats remained in conſultation with in Nyort, certeine horſmen of the Lord of Verac, (captaine of a hundreth light horſemen) making often incurſion vppon the next enimies, toke the Lord of Caſsac lieutenant of the men at armes to the Duke of Guyſe, as he was bayting in an Inne, whome they ledde to Niort, and ſo to Rochell.
               
               The Counte Mountgomerey lodgyng in a village called la Motte, was charged vpon ye ſodeyn by the Counte Briſſac, and enforced to retyre within the Caſtel of the ſame place, ſeruyng ſomewhat to hys defence: ſo that he receyued no other loſſe

than his yonger brother, whiche was led to the Caſtell of Luzignan: this was the xij. of February.
               The Princes now determyned to perfourme their enterpriſe vppon the caſtell of Luzignan, and to take it, the ſame mouyng (as it ſéemed) eyther by a practyſe of Montgomories brother, or elſe by ſome ſecrete intelligence they hadde with the Gouernours Lieutenaunte of the ſame place, where they were in good order, and vppon the ſodayne the .xx. of February very early in the mornyng, dyuers of their Captaynes and ſouldiours entring within, albeit, being diſcouered their further attempt was intercepted, and they returned without any thing doing.
               The Counte of Tande gouernour for the King in Prouence, in the begynning of Nouember the yeare before, put himſelfe vppon his waye with thrée thouſand footemen and certeine horſemen of that country marching intoo Fraunce as hée was cō
                  maunded, and paſſing by Dauphiné, the baron of Adretz, who alſo had leuyed a Regyment of footemen conteyning .xvij. enſeignes, ioyned with him, too paſſe alſo

in company into Fraunce: In theyr waye they came by the ſiege of Sanſerre, whiche the Counte Mertiuengo an Italyan and gouernoure of Gyran had long continued, where as they ſpente long tyme wythout aduauncyng the ende and purpoſe of the ſiege, ſo procuryng the ſiege to bée rayſed: the Counte 
                     
                        •
                     ande drew to Poyctou to the Kyngs Campe, where hée arriued aboute the ende of Februarye, and the baron of Adretz marched into 
                     
                        •
                     orayn to the Duke d'Aumale, ſent thither (as you haue heard) to withſtande the entrie of ſtraungers into Fraunce.
               
               The Kynges brother hauing receyued theſe newe ſuccours, and made ſhewe to his men of armes of two hundred thouſande frankes which the houſe of Parys had lent the Kyng vpon the temporal goodes of the Church men, he gathered ageyn hys Campe, and drewe towardes Angoulmoys.
               
               Immediatly after in the ſame moneth, arryued two thouſande and fyue hundred Reistres, vnder the conduct of the Counties Reyngraffe and Baſſompier, who béeing much harried in theyr long and paynful

iorney to come into France, refreſhed themſelues certayne tyme aboute Poyctiers afore they ioyned wyth the Kyngs Campe, whoe approched ſtill to Angouleſme, and taryed them. And bycauſe hée woulde haue the libertie of the Ryuer of Charente, to paſſe and repaſſe at his pleaſure, he diſpatched the Lorde de la Riuiere a Gentleman of Poyctou, for to ſeaſe vppon the Towne and alſo the Caſtell of larnacke.
               
               The Princes nowe béeing truely enfourmed what waye the Kynges Campe tooke, departed from Nyort, and vppon the begynning of March aryued at Sainct lean d'Angely, marchyng from thence with theyr battayle to Sainctes. The Admirall with the vauntegarde lodged at Coygnac and the d Andelot with the horſmenne and ſhotte of the ſayde vauntgard, drawing with them two Coluerines and two fielde péeces to beſiege the Towne of Iarnacke: The Captayne la Riuiere the ſame daye was on horſſebacke wyth his troupe of horſſemen to beate and ſkowre the ſtrayte that laye towardes Coygnac
                        •
                     
                   albéeit diſcoueryng a farre off the Lorde

Admirall, hée returned in greate dyligence, and without ſtaying in the towne of larnack, hée encloſed hym ſelfe ſpéedyly within the Caſtell, whyche foorthwyth was enuyronned and beſieged on all ſydes by the Admyrall, who as ſoone as his artillerye was planted, began to batter towardes the gate of the Caſtell, the ſame continuing all the day, and at night the Captayne demaunded parley, which the next mornyng was graunted togither with a compoſition by the Lorde de Bricquemau, (lefte there to direct the ſiege by the Lorde Admirall) the Caſtell thus taken, the Vicont Montamma entred with his Regiment to defende the ſayde paſſage.
               The .vj. of this moneth the Prince of Conde with the Admirall and d'Andelot, and the horſmen as wel of the vauntgard as mayne battayle, excepte the Lorde of Bricquemaus regimen which was at Iarnack went to Beauuoir vpon Matta, wher was the Kings brother with his armye: Ther the Prince of Conde ringed in battel his horſmen, leauing in couert behynd a hyll certein drūmes, ſounding as though

his footemen had bin there, notwithſtanding there was nothing done that daye other than certeyne ſkirmiſhes againſt the d'Andelot: The Reistres of the catholikes were not as yet ioyned to the Catholikes Campe, albeit they arriued very ſhortely after.
               The Kings brother being defeated of his purpoſe and meane to paſſe the Riuer of Charente at Iarnac, marched vp higher, and a little beneath Angouleſme, he paſſed the Riuer. In his way he tooke the caſtell of Ruffel, wherein were foure ſcore Souldioures, whom he put to the ſworde: He tooke alſo the Towne & garriſon of Melle, in the countrey of Poytou, who alſo taſted lamentably of the lyke compaſſion. And being thus ouer Charente, he came to Chasteau-neuf, ſtanding vpon the ſhoare of the Riuer, wherein was a garriſon of fiftie Souldiours, who without reſiſtance rendred the Caſtell.
               The Princes vnderſtanding that the Catholikes had wōne the paſſage, departed from Sainctes, and came to lodge at Coygnac, and the Admirall with the vaūtgarde at Iarnac, and thereabout.
               
                  The Friday the .xj. of this moneth, the Kings brother with all his horſemen and certeyne nūbers of ſhot, preſented himſelf in order of battail before Coygnac, cauſing in the meane while to be built vp ageine the woodden bridge of Chasteau-neuf, battered and beaten down by the ſayd garriſon. The Princes wer then within Coygnac accompanied only with their traynes and certeyne Gentlemen of their retinue: (their men of armes being lodged in the Villages thereabout) and therefore ſent immediatly to the Admirall for certeyne companies to march towardes them: the d'Andelot going thyther, heard newes in the way, that the kings brother had drawn his men of armes afore Coignac: The d'Andelot after he had talked with y• Princes returned to Iarnac.
               
               The morrow the .xii. of March, y• Princes armie marched towards Chaſteauneuf, the Prince of Cōdé with y• maine battaill lodging at Iarnac. & the Admiral with the vauntgard went before Chasteau-neuf to hinder the building of ye bridge, and withſtand the paſſage ouer the riuer: albeit as he was come neare the place, he vnderſtoode

that the Catholykes had ſet vp the bridge, and paſſed ouer with parte of their armie, entrenching them ſelues on the other ſyde the Bridge, to reſiſte all impedimentes to their full paſſage, where vppon the Admirall returned to lodge at Baſsac, leauing to Gouerne the retraite of his companies, the light horſſemen of Soubiſe and Pluueau, who remayned behinde, ringed in battaile in a playne neere the ſayde Chasteau-neuf vntill night. The armie of the Princes was greatly diſperſed in diuerſe Townes and Villages, beyng farre diſtaunt one from an other.
               In ye meane while the catholikes camp paſſed ouer Charente all the night, with as great ſpeede as might bee. And bycauſe the prince of Condé had no intent to fight the nexte morning, as not hauing his forces nere him, he diſpatched the lord Perdillan to the Admirall, to aduaunce the companies of the vauntgarde in ſuch diligence as to bee 
                     •
                  ith hym at Iarnac vppon the dauning of the day, which y• Admiral performed according to the ſpeede & neceſſitie of the meſſage, albeit not all in ſuch exacte

redineſſe as the caſe required, as lacking the Lord Pluueaus horſemen and his regimen of footemen, left (as you haue heard) to gouerne and garde the retraite of the vauntgarde.
               The morrowe after being the .xiij. of Marche, the Prince with his horſſemen that were already arriued, preſented himſelf in the morning in order of battail before the enimie aboue the village of Baſſac. When all was arriued, the ſayde Prince returned with the battaile, and drue to Matta neare S. Iean d'Angeli, whiche the Admirall did alſo, leauing behind to direct the retraicte, the Lorde de la Noue, who retiring a reaſonable paſſe, and not yet farre off, was charged with a great oſte of horſiemen which forced him to take the charge and chaſed him to Baſſac, where the Admirall was ready to reſiſte, and repulſed the Catholykes vntill the other ſyde of the village.
               In the meane whyle certeyne troupes of ſhot of the Catholikes entred the ſayde village, and buckled to ſkirmiſhe with the Admirall, who likewiſe droue them out of the village, notwithſtanding they were

reléeued by the reſt of the Campe that followed at hande and returned to the Uillage.
               The Lorde Admirall ſéeing the Catholykes armie ſo neare, diſpatched a Genttleman of ſpéede to the Prince, to aduertiſe him that the whole Campe of the contrary ſyde was there and almoſt vpon his backe, ſo that ſéeing no meane to retire without fighting, deſired him to aduaunce ſuch powers as he had of the battaill. Immediatly the Prince reculed till he was very neare the Admirall, rynging hymſelfe in battaill at the foote of a hill on the left hand.
               The Admirall was in order of battaill on the right hand along a little Coppies, looking towardes Baſsac. He had about him the Lorde Pluueaus regimen of fyue enſeignes of footemen, who made a long ſkirmiſhe: and ſeeing in the meane while that the Catholikes were ready to charge him, comming betwéene the Prince and him, turned his face right vpon them, and with certeyne Cornettes whiche were with him, preſſed vppon them ſo hoatly, that he brought to the ground a great nū
                  ber,

and ſo paſſed further. At the ſame inſtant the Prince, after he had preferred his prayers to God, went to the charge, & with great courage entred the battaille: vpon whō ruſhed a great ſquadron of Reiſtres, & ſet vpō him on the flanck or ſyde: at which charge his horſe was killed and fel vppon him, and his horſemen put to the chaſe, whom the catholiks purſued: albeit as they paſſed further, a french 
                     •
                  entlemā named the L. of S. Iean knew the Prince of Condé, and alſo the L. d'Argence, both which promiſed him to ſaue his lyfe, or to leaue theirs in the aduenture: whervpon as an Archer being deſcended on foote to helpe to ſhifte the Prince from vnder his horſſe, and had ſet him vppon his feete, one named Monteſquion (thought to be the Capteyne of the garde to the Kings brother) knowing the Prince, ſhot him thorough the head with a Piſtolet: the blow entring behynd and came foorth vnder his eye. The Lord Steward a Scot, and Chaſtelier Poitant, after they were taken, were alſo ſtabbed with daggers and murdered: the ſayde Chaſtellier by one named Coſse
                        •
                     us, beſydes whom were ſlayne in

this encounter about .ij. hundreth men, & xi priſoners: amongſt others, the baſtard of Nauarre, the Lorde de la Noue, whoſe horſe was killed at the firſte charge, the L. of Teligni, de la Balbe, de Soubize, & de la Loue. On y• catholikes ſyde were ſlayne ye Counte de la Mirande, the L. de Monſalletz, the Barons of Ingrande and Prunay, with many other.
               After this charge, one part of ye horſmen drew to S. Ieā d'Angely togither wt the Admiral, d'Andelot, ye Coūte de la Rochefoucaut and d Acier, with great numbers of horſmē: the reſt tooke the way to Coygnac.
               
               In this encoūter the Prince had no other footmē than the L. Pluueaux regimēt heretofore mentioned, all the reſte of his footmen was retired by his cōmaundemēt to Iarnac, as being not of mynd to fight y• daye: there was made at Iarnac a Bridge of boates to paſſe the Riuer Charente in tymes of need, ouer which ye footmen ſéeing the ouerthrow paſſed to the other ſyde the riuer, and then brake it in pieces for feare of purſutes, & ſo retired to Coygnac. where were the Princes of Nauarre and Anguyen. The Artillerie led from Coygnac,
                  
was brought thither again, hauing made no great way.
               The ſayd Princes of Nauarre and Anguyen (now Prince of Conde) departed from Cognac the next morning with ſuch horſemen as were retired to them: they arriued the ſame day at Sainctes in Sainctonge, leauing their footmen at Cognac, to maynteyne head againſt the Catholikes, who the morrowe after being the .xv. of Marche, preſented themſelues in battaill before Cognac with horſſemen and footemen, making countenaunce to beſiege it. There was a great ſkirmiſhe on the ſyde of the parke by meane of a ſallie made vpon them by the L. de Baudine, in whiche encounter were lefte deade in the place about two hundreth bodyes, and great numbers hurte, whiche made the Catholykes retire the ſame daye returning to Jarnac.
               
               In the meane whyle, the Admirall vnderſtanding the Princes were retired to Sainctes, went thyther to them, and with the horſemen of their traine, he brought them to S. Iean d'Angely, and from thence to Thome-Charante, whether the Quéene

of Nauarre came to communicate with them of their generall affaires. And now, albeit the vnwoorthyneſ
                     •
                  e of the Princes death, dyd ſo amaze the Gentlemen and Souldiours of the armie, as they ſéemed to wauer in varietie of doubtes, yet the Admirall (no leſſe wyſe than wel aduiſed) knit them againe with newe perſuaſions of courage by all his poſſible meanes. And ſure thys death was ſufficient inough to coole and qualifie ſuch as had no other regard than to the loſſe of ſuch a Gouernour of warre, but conſidering more neare the actions of this Prince, and of how long tyme he hadde bin giuen to the ſincere ſeruice of his God, King, and Coū
                  trey: they aſſured them ſelues more than afore. They are perſuaded, that there nothing happened to him, whiche he did not eyther foreſee or foretell according to the poeſie written in the enſeigne of the companie of his mē of armes in theſe words: PRO CHRISTO ET PATRIA, DVLCE PERICVLVM. And beſides, ye ſaid Prince was wont afore his death to ſay in his familiar talk, y• he attended his ſepulchre in the fields, in a day of battaill.
               The end of the firſt Booke.
            
            
               
               The ſecond Booke, of the laſt troubles and ciuill warres of Fraunce.
               
               
                  THE Prince of Condé thus taken away, & his death no ſmall loſſe to them of the Religion, the Kings Brother, knowing the Princes of Nauarre and d'Anguyen were paſſed the riuer of Botoune, determined to followe them, and in that purpoſe departed from Janac & came to Dampierre where he paſſed the Riuer: he lodged his armie within half a leage of S. Iean d'Angeli, of purpoſe to execute a certeyn enterpriſe within the ſayd towne, by meane of the Capteyn of the Caſtell. In the meane while the Princes armie paſſed Charante as well at Thonye Charante, as at Tallibourgh, kéeping the boates alwayes on their ſyde.
               The Quéene of Nauarre hauing impartedThe Queene of Nauarre returnes to Rochel. certeyn ſpecial admonitions, aſwel to the Prince hir ſonne, as other great lords

& perſonages of eſtate returned to Rochel.
               
               The Kings brother vnderſtanding the ſayd armie was paſſed ouer Charante, and alſo that his enterpriſe vpon the towne of S. Iean d'Angeli, was ſo diſcouered, as hée could not cōmit it to ſafe execution, returned from whence he came, that is, to larnac, Chasteau-neuf and places about Angouleſme, attending his opportunitie to effect an attempt which he had conſpired vpon that towne, and that by meane of the Capteyne of the Parke, which was alſo diſcouered, as hereafter ſhal follow.
               The Princes being now on the other ſyde the riuer Charente, began to ſurueye their forces, viewing firſt their horſmen, and then their footmen in order as hereafter ſhalbe ſhewed. All the horſemen were ſent for in one day into two places: The Prince of Nauarre and the L. Admirall muſtred the battaile, and the d Andelot with the Counte Rochefoucaut, the vantgarde. There were viewed and enhabled about .iiij. thouſand horſmen, wel moūted and armed, wt valiant diſpoſitiō to follow the cauſe to a good end. It was openly red there to al y• horſmē, y• the prince of Nauar
                  
declared himſelfe chief of the armie, with promiſe not to leaue the Campe till aThe othe of the Prince of Nauarre. good and happie peace, and muche leſſe to ſpare his lyfe and goods in that behalfe. This being publiſhed, the horſemen likewiſe proteſted by othe not to departe the armie without his leaue, nor forbeare life or liuing in the aſſiſtance of the quarell.
               
                  PEndureau Capteyn of a hundred lightl'Endureau reuoltes. horſemen, after the laſt conflict, reuolted, and tooke part with the Counte du Lude, Gouernour of Poytou Hee was gréeuous, (after his reuolte) to the proteſtantes in a number of heauie euils, as in pilling and robbing them without reſpecte, and alſo vnder ſhadowe of hys white Caſſakyns, wherwith he yet diſguiſed his people: He tooke the Caſtell of Mont-agu in baſe Poytou, yéelding to the garriſon no other mercie than by the edge of the ſworde. He made many incurſions into Poytou, & anoyed thē with ſuch generall perill, that ye Princes (to ouercome him & his troupes) diſpatched thither the Lorde de la Rocheenard, with xii. Cornettes of horſemen, & the regiments of footmen of ye L. la Mouſſon, Saint Magrin, & Montamma, whoſe

ſtrength & trauel was to ſmal purpoſe, bicauſe y• enimie had a ſpecial ſafetie in his ſingular ſwiftneſſe, as knowing well the ſtraites and compaſſe of that Countrey.
               The Princes being at Sainctes, got intelligēce of the enterpriſe which ye Kings brother ment to execute within Angouleſme, and therevppon (knowing alſo that he was vpon his way thither, diſpatched to intercept that purpoſe) ye Counte Mōtgomery with ten Cornettes of horſemen, ouer & beſydes the regimen of footemen of the Lord Montbrun and Mirabel ſent thither alreadie. The Montgomery, the better to execute his charge, in the beginning of Aprill, ſommoned the ſayd ten Cornets of horſemen to bée before him at Pons, the monday being the .iiii. of Aprill in the euening. At his comming, he found only .vj. Cornets with whō he departed after ſome expectation for the other which were not yet come: he trauailed all y• night, and the next morning was receyued within the Towne of Angouleſme without any let or impedimēt by ye way: ye other .iiii. cornets cōming ſomwhat late to Pons, haſted on ye way after their companie, albeit as they

were néer Chasteau-neuf neyther fearing nor forſeeing any peril, they were charged by a great troupe of horſmen layd of purpoſe in ambuſh to intercept them, and ſo purſued as the chaſe came to 
                     
                        •
                     oygnac, frō whence they returned and founde ſafetie in the ſwiftneſſe of their horſſes. At this encounter the L. de Chaumont, Capteyn of one of the ſayd Cornets, with certeyne other common ſoldiours were taken priſoners, and about .xxx. or xl. ſlayne.
               The Counte Montgomery was no ſooner within Angouleſme, than he began to deuiſe & prouide for the ſafetie of y• town: wherin for his firſt pollicie, he ſurueyed ye wardes and warders of the towne: And bicauſe that thoſe whiche afore made the view and ſearche of the towne, paſſed not by the Parke (whiche is a new building ioyned to the towne) whiche cut of all aduertiſement of any thing done there: the place it ſelf alſo not vnapt to receiue cōpanies, foyſted in by night without knowledge to them of the Towne: The ſaide Montgomery made pierce the walles, and open the gates of that ſyde towards the parke, ſo that alwayes after the ſearchers

of the Towne paſſed and viſyted the gardes of the ſame. He remoued alſo the Capteyne of the ſayd Parke to auoyde treaſon, with order that euery nyght the warders of that place ſhould bée changed.
               The Duke de Roauuois being led priſoner (as you haue heard) to Rochel, and there continuyng tyll the moneth of Januarie, was deliuered vppon hys promyſe to paye within thrée monethes after twentie thouſande Frankes to raunſom, or, in defaulte of eyther the tyme or ſumme, to returne priſoner to Rochell. He fayled and therefore was ſommoned to make good his woorde, which he refuſed, cléering himſelfe by the death of the prince of Conde, to whom, as he had gyuen hys fayth, ſo his death acquited his promiſe. The Kings brother kept ſtill about Angouleſme, albeit vnderſtanding of the preciſe direction of the Montgomery, gaue ouer his further attempt, and departed frōthence the .xij. of Aprill, taking his way to Perigueux, and paſſing by Aubeterre, he tooke ye caſtle by cōpoſition, for whoſe gard the L. of the place dyd enterteyne about a

hundred mē, who enduring only certeyn ſhot of the cānon, yelded themſelues (their lyues ſaued:) wherein notwithſtanding they were abuſed, for that diuerſe were killed, & the L of the place areſted as priſoner: from Aubeterre he drue to Macedan a town of Perigueux, afore the which, as the Lord de Montluc attend him with his forces: ſo ye armie being arriued, they begā to batter with ſuch furie, as a breach was ſpéedily enforced. There were within the town vij. or .viij. ſcore populair ſoul diours, who diſpayring eyther to fil vp the breache, or to kéepe it longer, in reſpecte chiefly of their ſmall numbers, abandoned the town and cloſed themſelues within ye Caſtell being ſufficiently ſtrong: The catholikes being within the Towne, bent their batterie againſt the Caſtell, where they had no ſooner battered a breach, than thei cryed to the aſſaulte. They within ſuſteyned y• firſt aſſault, & like wiſe .ij. others in ye necke of it, repulſing at laſt ye catholiks, wherof a great nūber left their dead bodyes in pawn: thē ye Kings brother (vnder their word of aſſurance) came to parle wt thē, wherin he ſo preuayled, as thei yelded,

reſeruing only their liues, which notwtſtanding were violently taken frō thē al without exception, contrarie to his fayth and word of honor: he loſt at theſe aſſaults a greate companie of ſouldiours with ſundry lordes and captaines of choyce: amongeſtBriſſac ſlaine which was the Conte Briſſac ſtriken with a harque buſh ſhot in the left chéeke: he was a galland gentleman and of great hope amongſt the people, of .xxv. yeares of age when he dyed, and of greate callyng and function in Fraunce. For firſt he was knight of the order, capteyne of fifty men at armes of the kings allowance, Colonel generall ouer the Frenche footemen in the Kings Campe, and gouerned alſo in this iourney a Regimen of .xl. enſeignes of footemen: his brother ſuccéeded hym in moſte of his charges, ſauing the eſtate of Colonell general which was giuen to the Lorde of Stroſsi: there dyed at that ſiege the Conte Pompadon, with many otherConte Pompadon ſlain. to the number of .v. or .vi. hundred.
               
                  Mucedan being taken in this moneth of Aprill, the kings brother toke way agayne to Angoulmois, and the Lorde of Montluc returned to his gouernement,

and charge.
               The princes horſemē being thus viewed and muſtered, they would alſo ſuruey their footmen, in which buſines the d Andelot was chiefly vſed, and therfore immediately diſpatched, to the end he might peruſe the garriſons in euery town of their obedience: he began his firſt trauell in this charge vpon the ende of Aprill, folowing the garriſons and muſtring them in his owne preſence. In the beginning of May, be returned to Saincts, feling himſelf ſomwhat ſick, the ſame growing ſo vpon him as he dyed the ſaterday the .vii. of the ſame 1569. to the lamentable gréef & diſpleſure of the whole army, as being noted a moſte wyſe and valiant gentleman called commonly the knight without feare: his office of general Colonel of the French footmen was giuen to the Lord d'Acyer: his cōpany of men of armes ſince his death hath bē gouerned by the lord of Beauuais his lieutenant. It was thought he was poyſoned, and the Phyſitions that viewed his body were of the ſame opinion.
               Immediatly after, in the ſame moneth and at the ſame place dyed the Lorde of

                  Boccarde hauyng lyne long ſick, he was ofThe Lorde Boccard dead. no leſſe counſell in matters of conſultation, than of courage in the execution, his eſtate of the great. Maſter of the artillerie was giuen to the Lorde Ianlis his ſon in law, with his cornet of horſmen.
               And now, to ouerſlip nothing that was executed in this laſte Apryll, there is in the mountaynes of Daup
                        〈…〉
                     
                   a Caſtell nere to B
                        •
                     yanſon, wherein the King keepes an ordinarie dead pay of certeyn numbres of ſouldiers: A capteyn called Colombyn borne in Grenoble, vnderſtāding by certein of the borough of Oyſans that moſt part of the ſayd dead pay men were iſſued oute of their charge, toke the ſayd Caſtel, and finding no reſiſtance other than the very capteyne of the place, who yelded beyng hurt with a ſhot, he made him ſelfe lorde of it, where neglecting one firſt and moſt neceſſarie pollicie in a victor, hee rather laboured to deface the images, than to furniſhe the place with cōuenient prouiſion, which being not vnmarked of certein euil neigh bors, purlewing vpō ye caſtle, they forthwt enuironed him with a ſiege, & ſo cut off his vittell, wherof they knew ye caſtel had but

ſlender ſtore: Their ſiege continuyng about xv. days, enforced him at laſt to render the place vpon compoſition and onely reſeruation of lyfe, whiche notwithſtanding was not kept, for that all his ſouldiors were cut in peeces, and he only led on lyue to Grenoble.
               
               After the generall view and muſter of the princes footemen, the Lorde de Pilles, (returned now from G
                        •
                     ſcoyg
                        •
                     e) was ſent to ſeaſe vpon the yle of Medoc, a rich yle lying betwéene Rochell and Bordeaux, conteyning in length aboute .xvj. or .xvij. leagues, and .iiij. or .v. leagues in breadth: he prouided neceſſary boates to paſſe the ryuer of Gironde, and embarkyng him ſelfe with .ij. thouſand footemen, diſcended into the ſayd yl
                     •
                  , and tooke hauen without any let: he made himſelfe maiſter of the yle vpon the ſodayne and vnlooked for, fynding great foyſon of riches, where with he & his ſouldiours loaded themſelues plentifully.
               By meane of this Ile, he beſieged Bourg a town in Bordelois, but being ſpeedily called back by the Princes, he raiſed his ſiege and came agayne to the Campe: At this ſiege died of a ſhot in his ſhoulder the Lord

                  Valpheuiere lieutenant to the late Lorde d'Andelot of his Regiment of footemen, whoſe regimen was trāſlated to the Lord of Rouray gentleman of Fraunce. This was vpon the ende of May.
               The kings brother, being now returned into the contrey of Angoulmois and after he had ſomwhat releued his armie on that ſyde to Villebois, ſent to ſommon the town of Angouleſme by a trompet, wherin hae was refuſed, & ſo tooke way towards Berry to ioyne his force with the Duke d'Aumall beeing in the ſayd contrey: the Conte Mont-gomerey charged vpon the tayle of his campe, and diſcomfited certen of them.
               The Lady Marquiſe of Rottelyn, vnderſtāding of the death of the prince of Conde her ſonne in law, put her vpon the way to come to Rochell, wher was the widowprinceſſe her daughter: ſhe paſſed to Sainct Iean d'Angely, and ſo to Thony vpon Boutonne wher the ſaid Princeſſe met her, and ſo returned into Frāce without her daughter, whome ſhe purpoſed to haue with her. But the Princeſſe excuſed her vppon hir children, which were then at Rochell whether ſhe alſo returned it was thought the

Lady Marquiſe came to entreate a peace, whiche was not ſo, bycauſe hir occaſion was only as is aſoreſayd: this was in the ende of May. 1569.
               In the firſt kindlyng of theſe warres, the Princes hauing true intelligence of diuers numbres of ſtraungers entred the Realme for the ſtrengthe of the Catholikes, determined alſo to fortifie their armie by the like meane: And therfore knowing that the Prince Wolfgange Duke de deux Pons had erected great numbres of men of armes, as well on foote as on horſeback, the better to defende his owne countreys, ſente to hym with requeſte to yelde them ſuccoures in their ſo vrgent and extreme neceſſitie, bothe with his armie preſently in point, and alſo ſuch other powers as hee might poſſibly leute, whervnto the ſaid duke condeſcended with promyſe to releeue them with all his forces, which albeit at that tyme were not fully aſſembled, yet he forgat not within ſhort tyme after to put an armie in redineſſe to come into France, wherof the duke d'Aumale (lying in Lorayne) béeing enformed by ſpecial Intelligicers, diſpatched forthwith

a Gentleman of his, by whome hée aduertiſed the Duke of the common brute that paſſed of the diligence he vſed in the leuyes of men of warre in Almayne and al to aſſiſt the conſpiracies of ſuch as arme themſelues ageynſt the crowne of France, with diſplayed warre ageynſt the King, which for his parte as he neyther had nor woulde beleue, ſo lookyng neerer into his magnificence and partes of a Prince, hée iudged hym of no inclination to fauoure rebelles ageynſt theyr ſoueraigne maieſtie, conſideryng withall, the ancient reſpect of amitte ſo long continued betwéene the houſe of the electors of the countie Palatines of Rhine, & the ſcepter of France: Albeit, his maieſtie deſiring to vnderſtand an abſolute truth, gaue him ſpecial charge to diſpatche this ſpeciall Meſſanger, hee alſo hauyng authoritie of his Maieſtie to withſtande the entrie of any ſtranger, 
                     •
                  o releue the enterpriſe of the ſayd rebell
                     •
                  s, which hée hoped to accompliſhe, or elſe to leaue his lyfe in the charge.
               The Duke forbare to anſwer ſpéedily, vntyll his armye were fully in poynte, albeeit after that hée hadde receyued hys

                  Reiſtres, he beganne to marche towardes the Conte of Burgogne, and as he lay vppon the frontiers of Fraunce, tarying for his Launceknyghtes, hée aunſwered the d'Aumales letter, which he ſent forthwith to the Kyng: In the beginning hee layde afore hym how in the yeeres afore, many Reistermaisters paſſyng thorowe his Duchy without leaue, gréeued ſo his countrey that the continuall complaints of his people forced hym to drawe into companyes of armed men, as well on horſbacke as on foote, to withſtande further offence to his people: And that nowe in reſpecte his couſyns and dearely beloued Princes of Nauarre and Conde, haue lamentably imparſed with hym the vniuſte quarell, vrged vppon them, as well to enforce their lyues and goods, as to depriue the exerciſe of their Religion contrary to the kings faith and playne proteſtation of his Edicts: and that not onely they, but all the Nobilitie and others, profeſſing the ſame Religion, haue and doo endure myſerable oppreſſions, as eſtraunged from theyr owne houſes, thruſte oute of their charges and offices, theyr poſſeſſions and welthes,

conſiſked into the Kings handes: laſtly, that there be raiſed huge companies of men of warre aided with ſundry ſortes of ſtraungers to cut them in pieces, as in other times of open hoſtilitie: in theſe reſpectes together with their earneſt motion and requeſt for ſuccours, and laſtly vpon an vpright view and conſideration of their preſent calamitie, he coulde, nor ought do no leſſe than ayde them: And for their partes, the better to auouche their integrities in refuſing all attempts, aſpiring preiudicially to ye crown of France, (as the d'Aumalles letters did ſiniſterly ſuggeſt) the ſayd Princes haue proteſted by letters, which he kepeth ſealed wyth their owne handes, that if (at his being in Fraunce) he ſee or know any inclination in them to conſpire in any ſorte againſt the crowne, that he would not only draw away his ſuccours, but conuert thē to the enemy and cōtrary ſide, the rather to reuenge their diſloyaltie: which makes him iudge of the Princes ſide, & beleue y• they are not only far frō the ſlaundrous impoſitions of their enemies, but alſo of vnfained deſire, rather to reſt quietly in their

houſes, than follow ſo harde and doubtful a warre, wherunto they haue ben drawen of force as to defend the violēt oppreſſion of their malicious enemies: he alledged beſides, that when his Coſine the duke Caſmir erected his army in Almaign in the like cauſe, he was alſo vntruly informed (as of purpoſe to draw him from ſuccouring the Prince of Conde) that it was againſt the maieſtie royall that the ſaid Prince did conſpire, which notwithſtanding was founde otherwayes, as appeareth by his maieſties edictes of peace both firſt and laſt, approuing always the actions of the ſayd Prince as done for the ſeruice of his maieſtie. And to take away all ſuſpiciō, he declared, that beſides that, his meanyng was to ſuccour the ſayde Princes of Nauarre and Conde, his enterpriſe in comming into Fraunce, ſtretched alſo to relieue the little ones of the Religion diſperſed into their ſeuerall miſeries, to whome of very duety (being a Chriſtian Prince) he coulde do no leſſe than offer and lende his hande to leade them to Jeſus Chriſt. And to the ende his maieſtie may vnfainedly reſolue in

the integritie of his purpoſe, and that he vndertakes not this iourney to ſpoile his ſubiectes or make pray of their welthes, or for any other perticular profit, he proteſted that if his maieſtie would graunt them a ſafe vſe of their religion with a frée exerciſe of the ſame without limitation and diſtinction of perſones and places, together with aſſuraunce of their goodes, honours, charges, and eſtates, hée would not onely returne and diſmiſſe his army, but alſo defray the whole charges of the ſame and the ſayde Reistremaisters in their paſſage, amountyng in all to aboue a hundred thouſande crownes, proteſting for ende, that if (in refuſing hys iuſte and reaſonable offers) the Quarell doo aggrauate by his comming into Fraunce, to wype hys handes in innocencie of all imputations hereafter, and the fault to be layd vpon the authors and chiefe Councellers of the warre, beyng about his maieſtie.
               The Duke hauing now receiued his Launceknightes, entered into Fraunce, and paſſyng by Bourgonguē, came to Charyte, béeyng coaſted ſundrye tymes

both behinde and before by the armies of of the dukes d'Aumall and Nemors, without attempting any thing vpon hym: he arriued without let before Charyte, theCharyte beſieged and taken. xvj. of May, which he battred ſo vehemētly that he enforced forthwith a breach, in the meane while the lord of Mouy, paſſing ouer Loere a little aboue the ſayd towne, with thrée hundred harquebuſiers, won the ſuburbes towardes the bridge, the ſame ſo occupying and amazing thé that were beſieged, that the Duke entred the breache, and put the whole garriſon to the ſword: this towne was taken in good tyme, becauſe that if it had lingred neuer ſo little, the Duke d'Aumalle being very nere with ſuccours, had endaungered the enterpriſe. The towne was no ſooner taken, than he was diſcouered not farre of with xviij. hundred horſemen, who comming to ſhort to withſtand the dukes entrie, returned in hope to hinder hym to ioyne with the princes army, by meanes that hee mette and aſſembled wyth the kyngs brothers power, who knitte together for this purpoſe in the countrey of Berry.
               
               
                  In the ende of May, the Princes informed of the approche of the Duke de deux Pons, and the taking of Charyte, began to marche to ioyne with his army, and leauing the Lord de la Noue, to gouerne in the countreys of Poyctou and Sainctonge, toke their way by Angoulmois, directly to Perigueux, and as they paſſed thorow that countrey, the Lord of Chaumontes lyght horſemen, with certaine companies of footemen, tooke the towne of Noutron belonging to the Quéene of Nauarre, wherin were killed aboute foure ſkore men that defended it: this was the ſeuenth of June. 1569.
               The morrow after the ſayd Princes diſpatched the Counte Montgomery into Gaſoyne, to commaunde ouer the army of the Uicounts, who otherwayes would not agree, as not acknowledging one aboue an other: he tooke his way by Solliac, where hee paſſed the riuer of Dordone, and ſo beneath Cadenat, he paſſed alſo ouer Lot and came to Montauban without any let.
               They of the town of Perigueux, fearing the comming of the princes army, deſired

the lord Montluc to ſend them ſuccours, to whome he diſpatched immediatly the Knight Montluc his ſonne with xij. enſignes of footemen, with the which he entred the towne the iiij. of June.
               In this meane while the Princes army kepte the way drawing to Lymoſyn, & the duke de deux Pons haſted by great iorneys to ioyne with them, paſſyng the riuer of 
                     Ʋiene two leagues aboue Lymoges. The Catholikes had ſent thither two C. ſhot to defend y• paſſage, who were all cut in pieces by the lord de Mouy, the ix: of this moneth, on which day the princes army arriued at Chalus a town in Lymoſyn, departing the next day to ioyne with the army of the Duke de deux Pons in a village within two leagues of Chalus belonging to the Lord d'Eſcars, gouernor of the ſaid countrey.
               The lord Admirall accompanied with two hundred horſemen, went where the duke was to ſalute him: ye duke enduring certaine fittes of an ague not many days afore, and not cured as yet, died the xj. ofThe Duke de deux Po
                        •
                     s dead. this month 1569. in a village thre leagues from Lymoges: afore his death, he called

before him the chief and principals of his army, with whome he communicated in many pointes, but chiefly in perſuaſion and requeſt to purſue the purpoſe of their comming into France, leauing for their generall leader in his place, the Counte Wolrard de Manſfeld, afore his lieuetenāt generall: his body was caried to the town of Angouleſme, to be there buried.
               In the army of the ſaid late duke, wereDeſcription of the dukes camp xxviij. cornets of horſemen, conteining viij. thouſand and fiue hundreth Reistres, whereof were Colonels, Hans Boucq, Reignold Grac, Henry d'Eſtam, and Hans de Theres: ſixe thouſand Launceknights wel armed on foote, and for the moſt part Pikemen, deuided into xxvij. enſignes, wherof were Colonels, the Lord de Grauillar, and the Lord Guieryn Ganſgorff baron of Grelezee, beſides ij. M. horſmen and ten enſignes of footemen of Frenchmen, wherof was Colonell (touching the footemen) one of ye ſonnes of the Lord de Bricquemau. There were alſo in y• ſayd army diuers perſonages of high eſtate, as the prince of Orange, his ſonne, the Counties Lodouike & Hēry de Naſſau, his brethern,

the Lord de Moruilliers, the Marques of of Renel, the Lordes of Mouy and Eſters ney, beſides many others: there were alſo xix. pieces of artillerie, and they either maine péeces, or field pieces, with others ſomewhat leſſe, wherofhe left two of the greateſt at Charyte. There were in theDeſcription of the princes army. Princes army about thirtene thouſand harquebuſiers, beſydes Pikes, wherof were great numbers, about iiij. thouſand horſemen, ſixe cannons and two meane peeces.
               The kings brother nowe hauyng receiuedSuccours from the Pope. from the Pope two thouſand horſmen, and foure thouſande footemen Italians vnder the conduit of the Counte de ſainct Fiour, came to Lymoges with his army, fronting alwais as néere as he could the Almaignes, but not medling with thē.
               About this tyme the Quéene mother accompanied wt the cardinals of Bourbon & Loraine, came to Lymoges, & there deſirous to ſée in battel the army of the dukeThe Quene mother encourageth the ſouldiours. her ſonne, ſhe viſited the battels & ſquadrons of his horſmen one after an other, perſwading them to omitte noduetie, to continue their ſeruice to his maieſty, & ſo

departed the campe, and went to Lymoges, where ſhe remained certaine dayes, and then retired to the Court.
               The ſame day the Lord de la Loue marſhall of the Princes campe with his regiment of horſſemen, was ſent to Aeſſe vppon Vienne, to garde the paſſage, whereof the kings brother hauing intelligence, came the next day being the .xi. of June, and encamped wythin a league of the ſayd Aeſſe, making out the ſame day certaine numbers of ſhot to vndertake the ſkirmiſh, who being repulſed, taryed not long there, but returned to the Campe: the .xij. day arriued at the ſayde Aeſſe, the footemen of the vauntgarde of the Princes and thether came alſo other ſupplies of ſhotte from the Caholikes campe, and that in great numbres: they at their firſt comming repulſed certaine ſhotte which were within the Subburbs on the other ſide Vyenne, albeit they were forthwith reſkued, and the other driuen to retire, the ſkirmiſh endured lōg and hot, deuouring of the Catholike ſide about .CC. mē, and of the Princes part only twentie or thirtie.
               
                  Within two dayes after the Princes army marched toward S. Tirier la Perche, in the ſaid coūtrey of Lymoſyn, of purpoſe to refreſh there y• Lanceknights, weryed with ſo lōg trauell: the kings brother folowed them, albeit ſo far off as it was the xxij. of June afore he came neer the Princes, & then lodged .iij. leagues frō the ſayd S. Tirier, wher the ſaid Princes wer, who ſent for their army as well footemen as horſſmen to come and campe there. The xxiij. of the ſame month he aduāced more néere them, lodging within a league & an half of S. Tirier in a vilage called la Roche, the ſame arguing to the Princes, that he wold giue them battell the next morow, wherfore they attended to ſée if he would come any néerer, which he did not, albeit the Princes ſent for their armie to be ready in the firſt ſhew of the day, who accordingly marched in good order to the ſayd place de la Roche, where forthwyth they beſtowed themſelues in ſquares: the forlorne hope were appoynted to marche both on the right & left hand: they of the right hand wer led by the Lord de Pilles, whoſe Regiment made the firſt

wing, the others of the left hand were guided by the Lord de Rouray: the Lorde de Mouy with his regiment of horſſmen kept the left hand, and the Lords de Bricquemau, & de la Loue with their regimēts of horſmen, the righthād, making y• wing of the vauntgard: the Lanceknights wer ringed in two battailes, the one a vauntgarde and the other a battell: the vauntgard caryed .viij. field péeces which were planted before their battell.
               The ſkirmiſh began of y• Lord of Pilles ſide againſt the Lord de Stroſsi, who with ij .M. ſhot was behinde a cloſe pale, & ſent thether for the defence of the paſſage, he had a great aduantage vpon the Lord de Pilles, becauſe his harquebuſhears ſhot in couert from behind the ſayd cloſe pale, & the ſayde Lord de Pilles was open & in a high place. Beſides, the Lord of Stroſsi had to backe him in time of néede .iiij. cornets of Italians, who ſéeing y• the forlorne hope of the Lord de Pilles could not diſcharge their péeces by reaſon of the rain, charged ſo hotly vpon him, as they forced him to retire a hundreth paſe within the woode, killing at that charge about ten

of his ſouldiours, albeit being reſkued by two cornets of light horſmen of the Capteines la Motte and Brilliam Gaſcones,
                   repulſed with equall violence the Italians, and put them to flight, in which meane while, the ſayd forlorn hope renued more hotly the ſkirmiſhe, and yet did neyther hurt nor amaze greatly the ſayd Lord Stroſsi, which cauſed the admiral to draw thither ward, who aſſone as he had ſurueied the place, cauſed to come to him ye ſhot led by the Lord de Rouray.
               
               They began to ſkirmiſhe on the left hand againſt the Lord de Stroſsi, beating him on the ſide: with conſtraint at laſt to habandon his ſhade and recule: whervppon the Captaines la Mote and Brilliam, with many other companies of horſmen, gaue vpon his troupes, and put thē to the chaſe, wherin the Lord Stroſsi was taken and led to the Admirall, who cauſedThe Lord Stroſsi taken. the victorie to be purſued to a litle riuer running faſt by, and many ſouldiors folowed the fortune of this chaſe euen within the tents of the catholikes camp, and hard to their enſeignes.
               On the left hande the Lord de Mouy
                  
offred to charge certaine Cornets of Italian horſſmen, who refuſed to abide him, and ſo he returned backe.
               It rained ſo vehemently that there could be no vſe of any harquebuſhe, ſo that without any other thing done, the army retired, the Stroſsi loſt and left dead on the place about .v. or .vj. hundred: Amongſt others of accompt was ſlaine hisStroſies men ſlaine. lieuetenaunt, called the Lord de Sainct Loup, with thirtie aſwell Captaines in théefe, as lieuetenantes and enſigne bearers, whoſe Targets remained alſo vpō the place: Of them of the Religion were ſlaine and hurte of all ſortes only fiftie, wherof were two Captains of footemen called Peyrol and la Merie Dauphynois,
                   this was the .xxv. of June. 1569.
               The morow after foure hundreth Italian horſſemen, with certain Pikemen of the mē of armes of the Duke de Nemors, came to ſée if the Princes armie wer diſcamped as the kings brother was aduertiſed, as they approched neere the campe, they were diſcouered by the watch, and ſo hotly ſet vppon, as they were enforced to retire out of order, ſome ſlaine & ſome

taken priſoners.
               The .xxvij. of this moneth, the ſayde Princes armie were driuen to diſcampe for want of vittailes, drawing towarde Perigueux, to relaue themſelues.
               The Lord de Moruillier, comen out ofThe death of the Lord 
                        •
                     f Moruil. 
                  Almayne as you haue heard with the late Duke of Deux Pons, was ſicke in this time at Angouleſme, of a hotte Ague, the ſame preſſing him ſo ſore, that within few dayes he dyed in the ſayd towne.
               The Counte du Lude gouernoure of Poyctou, hauing aſſembled certaine troupes aſwell of Touraine, and Aniou, as of Poyctou, departed from the Towne of Poyctiers, and the twelfth of this moneth of June, planted his ſéege before Nyort,
                  The ſiege of Nyort. wherein was gouernoure the Lord de la Broſse.
               
               The firſt day of the ſiege the LordeThe Lord pluucau ſuccours it. 
                  de Pluueau, with his Regiment of footemen, and his companie of light horſmen, entred the Towne in deſpite of the Lord du Lude, who notwithſtanding thoſe ſuccoures, began his batterie the next morning on the ſide of the toure de la Pigalle, and folowed it forth with with an aſſault:

which was ſo valyantly repulſed, that, he ſeeing the breache filled vp wyth ſuche ſpéede, remoued his batterie, and forced a breach in an other place, albeit he durſt not make it good with an aſſault, but vnderſtanding of ſupplies of ſuccor at hand raiſed his ſeege the .xxij. of the moneth of June.
               He hadde foure Cannons and two meane péeces: Comming againe to Poyctiers, he left within S. Meſent, the Lord de Anuouy, maiſter of the campe of the Regiment of the late Counte Briſſac, with ſuche companies as he had with the ſayd Regiment, with two Canons, two field péeces and certain other munitions, leading the reſt to Poyctiers.
               
               At this ſiege, the Lord de Pluueau was lightly hurte wyth a ſhotte, and ſoone healed againe: Of the du Ludes ſide were ſlayne the Captaines Flogeat, Gorbon a Gentleman of Sainctonge, Freſouet la Marche,
                   the Captaine Colonel of the ſayd Regiment, the maſter of the mines, and Morlou guider of the Artillerie cariage, with a great numbre of footemen.
               The Lord of Teligni, was ſēt for to go

to the reſkue of Nyort, with four cornets of Reiſtres, with certeine other cornets of Frenchmen, and the regiment of fotemen of the Lord Bricqueman the yonger. Notwithſtanding afore he came there, the ſiege was raiſed, whereuppon they went to the ſayd S. Meſent, to intercept the artillerie: which in the end they abandoned, as héereafter ſhall be noted.
               The Princes armie being in the coū
                  trey of Perigueux was ſtill purſued, but farre off, by the catholikes, keping on the left hand: The Princes entred by compoſition within the town of Brantbome, they toke alſo two Caſtles in the ſayde Countrey, the one belonging to the Byſhop of Perigueux, and therfore commonly called the Biſhops caſtle, the other called la Chapelle, in which wer killed about two hundred and thrée ſcore men, wyth like numbre of the popular ſorte withdrawne thither, and thereabout.
               Upon the beginning of July, the Princes army departed from the countrey of Perigueux drawing to Confluence or Confolance, a little towne vppon Vienne. Neare vnto the which is a Caſtle called Chabauey,
                  
then in queſtion betwéen the vidame of Chartres & the Lord de Montluc: within the Caſtle was a companie of footemen, whoſe captaine refuſed to open the gates to the vit tailers of the Princes armie, & therfore the vauntgarde came and beſéeged them, and the ſame day battred and tooke the caſtle by aſſault, putting the ſoldiours to the ſword: The captaine onely was taken, who promiſed for his ranſom twentie thouſande frankes, and withall to cauſe to bee ſent home M Peter Viret, miniſter of the Goſpell, taken priſonner in the territories of the Queene of Nanarre: The caſtle after it was taken, the ſixth of July, was burnt to the grounde. Within two dayes after the Lord de Mouy entred by compoſition the towne of S. Genais in Poictou: one chéefe couenant in the compoſition was, that the Towne promiſed to pay ten thouſand Franks, ſo that their goodes were not put to the pillage or ſpoile, wherein they were duely delt withall, as they alſo paid truly their money. You haue heard how the kings brother purſued the Princes campe into Perigueux, who now ſéeing (as it ſéemed)

into their ſeuerall purpoſes, turned away, and paſſing by Lymoſin and Berry, came into Touraine: Being at Loches, he licenced a great number of his horſmen, to recreate themſeiues abrode vntill the firſt of October, by which occaſion his campe ſo diminiſhed, as he had not about him of the Frenche nation aboue a thouſand or .xij. C. horſſemen, and very fewe footmen: almoſt all the Captains went to relieue and encreaſe their companies.
               The Princes being aduertiſed, that the towne of Chaſtelleraut, conteyned not aboue thrée ſcore ſoldiours in garde, diſpatched thither the Lord dé la Loue wyth his regiment of horſſemen, and a company of Harquebuſhers on horſſebacke: At hys firſt commyng he ſommoned the towne, which without muche reſiſtance, was rendred vnto him, reſeruing onely that their goodes ſhould not be ſacked, nor any the inhabitants hurt, vppon which agréement the gates were opened, & the Lord de la Loue entred at one gate, and the Lord Villiers Knight of the order, and gouernor of the towne, iſſued out of an other, Uppon the end of thys moneth, the

Lord de Sanſac, with .iiij. or .v. M. footemen & certein horſmen of the Catholikes, beſéeged the Towne of Charyte, he battered it ſo vehemently, that wythin ſmall time he made a breach, and ſodainly marched to the aſſault, frō whence he was repulſed with the loſſe of .v. C. men, the reſt retiring from the aſſault to the artillery, wherof one of ſmal experience let fal his match wtin a calk of cânon pouder, which in a moment fluſht vp ſuche a generall flame & fire, yt it burned a great nūbre of ye ſaid ſoldiers, & blew one on y• other ſide the riuer of Loere vpon the grauel, and ſo burned him to death in euery mās ſight. They yt defended the towne, made great reſiſtance, & gréeued many of the Catholikes by their ſallies which they made out of the towne: wherupon the Lord de Sanſac not able to force thē, was cōſtrayned to raiſe his ſéege, hearing wtal, that ye Princes had prouided to ſuccor thē with iij. or .iiu. M. horſſemen, which notwithſtanding was rather incerteine, than a true report.
               After the taking of ye caſtle of Chabaney, the princes army toke way to Luzignan,
                  
a ſtrong caſtle, and (as it is ſaid) builde
                     •
                   long ſince by Melluſigne: the gard of this Caſtle were two hundreth ſouldiors vnder the Lord de Guron, captaine and kéeper of the ſame, who, being ſommoned to render it, refuſed, by reaſon whereof it was beſeged the fourtenth day of the ſaid moneth, when the battery began very furiouſly with ſixe Cannons on that ſide to the Parke, they within being ſore ſhaken with the Cannons, and almoſt four ſcore of their ſoldiours ſlaine, a breache being beaten open and flat, and the regiments of footemen in order of battel ready to offer the aſſault, began to faynt in
                     
                        〈…〉
                     a
                        ••
                     le 
                        〈…〉
                     ig hart, demaunding parley, and immediatly rendred the place vnder this compoſition, that the ſaid Lord Guron wyth the Lord de Cluſeaux, ſhould depart with bag and baggage, & the ſouldiours with theyr liues and only ſword and dagger: within the caſtle were found foure Cannons, two field péeces with great ſtore of munition: and as ſome ſay, huge ſummes of money. They eſtabliſhed there as gouernor the Lord de Myrambeau, a gentlemā of the Country of Sainctonge, with .vj. hundreth

harque buſheares to garde it.
               The Baron of Adretz, who had bin at the d'Aumals camp, and ſeen his enſignes but euill folowed in reſpect of his ſlender numbers of men in his regiment, tooke way to Dauphine, very ſlenderly accompanied, without diſplaying any banner. Againſt his returne the Lord de Gordes gouernor ther, had put in readineſſe two Enſignes of footemen to ſend into Languedock, whereof he preſented the conduction to the ſayd Baron of Adretz, who refuſing ſuch charge, the expedition was vſed by Captaine Meſtral, who led them thither vppon the beginning of July.
               About this time the Queene of Nauar, the Prince hir ſonne, the Prince of Conde, the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen with others that accompanyed them, preſented a requeſt to the King, entreating an aſſured peace of the preſent troubles, which, for the importance of the matter, is héer contained in euery ſinguler woord and poynt as foloweth.
               ¶Sir, it is a thing no leſſe ſtrange, thanThe Proteſtants requ to the king for peace. almoſt incredible, that amongſt ſo many people put vnder your obedience by

the reſolute wil and prouiſion of God, as a bliſſed pawne and witneſſe of his bountifull regard to wards you, and the ſame contēding in ordinary vaūt to be ſo dearly enclined to the▪ vpright proceeding of your affaires, and preſeruation of your crown, ther is not one, no not one amōgſt ſo many nūbers, that once offreth to put himſelf in indeuor to quenche or qualifie this vnnatural fire ſo burning daily with in your reaime, as there lackes little of the vtter confuſion of the ſame: It is alſo no leſie true than the other maruelous, y• of the contrary, infinite numbres do trauel infinitely, not only to kindle y• which is already burſt into flame, but alſo by ſondry ſortes of artificiall ſleightes, doe ſtudye to entertaine, aggrauate and encreaſe it.
               
                  
                     •
                   And albeit it ought firſt rather to mouewhome troubles 
                        •
                     t to be 
                        •
                     uted. from ſuche, who of a galantneſſe of ſtomacke, and to ſatiſfie ſome particular reſpect in them ſelues, haue incēſed theſe troubles againſt the will of your maieſtie, making bothe peace and warre at their pleaſure: then from thoſe, who beſides

they are iniuſtly aſſailed and purſued in their conſciences, honors, lyues and liuelyhoods, haue no other purpoſe & meaning, than to defend their liues agaynſt ſuch heauy and violent tyrānies, lothing alwayes troubles and emotions, & louing with a ſingular zeale bothe peace it ſelf, and ſuche as laboure to entertaine it: yet the Quéene of Nauarre, the Prynce her ſonne, the Prince of Conde, with the Lordes, Knightes, and Gentlemen that accompany them, moued (afore the reſt) with a naturall bonde and affection to your Maieſtie, and preſeruation of your Crowne and Realme, neyther can nor will ſuſpend or deferre any longer, to ſearche and apply for their partes (as alwayes they haue done) ſuch moſt propre and conuenient remedies, as they thought moſt apt to warrant and defend this your realme from a lamentable ſubuerſion, wherewith it both hath bene, and is preſently threatned: And as in reſpect to eſtabliſhe a peace and publike tranquillitie, they haue hetherto more forwardly enclined than the reſt, happening by

that meanes into ſuch ſtrange perils and aduētures, as if God had not kept an eye vpon them, there had now remayned but a lamentable remembrance of their general confuſion: ſo theſe things well conſidered with their ſeueral circumſtances, they haue ſmall reaſon of hope, and leſſe cauſe of expectation to effect that which ſo earneſtly they deſire, if God (the incliner of al harts) change not the mindes of their enimies that gouerne you, and giue them a diſpoſition to deſire and embrace peace. The ſaid Princes, Lords, Knights wt others parties to this humble requeſt, perſuading rather that in place to allow this their franke and liberall will, with their duetiful indeuor to aduaunce a perfect vnitie and peace amongſt your ſubiects, they ſhalbe charged with ſlaunders and ſiniſter interpretation of their godly purpoſe, as héere to fore they haue bene vſed by thoſe who neither hate nor feare any thing more than to ſée this reconcilement.
               And as the ſayd Princes with ye other parties to this motion, haue neither had nor holdē any thing in more dear regard,

than the publication to your maieſtie frō time: to time of their actiōs & procedings, the ſame as impreſſions and witneſſes of their ſingular deſire to liue and die in the naturall obedience and awe of your maieſtie, and withall to make known afore the whole face of the world, both how far their hartes and wils be from the ſlaundrous impoſitions of the Cardinal of Loraine and his adherentes (penſionarie miniſters and naturall enemies to your crown) & alſo that by their forces (wherunto they haue bene drawne with their great euill will and griefe) they intende no other than to maintain their religion, liues, honours, and ſuch portions of goods as God hath appointed to their ſhares in this world: Euen ſo they perſuade that ſuch conſideraciōs, neither can nor ought to hinder their vttermoſt endeuor to purſue and purchaſe the effect of ſo bleſſed and neceſſary a peace to this realme, and yelding withall vnfained teſtimonie of the humble and reuer
                     •
                  t reſpect they owe to your maieſtie, which they had long ere this put in practiſe and proofe, were not that their enemies would thinke & perſuade

others to beleue, that the onely neceſſitie of their caſe haue induced them to it, ſéeing firſt their vntrue perſuaſion to your maieſtie, that there were no leuies of men of warre in Almaigne for the ſuccours of the Princes: Secondly, that if any ſuch were, yet the Realme was of ſufficient meane and force to withſtande their entrie: Thirdly, if they did enter, it was impoſſible to ioyne with the princes in reſpect of ſo many déepe riuers and paſſages of daunger betwene the one and other campe: Fourthly, albeit their armies did knitte and ioyne, yet, (the princes pouertie cōſidered) the charges could not be long defrayed, nor the plentifully long contented: ſeming by theſe reaſons to attend & temporiſe, till they had both ioyned & payed their ſayd forces, & aſſembled others which were diſperſed, and (as the world knoweth) of ſuch numbers and facultie, as beſides their habilitie to reſiſt eaſily their enemies, they wanted neither way nor meane to execute any wicked attempte if they had had any will, as is ſuggeſted and impoſed vpō them: If then in the former troubles, the late prince of

                  Conde with the Lordes, knightes, and gentlemen of his part, receiued the condicions of peace concernyng onely the matter of religion and libertie of their conſciences, and that immediatly after the death of the Duke of Guyſe and Marſhall Sainct Andre, and the late Conſtable of Fraunce taken priſoner, beyng thrée principall leaders of the army: if alſo in the laſt riſing, as ſoone as was offered to the ſayd prince and other lordes and gentlemen of his company the reſtabliſhmēt of the exerciſe of religion, notwithſtanding their great troupes and ſtrength of ſtraungers ioyned with them, and vpon the very point to aſſaulte the towne of Chartres in the view and face of the enemies campe, which was for the moſt diſordred, if at the only ſound & pronoūcing of peace made by a trumpet ſēt vnder the name of your maieſty, the ſayd prince did not only forbeare ye aſſalt, but alſo raiſed forth with his ſiege & retired his army, reping notwithſtāding of ſo redy obediēce, but a bloudy peace & promiſe full of infidelitie: if alſo during the ſame ſturre, the morrow after the battel at Sainct Denys:
                  
where both the Prince had the better, & the Conſtable principall leader of the army was ſlaine. The ſaid Prince diſpatched to your maieſtie the Lord de Theliguy, aſwel 
                     •
                  o warne you of the ruine and deſolacion threatning from the inſtaunt your realme if the ſtraungers were ſuffred to enter houering there vpō the frō
                  tiers, as alſo to mediate and ſollicite in means and remedies to knit an abſolute peace onely in the cauſe of religion: if (in ſhort) your edictes haue bene alwais publiſhed, & the peace accorded, at ſuch times as they of the religiō, (if they would haue abuſed ye opinion of your purpoſe) might, in reſpect of their forces, perſuade and beleue, that aſwell in all your parleyes and treaties of peace, there was no other mencion than of the matter of religion, as alſo that their enemies haue not bene brought to it but by neceſſitie, being vnable by open force to maintain any longer againſt them: in what conſcience or with what face, or countenance, may it be ſayd that theſe troubles moue and continue for the matter and cauſe of religion? And yet neuertheleſſe the more to choke and

conuince the Cardinall of Loraine and other his adherentes, of their lies & ſlaunderous impoſitions which they publiſhe daily: the ſaid Princes, Lords, knightes, gentlemen and others of their companies forgetting the infidelitie and all diſloyall attemptes heretofore conſpired againſt them, declare and proteſt this day both before God & your maieſtie, y• what ſo euer hath bene done or offred to thē in euill from the beginning to this houre, they neither haue nor will once impute it to your maieſtie, as knowing your nature to be nothing touched with ſuch iniuſt ſeuerities, wherof you haue giuen ſo many publike experiences, that there is now no cauſe of doubt: neither haue or do they thinke to chaunge or diminiſhe in any reſpect their duetie and naturall regarde which they haue alwayes bente to the true aduancement of your greatneſſe & royall eſtate: wherin, & alſo in ſo many effectes aforeſaid, if it be both knowne and ſeene, that they enterteine no other purpoſe nor meaning, than (vnder the obedience and authoritie of your Edictes) to ſerue God according to his will, and as

they are inſtructed by his holy word, with deſire to be maintained with equall care as your other ſubiectes, in their honours, liues, and goodes, they are now ready to geue ſuch further manifeſt proofe & witneſſe, as their moſt enemies ſhall haue leſt cauſe henceforth to doubt thē: And y• neither to enter into any iuſtification of their actions paſſed, as their innocencie & iuſtice of their cauſe being ſufficiently known to your maieſty, & al other kings, princes, & potētates what ſtrangers ſo euer they be, if they be not of the faction & partie of Spain: and much leſſe to ſeke to capitulate with your maieſtie, knowing (god be praiſed) what is the duety of good and faithful ſubiectes to their ſou
                     •
                   raigne prince & natural Lord. But (ſir) in reſpect of the large peny worthes and common marchandize which heretofore hath ben made of the faith and worde of your maieſtie, which (aboue all) ought to be holy, ſacred, and inuiolable, and withall, with what vnſeming boldnes your authoritie & name hath ben abuſed to ye extreme peril of all your people of the reformed profeſſiō: it nede not ſeme ſtrange if the ſayd

Princes wt their cōſociates do humbly beſech you to declare by an edict ſolemn, per petual & irreuocable, your reſolute wil in a libertie & exerciſe of their religiō, to the ende y• by the ſame, ſuch as heretofore at 
                     •
                  . ſeueral times both raſhly & with al impunitie haue infringed and violated your former conſtitutiō in ye cauſe, may by this third, be more brideled & reſtrained, wher in becauſe ſuch as wer not able to endure the vnitie & vniverſal reſt maintained amōgſt your people, by the good obſeruaciō of your edicts, haue takē occaſion to alter & corrupt thē by new conſtructiōs & modificaciōs contrary to the true ſubſtace of the ſame & ſincere meaning of your maieſtie. And y• alſo the ſayd Princes wt the reſt of their factiō confeſſe to haue borne a moſt iuſt iudgemēt of god in more ſorts of afflictiōs in time of peace, than when it was opē war, as in cōſenting to eaſily to y• treaties of peace which haue ben made, the ſame prouiding a general contentmēt on all ſides y• good ſhould be ſerued only in certein places of the realme, & by certain perſons, as though (in a ſoūd conſcience) there belonged no other thing to ye ſeruice of God.
               
                  They moſt humbly beſech your maieſtie to accord and graunt generally to all your ſubiectes of what qualitie and condicion ſo euer, frée vſe of the ſaid religion in all cities, villages, and boroughes, and all other places & corners of your realm and countreys within your obediēce and protection, without any exception, reſeruacion, modificacion, or reſtraint of perſons, times, or places, and that with ſuerties, neceſſary in ſo high a cauſe: and beſides to ordeine and enioyne to make manifeſt profeſſion of the one or other religion, to the ende to cut of hereafter all meanes and occaſions to many, who abuſing ſuch benefite and grace, are ſlipt into Atheiſme and carnall libertie, and who, ſtanding vpon no exerciſe and profeſſion of religion, deſire nothing more than to ſée an vniuerſall confuſion in this realm, and all order, pollicie and Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline reuerſed, and aboliſhed, a thing ſo daungerous as not to be tollerated in any chriſtian ſtate. And becauſe (ſir) we doubt not at all, that thoſe who hetherunto haue pitched the foundacion of their deuiſes vpon ſlaundrous reproches, impudently

publiſhed to make vs hatefull, euen to ſuch as (God be prayſed) bée free from the ſeruitude and tyrannie of Antichriſt, will not ſticke to impoſe vppon vs an inctuile obſtinacie, rather to defende, (without reaſon) that we haue once reſolued to beléeue touching the Articles of Chriſtian Religion, than to correct or retract our erroures. Wée declare and proteſte (as hereunto we haue done) that if in any point of the cōfeſſion of faith heretofore preſented to youre maieſtie by the reformed Churches of your realm, it may bée found by the word of God comprehended in the Canonicall bookes of the holy Scripture, that wée ſwarue from the doctrine of the Prophetes and Apoſtles, we will foorthwith lend our handes, and giue place to ſuch as will inſtructe vs better in the word of GOD (if we erre in any Article) than we haue bin from the beginning: For which cauſe, and the better to effecte ſo happie a purpoſe, wée deſire nothing more, than a conuocation of a councell frée and generall, and lawfully called, wherein as euery one may haue hea
                  
                     ••
                  ng & ſcope to deduce his reaſōs at large,

ſo the ſame to bée eyther confirmed, or conuinced by the onely woorde of GOD, the true meane vſed in all tymes of Antiquitie vppon lyke occaſion. By whiche meane (Sir) alſo it is not to bee doubted, that GOD (by his ſpeciall grace) will not vnſeele the eyes of your Maieſtie, and ſo gyue you ſpeedie and true ſight into the hartes and willes of youre Subiectes, reconciled and knitte with an indiſſoluble bonde, and your Realme returne into his firſte eſtate, beautie and dignitie, to the ſhame and confuſiō of yours and our common enimies, who by their ſubtill and priuie intelligences with the houſe of Spayne, haue with ſiniſter pollicies tranſlated the late ſtorme and tempeſte of the lowe Countryes to your Realme, and almoſt thundred it vppon the type of youre Crowne: Humbly deſiring youre Maieſtie to enter into preciſe conſideration and iudgement, whether it bee better to exſpecte, of two Armies alreadie aſſembled within youre Realme, a firie and bloudie victorie, yeelding equall frute to the Conquerour, and he that is ouercome,

or elſe to employe them togyther in the ſeruice of youre Maieſties affaires, in ſo many goodly occaſions preſently offered, importing no leſſe the reſt and aduauncement of your Crowne and Realme, than any that euer happened in your tyme, returning alſo by that meane, the ſtorme to the place from whence it came: wherein the ſayde Princes, Lordes, Knightes, Gentlemen, with all the reſte of their companies, bée vnfaynedly reſolued, (as in all other things, tending to the greatneſſe of youre noble Eſtate) to employe their lyues, goods, with all other meanes wherewith GOD hath endued them, euen to the laſte droppe of their bloude, acknowledgingOffice of true ſubiects in thys worlde no other ſoueraintie or principalitie than yours, in whoſe obedience, and ſubiection they do deſire to lyue and dye. The ſame beyng alſo ſuche and all that a ſouereigne and naturall Prince is to exſpect or deſire of hys faythfull lonyng ſubiects and ſeruauntes.
               This requeſt thus deuiſed and written, the Princes ſent a trompet to the Catholykes

Campe to obteyne paſſeport for a Gentleman to go to his Maieſtie whiche being refuſed the Admiral found meanes to ſende a Copye of it to the Marſhall Mōt
                        ••
                     orancy, to preſent to the king, who about the .xix. of Julie following returned a meſſanger to the Admirall, to lette him knowe that he had preſented the requeſt to his maieſtie, who would not looke on it, ſaying, he would neyther heare nor ſée any thing comming from him, afore he hadde put hym ſelfe in obedience and fauoure of his Maieſtie, who then aſſured hym to receyue and embrace hym, when, and as often, as he would put himſelfe in endeuour.
               To this meſſage by letter, the Admiral aunſwered the .xxvj. of the ſame moneth, that ſeing his maieſtie would not receiue the ſayd requeſte, he could not otherwyſe chuſe, than leaue the matter to the iudgement of al Chriſtian Princes not touched with paſſion or partiall affection, whither they vſed not indeuour to come vnder the duetifull obedience of hys Maieſtie or not, labouring for their parte by all their poſſible meanes to quenche the manifolde

calamities houering to ouerwhelme the woole Realme, and ſo ſette them ſelues within the fauoure and grace of the King. But now, ſeeing that there bée ſome will not ſpare the vniuerſall deſtruction of the Realme, onely to rauiſhe their lyues and exercyſe of their Religion, they woulde looke more neare than afore for the remedie.
               The Kings brother being at Loches, had aduertiſement of the ſiege of Luzignan diſpatching withal diligēce the Duke of Guyſe, to get within Poyctiers, as well to hinder the taking of the Towne, as to turne the ſiege from Luzignan, notwithſtandingLuzig. rendred. he was there no ſooner than the Caſtell was rendred.
               The Duke of Guyſe arriued at Poytiers with the Marquiſe du Meine his brother, on Frydaye .xxij. of Julie, entring by the Bridge An
                        ••
                     ubert with hys companies, which were about fiftéene hundreth horſmen, amongſt whom were .iiij. hundreth Italians, gouerned by the Lorde Paule Sforce, brother to the Counte de Saincte Fiour, and one Cornette of Reistres. Theſe ſuccoures aſſured greatly them

within the Towne, who otherwayes might happyly haue trembled at the comming of the Princes Camp.
               There were within Poyctiers aforeLords and Captaynes 
                        •
                     ithin Poy
                     
                        •
                     yers. the Guyſes comming, the Counte du Lude, his thrée brethren, de Chaſtelliers, de Sautere, and de Briançon, the Lordes de Ruff
                        •
                     c, de la Riuiere, Bo
                        •
                     ſequin, de Ferraques, d'Argence, de Rouët, and other lords and Knightes of the order, and Captaynes of horſſemen with part of their cōpanies. There were alſo of footemen, the companies of the Capteynes Paſsac, la-Prade, la Vacherie, d'Arſach, le Lis, Bois-vert, Boneau, Boulāde larrie, wt certeine other, be ſides vj. cōpanies of footmen rayſed by the inhabitants of the Towne. The generall number of Catholike ſoldiors of al ſortes, as well footmē as horſmen, ſtrangers, as towneſmen during this ſiege (whereof ſhall bee ſpoken hereafter) were v. or .vj. thouſand men: they had. vj pieces of Artillerie, as .ij. or .iij. meanes, and certeyne leſſe pieces in the Caſtell.
               The Princes, after the rendring of Luzignan, and afore they beſieged Poytiers, tooke Monstruel, Bonyn, Couché,
                  
                  Saſay, Ʋiuone, with other little Caſtelles about Poytiers, thereby to hold the Catholikes more ſtrait. In which meane while the Princes horſſemen made ordinarie roades euen to the gates of Poytiers, burning many Abbaies, Priories, and Temples.
               The xxiiij. day the ſayd horſmē, as wel French as Allemans, preſēted thē ſelues in battaill before the town, on y• ſyde, which is aboue the Abbaye of S. Cyprien, vntill very neare S. Benoit, being deuided into two great hoſtes: Certeyn horſſemen of the Towne iſſued oute at the gate towarde the Bridge Anioubert, with certeyne numbers of ſhotte on foote, who without any thing dooing, retired into the towne, and the horſſemen of the Religion, into their ſeuerall quarters.
               The .xxv. daye of the ſame moneth, the Princes footemen and horſſemen preſented agayne before the Towne aboute noone. The footemē gaue a hoat charge vpon the ſuburbes De la Cueille, where the Capteyn Bois-vert, with hys companie, (l
                     •
                  dged behynd a little trench) making negligent watche, were ſodenly ſet vpō,

and the moſt part killed: the reſt beyng forced to retyre more low to the ſuburbs S. Ladre, were valiantly folowed by them of the religion euen to the poſtes & houſes ioyning to the gate of the ſuburbs: There began a hoat ſkirmiſhe which laſted almoſt fyue houres, vntill the night deuided them: they (of the religion being come but to make a firſt viewe of the ſtate of the towne) retyring with loſſe of very few of their people. The .xxvj. day being tueſday,Poict. beſieged. the Princes beſet the towne on all ſydes, pitching their tentes in the medowe beneath Hoſtel-dieu nere to a milne, where they made forth with a bridge vpon the riuer of Ciyn to paſſe on both ſides the town as nede required: the ſame day, certayne principals of the army viewed the towne on al ſides, beginning the next day to batter the defences of the Caſtell with certayne culuerines & other meaner péeces. There was no other thing worthy of report done this month, but making and filling of baſkets, deuiding of quarters, dyſpeſing the camp, caſting trenches, ditches, and digging of earth to couer and ſhroude the ſhot.
               
                  The battrie began the Monday beingBattery againſt Poye. the firſt of Auguſt on the ryght ſide of the Tower of the bridge Anionbert, and the wall faſt by, planting .viij. or .ix. péeces of battery vpon the rock or hill right againſt the ſayd bridge, aboue and betwene the ſuburbes of Pympaneau and S. Sornyn, which cōtinued .iij. dayes: the reaſon was, that other wayes the ſayde tower myght greue the army and other batteries: they forbare not alſo to prouoke ſkirmiſhe, wherein they that kept the ſuburbes beyonde the bridge as captaines Arſach and Bonneau with their companie were forced to leaue the ſaid ſuburbes.
               Aſſoone as the ſaid ſuburbes were abandoned, there was brought downe .ij. Canons to beat the foote of the wall, piercing of purpoſe to make it a houſe to ſerue for baſkets of earth, the ſame being perceiued by them in the towne, foorth with diſcharged certaine volues of the cannon againſt it, to make it fall, and ſo enforced the ſayd ij. cannons to be haled away: in the mean while the proteſtantes labored to winne the ſuburbes of Rochreull, garded by the captaine La Vacherie, ſkirmiſhing contynually

within a vyne, lying directly betwene the ſaid ſuburb and the caſtel, wher was hoat warre without intermiſſion. The .v. of Auguſt the ſayd captaine la Vacherye as he maintained the ſkirmiſh was ſhot thorow the head with a harquebuſh where of he dyed in the fielde.
               I haue noted before that the L. d'Aunoux, maiſter of the camp of the regiment of the late counte Briſſac, was left wythin S. Meſen by the counte Du-lude, ſince his returne from Nyort, who nowe by commaundement from the Duke of Guyſe, coolled out .iiij. or .v. hundred of the beſt ſouldiers in his companies to come to the ſuccours of Poyctyers, ſending the reſidue with his cariage to Pertnay, where was the captaine Allard, and ſo he aryued at Poyetyers about two houres after mydnight the ſixt of Auguſt.
               The batterie hauing ceaſſed at ye bridge Anionbert, from the .iiij. of this moneth, began againe the▪ vij. of the ſame, albeit not on that ſide but againſt a towre of the bridge S. Cyprian next to the ſuburbs, by meane wherof they within were inforced

to diſcende and leaue the ſayd towre, andBattery againſt Poye. entrenche themſelues vppon the bridge with veſſels and hogsheades and other ſuch like things, ye Proteſtants from that tyme afterward, being vnable to greue them within the Abbay of S. Cyprian, as they did afore: The company of captayne Reynaut was ordained for the garde of this towre and quarter.
               After the defences of this towre were raiſed, the Princes remoued their péeces to the right ſide of the wal of the Abbots meade, thinkyng that place moſt weake of all the towne, and to that effect they planted theyr cannons the nynth of thys moneth to make a breach, beſtowyng others in other places to batter the flanke & ſyde, hauing y• day before ſet vp in thys quarter vppon the riuer of Clyn a, bridge of pypes and boordes tyed togyther with great cables.
               The battrie was ſo vehement and fierſe, that in ſmall time they had enforced two great breaches, the one neare the other, ſkowringe ſuche defenſes as annoyed them by reaſon of a towre and

mylne which were there by: they within laboured to fill vp their breaches, albeit with great difficultie and diſtreſſe, as not able to ſhew them ſelues within the Abbotes meade without gret perill, bycauſe the hilles gouerned all the ſayde medow.
               The breaches thus battered, the Proteſtantes were of mynd to aſſault them, beſtowing (for this purpoſe) their people in ſquares and wings, and ſhewed themſelues vppon the hilles in very good order. They firſte ſent certeyne Capteynes and Souldioures to viewe the breaches, who brought reporte, that they could not bee entred without great perill, the rather bicauſe the bridge which they hadde erected vppon Clyn (ouer the whiche they muſt paſſe to go to the breache) was neyther conuenient for the matter, nor ſufficient to beare the ſouldioures that ſhould paſſe ouer it, neither could the horſſemen (what diſtreſſe or neede ſo euer chaunced) go to the ſuccoures of the footemen within the ſaid Abbots meade if it happened that thei were charged by the horſemen of the Catholykes. Beſydes, they within had planted a counter batterie of .iij. or .iiij. Canons faſt

by Carmes, whych diſchargyng right vpon the breaches, might much endaunger them that offred the aſſault: theſe were the cauſes that nothing was done yt day. Captain Caluerat being in a towre neare the breach, and going to ſee it, was killed the ſame daye: in the nyght the catholickes diſcended to the ryuer, and cut the cordes of the bridge before mencioned and ſo brake it, vſing this pollicy to couer and diſguiſe their enterpriſe, they brought down great volues and noyſe of Harquebuſhot, beſtowing them againſt the bodye of the watch being neare the artillery, to the ende they ſhould be neither heard nor ſéene whilſt they brake the bridge. Theſe things hanging thus in traine afore Poyctyers, the king, and Q. mother accompanied wyth the Cardinals of Bourbon and Loriain; came to Amboiſe, & from thence to Towars whether the Kings brother came to them: there they deliberated vppon meanes to ſuccoure Poyctiers, and to that ende was dyſpatched ſpéedelye the knight Montluc wyth fiue hundred harquebuſiers on horſback, to get (if he could) within Poyctyers, albeit he was ſo diſcouered

in the way y• his enterpriſe quailed & he returnd to y• camp: The king ſēt for ye L. de Sancſac lying before the ſiege of La Charite to come to him wt all his forces: he procured alſo a ſpedy leuy wtin Paris of .20 enſeignes of footmen & certain horſmē, diſpatching ſpecial letters to all ye Nobilitie of Fraunce to repaire ſpedely to him to the camp, which he was determined to folow in perſon, & that vpon payn of confiſcation of bodies & goods, or to be declared wtin the danger of contempt, he raiſed alſo his arrear banks in many prouinces, who forth with came to him in the ſayd country of Touraine, in effect he aſſembled with wonderfull diligence aſmuch ſuccours as hée could for ye reſkue of Poyctiers. Ther were certain cornets which ordinarily vſed to beat the ſtreets & ways wtin half a league of Chaſtelleraut, amongſt whom were ſpecially, the L. of Boniuets companies, ſonne to y Lord of Creuecoeur, & of the baron of Numburg a Normande: which being knowen to ye garriſon of ye ſaid Chaſtelleraut, together with the certaine place wher the ſaid Lord Boniuet was wont to come, the x. of Auguſt .ij. or .iij. hundreth horſmen wt
                  
certaine ſhot of ye captain Norman, made a ſally vpon them, & toke y• ſaid L. Boniuet with his company in a village nere to Liguers wher they entred without let as keping negligent garde, and were foūd layd & lodged after the french maner, the Lord Boniuet was priſoner, and almoſt all the reſt of his company either killed or taken. About the ſame time the Marquis of Rancon an Italian, was taken neare to Myrebeau as he bayted, and was led priſoner to Nyort The Lord of Tarri
                        •
                     les gouernour for the King in Quercy, maintained war all this while in Bern, a countrye belonging to the Quéene of Nauarte, hauing almoſt brought all the country vnder his auctority: wherfore ye counte Mōtgomery, ſent (as is ſaid) into Gaſcoyne▪
                   aſſembled y• forces of the .ij. vicountes to apply ſpedely to ye ſuccors & reſkue of ye city of Nauarre in Bearn beſeged by ye ſaid L. of Tarrides: he deuided his iornye into ſuch diligence and ſpede as about ye .7. of Auguſt he was very nere Nauarreis, at whoſe ſo ſodaine comming, the Lorde Tarrides raiſed hys ſiege, and retyred into a towne there ioyning, where the Montgomery beſieged

and tooke hym wyth hys brother and the Lorde de S. Colombe and of Negr
                        •
                     -peliſse, with many other great lords & knights of the order, and captaines to the number of xxx. The Lord of Tarrides loſt his artillerye with a great number of hys horſmen and footmen: The counte Montgomery, (by meane of this diſcomfeite) reſtored the whole countrye of Bearn to the obedience of the Quene of Nauarre.
               
               Touching the ſiege of Poyctyers, they within were in great amaze with the breaches made in the abbottes meade, the rather bicauſe they could not defend them, wherupon entring into counſel, they foūd moſt beſt and neceſſary to ſtem the ryuer of Clyn to the ende to make it runne ouer his channel and ſo drowne the ſaid meade: this counſell was put to ſpéedy execution, and planting ſtakes and pales proper for the purpoſe beneath ye arches of the bridge of Rochercul, they dammed the riuer, ſo that in a moment the mead was all ouerflowen with water about. iij cubites high, the ſame ſo troubling the proteſtantes, as it dryue them from their determinations, notwithſtanding after they had conſidered

well of the ſubtilty, they beganne as in a counter pollicy, to beat the pales, and giue vent to the water, and therefore the next morning diſcharged ſo many ſhots of artillery againſt the ſayd waterworke, as the water retyred and left the meade drie, which the catholikes the night following reſtored and countergarded in this order: they caſt behynd the ſaid damme vnder the arches a very thicke wall, faſtening certaine fléeces or balles wol to the pales to receiue and damp the cannon ſhot, which made the water ſwell and ouerflow more high than afore: Notwithſtanding the catholikes were cloſed very nere and ſtrait, yet made they many ſallies vpon the proteſtantes, who ſkowred them back againe euen to the verye poſternes of their citys, not without great loſſe to the one and other ſide: Amongſt theſe ſallies they made one of ſuch a ſodaine the .xij. of this month that they tooke a cornet of Reiſtres, and caried them without let into the towne.
               In this moneth the towne of Orillac in Auuergne, was taken by night by the L. de la Roche, and Beſſonniere, profeſſours of the religion in that countrey, accompanied

onely with .vij. or viij. ſcore men. This was their meane and pollicy: there is in the ſaide Oryllac, a gate of quarrye in the wall towardes the ryuer, which the inhabitauntes of the place cauſed to ramme and wall vppe, leauing onely a poſterne ſo ſtraite, that one perſon coulde ſcarcely enter.
               This poſterne was cloaſed with two portes or gates of woodde, the one within and the other without the Towne: the ſaide Lord of la Roche and Beſſonniere came to the gate without the po
                     •
                  terne and with a great yron inſtrument made a hoale or creuiſh, by the which they caſt in about a hundreth poundes of cannon powder betwene the ſaide two gates, and then cloſing vppe the ſaide hoale or creuiſhe, and making vnder the ſaide firſt gate a traine to the ſame powder, they put fire to it, which foorthwith fluſhed within the ſaide two gates, and blewe them both vppe, the one caried forty pace of, and throwen vppon a houſe within the Towne, and the other inforced with the violence and ſtrength of the powder,

puſhed againſt a wall without the towne, and brake a brea
                     •
                  he contaynyng hys owne compaſſe, by which they entred the towne, wherein was no other garde than of the inhabitantes, whereof they killed a hundreth or ſixe ſcore reſicting them in armoure. The Lord of S. Heraut gouernoure of the countrye appeared certayne dayes after afore the towne▪ thinking to recouer it, but fynding ſuche warme reſictaunce he returned forth with to S Floure
               
               The longe continuaunce of this ſiege afore Poyctyers, brought the Catholikes in a great neceſſitie and want of vittails, alwell for men as horſes, and aboue all, forrage was ſo ſka
                     •
                  t with them, that they were dryuen for to turne abroade parte of their horſes to the vynes, medowes, landes, and other voyde places of the towne: whereof the Princes hauing vnderſtanding by certaine ſtraggling ſouldiers iſſuing out of the towne, determined to breake the mylne in the bottome of the medowe neare to the port de Tyſon.
               
               
                  And for this purpoſe planted ouer .ij. cannons in that quarter, which they diſcharged againſt the ſaid mylne, and after retyred them as being diſcouered and annoied by the Catholickes: who pinched nowe with an extreme want of vittailes, determined to thruſt out of the towne a great number of vnprofitable perſons, which as they beganne to execute the .xvj. of thys moneth, ſo the proteſtantes (to pine and ſterue the towne more) driue them backe with force to enter the towne againe.
               For want of powder and bollets, the battrie ceaſed for a tyme, whereof, the Princes hauing receaued a new prouiſion from Rochell, renued alſo the batterie the xx. of Auguſt on that ſyde towardes the Abbottes meade, where the breach beyng forced, they ſent in the euening to ſuruey it by certain numbers of ſouldiers, wherof .xvj. or xvij. entred by the breach in to the ſaid medow, from whence (being diſcouered by the watch in S. Peters ſteple who ronge the alarum bell) they were conſtrained to retyre with ſpéede.
               The night following the proteſtantes builded a bridge vpon Clyn towardes the

ſuburbs of S. Sornyns, to paſſe to the byſhops mead, ſtretching towards the temples of S. Radegonde and S. Sulpice: the bridge was made of quarreis of wood, hurdles, pypes, earth and plankes of oke very large, alſo well faſtened and ioyned with nailes, cables, and cordes, yt the cannon might well paſſe ouer it, and of ſuch bredth that .viij. or .ix. men might walke a fronte. They made an other of the ſame matter and faſhion, and ſet it likewiſe vppon the riuer about .xl. paſe diſtant from the other. Theſe bridges thus made and erected, they beſtowed many baſkets with earth, aſwell neare the firſt bridge, as on the other ſyde that which was within the byſhops meade, drawing to the ſuburbes of S. Sornyn neare the ſayd bridges, part of their artillerye beating the defenſes of the wall, which are before and right againſt the ſayd temples: Thoſe defenſes thus beaten and ſkowred, the battrie beganne the morrow after being the .xxiij. of Auguſt, in that place and the byſhops mead. The catholickes labored to theyr beſt to repaire their breaches, and had no aſſault that day: The Lorde of Briançon,
                  
brother to the counte Du lude, going the ſame day to viewe a platforme neare to Carmes, to ſupply ſome ſpeciall want with his aduiſe, had his head ſtriken from hys ſhoulders with a bollet: Lykewyſe the Lorde d'Aunous, ſtryuing the ſame day to dryue the Proteſtantes from a Towre which they occupied neare the breache of the Abbottes meade, was ſtriken in the head with a harquebuſh, whereof he dyed ſhortly after.
               The Lorde of Prunaye alſo beinge amongſt his ſouldiers at the breache, had his left legge taken away with a cannon and ſo dyed Of the proteſtants ſide were killed the Lorde of Chanay called Frauncis du Fay and one of the Marſhalls of the campe of the vauntgarde hurte wyth a muſketie in the arme, broken in two partes.
               The foure and twenty of thys moneth in the morning, the Princes renewed oftſones the batterye with twelue or .xiiij. peeces agaynſt the wall before the ſayde Temples, the ſame being of ſuch vehement furie, that there was diſcharged that

day more than ſeuen hundreth ſhottes of cannon, which beat a large breach before thrée of the clocke in the afternoone, and the proteſtantes ringed in battell vppon the toppe of the hilles towardes the ſubburbes, ready to geue the aſſault, which they entended foorthwith to do by the Abbots meade, as hauing diſpoſed moſt part of their army on that ſyde: The catholikes were buſie to releue their breaches with beds, faggots, and other matters apt to fill vp.
               The Duke of Guyſe being at the one breach and the counte Du-ſude at the other, ſeing the enemy prepared ſtrongly and ſpedely to the aſſault, rong the alarm bel of the towne, to the end that euery one might retyre into his quarter. Ther was a captaine of the proteſtantes, who beyng followed with ten or twelue and couered onely with his target, ranne ouer one of the bridges within the biſhops meade, and came euen to the little corner or arme of the ryuer that toucheth the wall, and ſo viewed the breache, whiche hee reported to the Admirall not to bée ſufficiently

aſſaultable, aſwel becauſe the ruine and breakings of the wall were faine within the town & had not filled vp ye riuer which runneth at the foote of the wal, as alſo that they within had raiſed great trenches and rampiers, wherupon the army retyred in the euening without any aſſaulte: Thys day captaine Gaſcourt Knight of Mal
                        •
                     e, was ſlaine with a cannon, being ſent by the Guyſe, to view the breach, and conſider what was neceſſary to defend it.
               The morrow being the .xxv. of Auguſt, the princes army was eftſones ringed in order as thoughe they would go to the aſſault, the breaches were once agayne viewed, aſwell that within the abbottes meade as the other at S. Radegonde, by certaine captaines and ſouldiers, who in their return reported the perillous eſtate of the ſame.
               The ſame daye, the Proteſtantes beſtowed certain ſhotte of artillery as well againſt the bridge Anioubert, as Rochereul, wherein were beaten certaine holes or creuiſſes to auoyde the water out of Abbottes mead: the ſame beyng filled and ſtopped againe the ſame euening by the

Catholikes.
               The reſt of this Auguſt paſſed without any great effectes, ſauing certeyne light batteries to purge the waters and raze the mylne of Tyſon, togither with certein ſallies made ſometyme by the Bridge Ach
                        •
                     rd. It was thought that the ſickneſſe of the Admiral and ye L. d'Acier was the cauſe why there were no more attempts aduaunced.
               The firſt of September, the Princes determined to winne the ſuburbes of Rochereul, to the ende by that meane the ſooner to rydde the waters. And bicauſe they would cut off from ſuch as kept the ſayde ſuburbes all ſuccours and releefe from the towne, they bent firſt certeyne canons againſt the towre of ye bridge of Rochereul, diſcharging vpō it aboue an hundreth voleys, whiche battered a great parte of it, winning in the ende the vyne whereof is ſpoken before, whiche houered and valted on highe ouer the ſtreate of the ſuburbes. This was almoſte the chiefeſt place of ſkirmiſhe, ſince, and during the ſiege.
               The morrowe, they battered the defenſes of the Caſtell and Rochereul bridge,

pitching alſo newe batteries vnder the Nut trees neare the Riuer, betweene the way that goeth to Hostel-dieu, at the parting of the ſuburbes drawing to the meadow towardes Chastelleraut.
               
               The ſaterday the .iij. of September, the battery began in the morning againſt the wall and gate of the ſuburbs, which by .ij. of the clock in the after noone had thrown open a wyde breach, wherevpon the proteſtants did ſpéedely ring them ſelues in battaill, as well on highe de la Cueil, (where lay a piece that gouerned the Offices of the Caſtell) as beneath the ſayde Hostel-dieu, and in .iij. ſquares neare the Nut trees of the place, where the batterie was made. The Catholikes reſtored the breaches as much as they could, with veſſels, wood, earth, and rampiers: and there were the Capteynes Paſsac, Nozieres, the Lorde of Mo
                        •
                     tail, and Carbonieres, with others prepared to ſuſteyne the aſſaulte. They had beſtowed about foure hundreth harquebuſears in the Towers, galleries, and offices of the Caſtell, which flancked all along as they ſhould come to the aſſaulte. All whiche notwithſtanding, the

Proteſtantes aboute three of the Clocke in the after noone, came to the aſſaulte, the Lorde Pilles, with hys regimen wasThree aſſaultes gyuē to the ſubburbes of Ro
                        •
                     l. the formoſt, beyng followed with diuerſe other regimentes of the Frenche footmen, who valtauntly came vppon the breache, and ſtoode till they hadde beſtowed diuerſe blowes with their Curtillaxes: albeit, they were conſtrained to turne face in reſpect of the flankers, whiche greeued them greatly. Immediatly followed the ſecond aſſaulte gyuen by certeyne numbers of horſſemen deſcended on foote with diuerſe footemen, and they likewyſe repulſed.
               Theſe firſte aſſaultes beyng performed by the Frenche men, the 
                     
                        •
                     anſquenets would needes followe with a third, which albeit was performed with ſuch courage, as they foughte valiauntly vppon the breache, yet ſeeing the preſent defenſe, and generall daunger to maynteyne it long, they reculed, and retired euery one into his quarter.
               In theſe aſſaultes the Proteſtantes loſte an hundreth or ſixe ſcore Souldioures, with certeyne numbers hurte.

The Lord de Pilles was hurt in the thigh with a ſmall ſhot, whereof he was ſpéedely cured. The Lorde Bricquemaus ſonne, Colonell of the footemen was alſo hurte with a harquebuſh, whereof after certeyn dayes he dyed. The Lorde de S. Marie of Dauphinoys, with others of marke were alſo killed. On the Catholikes part were killed, Capteyn Paſsac, and the Lorde de Montall, with a good number of footmen.
               Before theſe aſſaultes, the Catholikes ſent two men to the King and his brother for ſuccours, with charge to reueale the eſtate of the Towne and penurie of vittails. The Kings brother hauing aſſembled as much force as he could, came to La Haye, & to Port de Pille, determining to beſet Chastelleraut, to ye end to draw the ſiege frō 
                  Poytiers: and therefore made to march his vauntgarde right to Chastelleraut, lodging the monday, being the .v. of September, a quarter of a league from the town. The morrow after, his horſemē and part of his footemen preſented in order of battaill before the Towne to view it, al that day being ſpente in ſkirmiſhing on the other ſyde the riuer of Vienne.
               
               
                  The Towne was gouerned by the L. de la Louē, Marſhall of the Campe of the vauntgarde to the Princes: He had firſt for the defence of it, his owne companie of light horſmen, and then the Lords of Valauoire, Broſſay, La-motte, and de Roeyſſes, with .vij. Companies of footemen, and Capteyne Normantes companie of harquebuſears on horſeback.
               The ſuburbes defaced by fire, was no place for the Catholykes to lodge in, ſo that they were conſtrained to encampe further off, whiche they beganne to doo the ſame day they viewed the Towne. The Artillerie brought by the Suyzers, arriued at midnight, and immediatly approches were made, and the canons ringed in batterie in two ſeuerall places, beating notwithſtanding all one breache. It beganne the wedneſday the .vij. of the ſayde moneth, very early neare the gate S. Catherine, betwéene a tower of ye ſayd gate, & an other tower more neare drawing to ye tē
                  ple S. Iean. Such was the furie of ye batterie, as by two of the clock in ye afternoone, a breach was forced of thrée or foure ſcore foote wyde: the chaūce fel vpon ye 
                  Italians,
                  
to giue ye aſſault, which thei 
                     ••
                  d being backed & folowed wt certeyn French mē. Thei moūted vpō thē breach, where, albeit theyAſſault of Italians. preſented .xvij. enſeignes, yet founde they ſuche ſharpe and ſpeedy repulſe, as they were enforced in a moment to turne their faces, receyuing great loſſe by the 
                     •
                  aulte of the ſayd gate, wherein were beſtowed .vj. ſcore harquebuſears well appoynted. The Italians loſt at this aſſaulte 
                     •
                   of their enſeignes, which y• Proteſtants tooke from them by force.
               After this aſſaulte (and the Catholikes retired from the breach) Capteyne Bernier d'A
                           •
                        phinoys
                   came to ſuccour the Towne with iiij. hundreth harquebuſears, beyng backt with the horſſemen of the Princes vauntgarde led by the L. de la Loue and Telignie. The Italians were ſo cruſhed at this aſſault as they had no will to make it good agayne, neither was any other thing worthie of memorie done that day.
               The ſame daye, the ſiege of Poytiers rayſed to come to reſkue Chastelleraut, marching no further that daye than thrée leagues, by reaſon one of ye Canons miſcaried and was lefte on the place. The

morrow after the Armie approched within halfe a league of Chastelleraut, whiche made the Catholykes rayſe their ſiege, & retire to Port de Pille, hauing loſte in this ſiege fyue hundreth men, and almoſt all Italians, whereof the Colonell Fabiano de Rome was one. The next morning the Princes vauntgarde purſued the Catholykes, cutting off from the tayle of their Campe about two hundreth footemen, and killed them all.
               The ſame day, the Lorde de Sanzay entred Poytiers with .x. or .xij. companies of footmen, almoſt all Italians, and two hundreth horſſemen. Immediatly after whoſe cōming the Duke of Guyſe and the Marquiſe du Meine his brother, accompanied with .xv. hundreth horſſemen, departed the Towne to relieue themſelues with freſh aire. The morrowe after, beyng the .x. of September, began a ſkirmiſhe on the hyther ſyde the ſayde Port de Pille againſt ij. thouſand harquebuſears which the catholikes had left there within the trenches. They wer at laſt enforced to paſſe ſpedily ouer 
                     
                        •
                     re
                        •
                     ſe, leauing about .iiij. or .v. hundreth of their companie dead on the place.

The Princes armie drewe to la Haye, to paſſe the ſayed ryuer the nexte morning, being the .xj. of the ſayde moneth. There was no woorthy matter performed other than certeyn light ſkirmiſhes.
               The monday following, the Princes armie readie ringed in battaill very early, preſented afore the Catholykes to gyue them battaile: Albeit, bycauſe there was betwéene the two Armies a little Ryuer with mariſe ſhoares, whiche neyther the Princes could paſſe them ſelues, nor yet conueye ouer their Artillerie. After the two armies hadde long remayned one within viewe of an other, they retired into their ſeuerall quarters. The princes armie, for want of vittayles, and ſéeing withall the Catholykes had ſmall diſpoſition to fight, paſſed againe ouer Cr
                        •
                     uſe, and alſo 
                     Ʋienne, the .xij. of September, retyring ſo to Faye la Ʋineuſe in Poyctou, of purpoſe chiefly to refreſh them. The catholiks drew to Chynon, expecting not only forſes to be brought from many places in France, but alſo ſuch companies of men of armes as had leaue til the firſt of October as hath bin ſayd.
               
                  The Prince of Orange departed from Faye to returne into Almaigne with a very ſmal company, he paſſed by Charyte & Ʋezelay, and from thence by many countreyes without any let till he came into Almaigne, The brute went that he vndertooke this iourney to haſt certain ſuccours of Reiſtres.
               
               As the Admirall lay at Fay vineuſe, there was one Dominike Dalbe a Gaſcone executed by ſentence the xxi. of this mōth. Theſe were the cauſes proued againſt him: Firſt, y• he being of the admirals chā
                  ber, and ſent by him to the Duke de deux Pons with letters, as well from the ſayd Admirall his maiſter as other Princes, was taken at Briſſac, a countrey in the marches vppon the ende of May laſt, by the lord la Riuiere, Captaine of the garde to the Catholikes, and being by him earneſtly, ſollicited, he reuealed to the quéene mother, Duke d'Aniow her ſonne, and Cardinall of Loraine his iourney with the purpoſe, with further promiſe, that vnder colour to go and deliuer to the ſayde Duke his letters of charge, to eſpy his campe, and ſound his ſecret determinacions,

and ſo being preſented from that tyme with an hundred crounes, and an eſtate or office roomth in the chamber of the ſaid duke d'Aniou, he put him on the way to effect his promiſe touching the view and report of the Dukes campe, from whom hauing ſpéedy diſpatche, he returned to ye ſayd la Riuiere, & imparted his full expedition, not forgetting to deſcribe at large what he had lerned of the ſtate of ye dukes camp. Secondly, he was inſtantly perſuaded and purſued as wel by one Laurence de Ruze, Secretary to the duke d'Aniou, as by the ſayd la Riuiere, to kill by poyſon or otherwaies the ſayd Lord Admirall: which he might be bold to do (ſay they) without feare of the Admirals childrē, who alſo ſhould be rooted vpto the vttermoſt of their race, neither nede he ſtand vpon any dreadful reſpect of any his frends or kinſmen, ſeing they aſſured him y• no one of them ſhould euer be well receiued or welcomed to the court, as firſt the Marſhal Montmorancy his Coſine ſhould be committed to priſon, where he ſhould neuer come out with honour, and that of the reſt of the

ſayd Marſhals bretherne, there ſhould not remaine one. Finally, the (rather to allure him to ſuch an horrible acte) they ſealed their laſt offer with a dampnable promiſe of xxx. thouſand crownes in recompence, and xxx. thouſand Frankes of perpettritie out of the towne of Paris, beſides the fauourable good wil (all days of his life) as wel of the Quéene mother, Duke d'Aniow, as Cardinal of Loraine, and the whole courte. Dalbe yelded ſo farre to their murderous enticements, as he gaue his worde and promiſe to kil the Admirall: Wherupon was deliuered him by the ſayd la Riuiere certaine white pouder, which was known afterwardes to be either Reagar, or Arſinicke, with a large paſport from the ſayd kinges brother, wherwith he departed and came to the lord Admirall his maiſter at the ſiege of Poictiers: his long abode in the Catholikes campe, together with other ſuſpicious circumſtaunces appearing at hys arriual, perſuaded a ielous iudgement of his dealing, & therupon was committed to priſon, his proceſſe purſued & ended, & ſentēce laſtly pronoūced in theſe terms.
               
                  Judgement pronounced the xx. of September 1569. in the councell eſtabliſhed by the princes of Nauarre and Conde preſent, and aſſiſted with the Prince of Orange, the Counte Wolrard de Manſfelde, lieuetenaunt generall of the Almaignes, vnder the ſayd princes, the Countes Lodouike and Henry de Naſſau bretherne, Menard de Chomber Marſhall of the Almaignes campe, Hans Boucq, Renard Gracco, Henry Deſtain, Hans de Theres, Colonels of the Reistres, Guieryn Gangolf
                   Baron of Greleſee, Colonell of a regiment of Launceknightes, Theodore Wegger profeſſor of the law, and Embaſſadour from the Duke de Deux ponts, with many other lordes, knightes, colonels and Reistremaisters of Almaigne: the lord of Corras councellour to the king in the parliament of Tholouſe, and chaunceller to the Quéene of Nauarre and the army, the lord of Francourt, Bricquemau, de Mouy, de la Nouē, de Renty, de Soubize, de Mirambeau, de la Caze, de Puch-perdillan, de Biron, de Leſtrange, with many other lordes, gentlemen and captaines of Fraunce.
               Seing the proceſſe made by the cōmiſſaries

deputed by the ſaid princes of Nauarre & Conde, againſt Dominique Dalbe, groome of the chāber to ye L. Gaſpard Coū
                  te de Coligny, lord of Chaſtillon, & Admiral of France, the iij. examinations of ye ſayd Dalbe afore the Prouoſt generall of the camp, & two other afore the cōmiſſioners aſſigned for ye purpoſe, laſtly, ye confeſſiōs of the ſaid Dalbe reiterated v .iij. ſeueral times, wherin he acknowledgeth to haue bene inſtantly ſollicited, vrged & preſſed by la Riuiere, captain of the garde and one Laurence de Ruze, ſecretary to the kings brother, to practiſe & procure the death of ye ſayd L. Admiral, either by ſword or poiſon, which he promiſed to ye ſaid la Riuiere to effect wt poiſon only, receiuing (to that end, of the ſaid la Riuiere certaine mony, & poiſon in forme of white powder, which he hath ſhewed ſince to the ſayd Prouoſt and commiſſioners, ſeing alſo the verification and proofe of the ſaid poyſon tried by Phiſicions and Apothecaries aſſembled at la Haye in Touraine, the xiij. of this moneth together with a very large paſport graunted to the ſayd Dalbe the 30. of the laſt month by the kings brother, lying

then at Pleſſis les Tours: and now (for due puniſhment and reuenge to ſuch a traiterous and deteſtable attempt ſo often acknowledged, as wel in his priuate cō
                  feſſions, as publike aſſembly, the ſayde councell hath and doth condempne the ſayd Dalbe to be deliuered into ye handes of the executioner of high iuſtice, who tieng him vpon a hurdels, with a halter about his necke, ſhall drawe him thorow the ſtréetes and corners accuſtomed of this town de Fay la Vineuſe, with this inſcription in parchment about his bodye: This is Dominike Dalbe, traitoure to the cauſe of God, his Countrey, and Maiſter: trailing him firſt to the lodgyng gate of the ſayd Lord Admirall, and there with no other garmentes than his ſhirte▪ the halter remaining ſtil about his neck, holding in his hand a torch of burning wax, ſhal demaund pardon of God, ye king, the law, & the lord Admiral, confeſſing there ye wickedly, diſloyally, & traiterouſly he had profeſſed, promiſed & practiſed to kill by poyſon ye ſayd L. admiral his maiſter, & at the ſame inſtant & in his preſence ye ſaid poiſon which he confeſſed to be geuē
                  
vnto him by the ſaid la Riuiere, to be caſt into the fire and burned. All which being done, he ſhall be led (keping ſtill the inſcription about his body) to the place of publike execution, and there to be hāged and ſtrangled on a gallowes ſet vp for that purpoſe. And that alſo humble ſute be made to the king to do iuſtice vpō the ſaid la Riuiere and Laurence, with their complices, and with all, (if his maieſtie be of minde) to verifie more ample their ſayd conſpiracie with the ſayd Dalbe (the ſame not withſtāding reſembling a ſufficient truth againſt them by his voluntary confeſſion) to proceede againſt them with puniſhemente due to ſo horrible a facte, and the ſame both to terrifie hereafter others of like villanous humor, and alſo to remaine to all nacions, as a Preſident of the noble nature and diſpoſition of Fraunce, in abhoryng ſuche trayterous attemptes, declaryng the ſaid la Riuiere & Lawrence, with all other ſectes & ſortes of traytours (keping ſchoole and open ſhop to poyſon perſons of name and vertue) to bee traytours, villaines, and men vnworthy of honor,

either in themſelues or their poſteritie to the iiij. generacion: Laſtly, it is iudged, that afore the execution of iudgement, the ſaid Dalbe ſhal be put on the racke, to the end to confeſſe further practiſes with his ſaid confederates, wt other things contained in interregatories geuē to the Pronoſt: This ſentence thus pronounced, the morrowe after being the xxj. of September the racke was vſed accordingly, where he confirmed his former confeſſions, and ſo the ſame day the ſentēce was put in execution.
               Whileſt the kinges brother kepte at Chynon in the country of Touraine whether he was retired (as is ſaid) great nū
                  bers of men of war flocked to him from many partes of the realm, together with the horſmen to whom he gaue liberty for recreacion, and the xx. enſignes of footmen Pariſiens, whereof we ſpake before: theſe forces aſſembled, hee made marche hys Vauntegarde out of Chynon the ſixe and twenty of thys moneth, vnder the conducte of the Lorde Mont-penſier, hymſelfe followyng wyth the battaile, lodgyng neare Lodune, the Princes campe

drue towardes Partney the .xxix. of this moneth, whome the Catholikes followed neere to prouoke them to battail, as in reſpect of the aduauntage and fauor of certaine townes which they held thereabout: either campe was within the view of other, and both of equall deſire to gain Mont-gontour, vſing like diligence the rather to obtaine it: For which cauſe the admirall made his footemen aduaunce all night, his horſſmen being in point of battell the laſt of Septēber in the very firſt diſcouery of the morning vpon a plaine within a league of Mont-gontour. There the Admirall ſent the Lord de La-louë, and de La-nouē
                   with .vij. cornets of horſmen, and Captaine Normant, harquebuſiers on horſſebacke, to Mont-gontour to know if the Kings brother were there, who finding no body, returned with ſpéedy report to the Admirall accordingly, who made marche foorthwith the footemen of the battel, then the Artillerie, and ſo the footemen of the vauntgard, aſwell French as Almains, folowing them himſelfe with the horſſemen of bothe the one and other nation: He left in the taile the

Lord de Mouy with charge to gouern the retraict with fiue cornets of French horſmen, two cornets of Reiſtres, and a company of harquebuſhears on horſſebacke of captaine Montarnaunt a prouinciall: The catholikes coaſted them very neere, exſpecting their artillery, which was not yet come. The admiral paſſed ouer a litle riuer half a leage from Montgontour, very vneaſie to marche ouer, by reaſon of a marriſh along the brinke of it, the ſame making it impoſſible on all parts, ſauing in a little ſtrait or gutter beneath certain houſes along the high way: There lacked no more but the Lord of Mouy and his troupe, whom the Catholikes with .xl. cornets of horſmē charged togither with a voley of Cannons diſcharged alſo vpon them. It was thought this charge was giuen by 
                     •
                   lord de Tauannes gouernor for the king in Burgon: it was withſtanded a litle by the Lord de Mouy, who vnable to ſuſtain it thorowly, in reſpect of the multitude, retired: The Admiral ſeing his perill, gaue backe with the horſſemen, and retourned (with no leſſe ſury) the charge

vppon them that had layde it vppon the L. de Mouy, who in the meane time retired with the reſt of his troupe with the loſſe of ſome fewe, amongſt the which was the Lord de Entrichaut, enſigne bearer to the Lord S. Auban Dauphynois: the Artillerie was by this at Mont-gontour, and the footemen of the battel very néere, who ſéeing that charge, turned backe to the fight, as alſo the Lord de la Nouē, and la-Louë with their cornets, all that day paſſed in ſkirmiſhing without offer of other charge.
               The Catholikes ſhotte vehemently, which albeit annoyed muche the Admiral: yet he left not the field till night, and then retired with thoſe of the Religion to Mont-gontour, and the Catholikes encamped vppon the place.
               The next morow being ſaterday, and firſt day of the month of October, the ſaid armie iſſued out of Mont-gontour, & lodged in the Uillages thereabout: leauing the Lord de Mouy with his regiment of horſſemen, and two regiments of footemen, within ye towne to gard the paſſage.

There were certain light ſkirmiſhes, albeit neither of long fight, nor much loſſe: They moued by certaine diſordered ſhot of the Catholikes, who thought to winne the Subburbs on their ſide, but being repulſed, their purpoſe was alſo intercepted, and they forced to returne without any other thing doing.
               The kings brother ſéeing that ſide cloſed from him, and that he could not eaſly wade the Riuer of 
                     Ʋiue, (the ſame being his only impediment to follow the Princes campe) determined to paſſe aboue the head of the riuer in a village beneth Mirebeau. In the meane while the Princes, hauing bene at Nyort to ſée the Quéene of Nauarre, returned to the camp the ſecond of October, where they drue into counſel with reſolution to take the way to Partney and Nyort, and giue battell to the Catholikes if they aſſailed them in the way, ſommoning (for this purpoſe) the whole army to be ready by the dawning of the day: and euery Colonel and captaine to labour accordingly in his charge.
               The Catholikes were alſo of opinion to go to Nyort and beſéege it, and by that

meanes to prouoke the Princes to battell. The Princes campe (according to the order reſolute aforeſayd) was in a perfect readineſſe, ringed in battels and ſquares, pitching the next morning the third of October, vppon a little hill néere to Mont gontour, well diſpoſed (as is aforeſayd) to giue battel if the ennimie aduaunced, who alſo began to appéere and diſcouer on the left hand vppon an other round hill, from the bottom wherof they might eaſily diſcern the diſpoſition of the Princes armye, which when he had well viewed, he retired his marche as though he ment to draw directly to Nyort, vſing notwithſtanding ſuch order as his rings and companies kept néere togither. The Admirall bearing an eye to their doings, eſpied their pollitie and purpoſe of proceding, wherein as he ſuſpected, that they ſhotte at his aduauntage, as labouring to win way vpon him, made deſcend forthwith the Prynces armie from the hill where it was ſetled, of purpoſe to gaine and occupie the plaine afore them, wheruppon the Catholikes, in place to marche forward, commaunded a ſodain ſtay, holding

their Pikes vpright, and ringing them in ſquare and mean battels turned face to their vauntgard, winning (by that meanes) the hil from whence the princes armie were but now diſcended. And being maiſters in this ſort of the hill aboue the opinion & expectation of the Admiral, beganne to diſpoſe them ſelues to the ſhocke. And at the firſt deſcending from the hil, they ordred and ringed their footemen in the valey or ſide of the foote of the ſayd hil, not without great diſcretion and iudgement, keping by that meanes their footmen in couert, and defended from the ſtorme of the artillerie, which diſcharged vehemently as well on the one as other ſide. In the meane while the kings brother dreſſed and diſpoſed two batteries, not ſparing his body to trauell from one battell and ſquare to an other, with perſuaſion to the ſoldiors, to haue good hart, the like alſo did the Princes, viſiting in perſon euery ranke aſwell of horſſemen as footemen, whoſe pleaſant aſpect, & ſpecially in the prince of Nauarre, gaue cauſe of ſingular corage to the ſoldiors, whoſe ſtomackes beſides they were firmly ſetled

in the goodneſſe of the cauſe, yet they ſeemed to redouble in deſire, the rather at the gracious view and perſuaſion of the yong Prince. Immediatly after two of the clock in the after noone, the vantgarde of the Catholikes went to the charge with a ſquare and wing of .xviij. cornets of Reiſters, and great numbres of horſſemen, as well French as Italyan, who charged altogither ſo violently vpon the Lord of Mouy, and la Loue, that they were enforced to endure and take the charge, retiring thorow the battell of the Lanceknights which gréeued them ſore, notwithſtanding the Admirall ſupplyed the charge, and gaue with ſuch furye vppon the Catholike Reiſters, that he cutte great numbres of them in péeces, and immediatly with the remainder of hys horſſemen of the Uauntgarde, repulſed with force the Uauntgarde of the ennemy: wheruppon was raiſed a crye on the Admirals ſide, Uictory, Uictory, the ſame ſounding with ſuche noyſe of comfort in the eares of the mayne battayle, that diuers ranne thither to follow the victory:

When loe the Catholikes maine battell aduaunced, bending directly vppon the Princes battel, where they were in perſon. To the Catholikes battell ioyned a wing of horſſemen, which came from the vauntgarde. At the beginning, the battel of the Princes ſuſtained the charge, albeit finding and féeling their own weakneſſe, as being not able to fight togither (as the Catholikes did) were enforced to diſorder and fell out of aray, the horſſemen of the vauntgard diſperſed héere & there without order, and not drawne as yet into any ſafe pollicie or garde of war, folowed alſo the others, whereby bothe the French and Almaine footemen were left naked, whereof the Frenchmen were firſt forced to breake aray, and then the Papïſtes horſſemen on the one ſide, and y• 
                  Suyzers on the other, begā to buckle wt the Launceknights, who ſéeing thēſelues enuironed on all ſides, neyther preſent helpe, nor cauſe of further hope, the rather for that the Artillerie was planted euen at their féete, let fal their pikes and proſteate themſelues vppon their knées, amongſt whome ruſhed with no ſmall

fury the horſmen and certaine Suyzers vſing butchers mercy, and cut them all in pieces. The Counte Manſfeld and Lodouike retired alwaies in order of battell: a thyng worthy to be noted in ſo generall diſorder, hauing aboute them xiij. cornets of Reistres, whiche had not followed the others, with whome they gathered together certayne cornets of Frenchmen and ſo retired & neuer were charged. After the ouerthrow and ſpoyle of the Launceknights, the kings brother purſued the victory halfe a league and no further, and ſo encamped in the playne of Cron, where the battell was geuen: he was farre ſtronger in horſemen and footmen, than the princes, who had, not aboue vj. thouſand horſmen of all ſortes, as wel ſtraungers as others, viij. thouſand footemen Frenche, and moſt harquebuſiers, and laſtly, thrée thouſand Lanceknights. In this battayle the Princes loſte their Launceknightes, a thouſande or xij. hundred French footemen, and about an hundred horſes, vj. Cannons, two coluerines, and thre little field pieces: The lord d'Autricour captaine of a hundred light horſemen,

a very forward and galland Gentleman was there killed: the Lord d'Acyer and la Noue takē priſoners, and the Lord Admirall lightly hurt in the cheke: In the catholikes army were viij. or ix. thouſand horſmen, and xvj. or xviij. thouſand footemen with great ſtore of artillery. They loſt few footemē becauſe they foughté not, ſo that their greateſt loſſe conſiſted in horſemen, which, what with the chaunce of that day, and the encounter before touched, grew to great numbers, with diuers of no ſmall eſtate, as the Counte Manſfelde, and the Ringraue, the Marques of Baden, the yong Counte Cleremont Dauphynois, with many other Lordes and knightes of the order: the Duke of Guyſe, and the Ringraues brother hurt.
               The retraite of the Princes and their army was to Partenay about vij. leagues from the place of the battell, where, as they arriued the night following at midnight, ſo the next mornyng the iiij. of this moneth, they departed from thence with the Admirall, Counte Manſfelde, the Counte Lodouike and Henry de Naſſau
                  
brethern, with other great numbers of Lordes, gentlemen, and Capteines: comming the ſame day to Nyort, where they found the Q. of Nauarre, remaining there euer ſince they departed: in the mean time they layd the wayes & quarters by the Marſhals of the camp, to the ende the diſperſed ſorte might eftſoones reſort to their enſignes, which was performed the ſame day by the moſt parte of the horſemen.
            
            
               
               ¶ The third Booke of the ciuile warres and laſt troubles of France, vnder Charles the ninth.
               
               
                  NOt withſtanding this laſt ſucceſſe & loſſe at Mōtgontour, did both greue & amaze the Princes, yet they wer not vnmindfull to reaſſemble their forces, whereof ye moſt part of ye horſmen was forthwith vnder their ſtanderdes, which ye footmen could notdo with ſuch ſpeed in reſpect of their lōg retrait, & therfore ye vātgard of the battell were diſpoſed ſeuerally into ſondry quarters and villages néere to Nyort, by which meane the French footemen, who (in reſpect of their good order) were not much diſtreſſed in this conflict, reſorted redily to their enſignes & companies. In the meane while the Princes deliberated in the ſayd towne vpon the ſequell of their affaires, to whom albeit the loſſe ſéemed great, yet (conſideryng

that in a generall calamitie euery one hath his fortune, they couered their preſent gréefe, (and as the neceſſitie of their ſtate required) with ioyful countenance they aſſured eftſoones the remaynder of their diſperſed companies: In the euening the Quéene of Nauarre departyng from Nyort, wente to Rochereul, and the princes ye next morning tooke their way to Saintonge, leauing wtin Nyort bothe to make head ageinſt the catholiks, and let them to paſſe further, the Lord of Mouy with his regimen of horſmen, and .ij. regimens of footemē, beſide the ordinarie gar riſon, being perhaps .iij. hundred ſhot.
               Suche was the brute and heuy noyſe of this battell, that many companies of the Princes armie, as well footmen as horſmen, beſtowed in ſeueral charges in ſundry caſtles and townes, as well in Poyctou as Touraine, determined to leaue their garriſons, as not able to endure a ſpéedy ſiege, in reſpect they were weake within themſelues, and alſo hadde ſmall hope to be ſuccoured in ſufficient tyme. As they which were within Chauigny vppon 
                     Ʋien at Rochpoſé, captain Belon within

the Caſtle d'Angle with Cheſnebruſle his enſigne bearer, which was at Pruly, together with captaine Teil, captaine of the caſtell of Cleruaut, with his cornet of ſhot on horſebacke, departed, & abandoned their ſeuerall charges, taking their way to Charyte: Captein Lornay gouernour of Chastelleraut, aſſoone as the ſiege was raiſed, left the towne the vij. of October at xj. of the clock before noone with his owne company of footemen, and two others, whereof one was vnder captaine Morans, beyng in all about thre hundred footemen, and two hundred horſemen, and tooke their way towardes Charyte, paſſyng by leblane in Berry, & from thence came to Bourgdien, a towne belongyng to the Biſhop of Bourges, and heretofore taken by ſkaling by the Lorde de Bournay: there they ioyned with the reſt aforeſayd, and alſo the Lorde de Bricquemau the elder, who taried there with his companies in reſpect of his ſickneſſe.
               In the meane while, the kynges brother folowyng his victory, came to Partnay, which he found deſolate, directing hys way from thence to Nyort to beſiege

it: certaine forerunners of hys campe were come already to the gates to terrifie thoſe that were within the towne. At this alarum the Lorde de Mouy with certaine horſemen iſſued ſpedely out of the towne, who were no ſooner without the gates, than the other were retired almoſt out of ſight, wherupon he returned, and beyng one of the laſt to gouerne the retraite, as he was at pointe to enter the towne, one Montreuell (yelded to hym not long afore vnder coloure of religion) diſcharged a Piſtolet vppon hym, and hurt hym ſore in the head, flying immediatly well mounted vpon theThe Lord de Mouy hurt. ſelfe ſame horſe which the Lord de Mouy had geuen hym: who notwithſtandyng hys hurte, determined not to depart the towne, albeit beyng ſpecially aduiſed by his frendes to be caried where hys hurte may bée cured, hée left Nyort the ſeuenth day of October, and came to Sainctes, and from thence he was caried to Rochell, where within fewe dayes after he died, to the griefe of the armye: for he was of ſtayed counſel in any cauſe

of eſtate, of great ſpéede and iuſtice in execution, and of long experiēce in matters of warre, as witneſſe his actes as well in the battaile of Dreux, as other places of worthy memorie: the reſt appointed vnder him within Niort, left alſo the town together with the Lorde de la Broſſe, gouerner there, retiring with .iij. hundred ſhot to Rochell. This was the ſame Lord de la Broſſe, who with the ayde of the lord de Pluueau made headageynſt the Conte du Lude at the ſiege aforſayd.
               The kings brother finding the towne forſaken, entred withoute let: whether alſo came very ſhortly after, the king, the Quéene mother, and Cardinall of Lorain, being then néer Chynon: they began ther to deuiſe and deliberate vpon their preſent buſineſſe, accompting it of ſpeciall purpoſe, to recouer the Caſtell of Luſignan, wherin was gouernor the L. de Mirambeau, and that afore the Proteſtants had eyther renued their ſtrength, or wel aſſured their preſent companies: In this mynd they diſpatched forthwith certein to ſummon the Caſtell, who ſo preuayled with perſwaſions to the gouernour,

that eaſily inough he gaue vp the Caſtle only with liues and goodes ſaued: certen days afore the battel, there were beſtowed in this hold fiue Cannons which diſcended to the catholikes by couenaunt: this was .iiij. or .v. dayes after the battell of Mont-gontour. Nyort being thus abandoned, the Princes went to S. Jean d'Angely, the▪ ix. of this month, and ſo to Sainctes, and bicauſe they gathered, that the catholikes wold beſiege it, they determined to mā it with great numbres of men of warre, cauſyng to enter forthewith the horſemen of the L. de la Motte, wyth certein footmen: like wiſe captein la Mures company, beyng of the regimen of the L. de Virieu: At that time was gouernor the L. d'Oryoll, a gentleman of Sainctonge, who after was content to giue order to the policie and ſtate of the towne, leauyng the conſideration of matters of war to the L. de Pilles, whom the prince eſtabliſhed there for that purpoſe, and who as yet was not fully cured of the hurte in his thigh, receiued at the ſiege of Poyctiers. Hee with the Souldiers and the reſte of the inhabitauntes, reſolued

to defende the Towne, and endure the ſiege. The morow after, the princes came to Sainctes, and there made their armie paſſe ouer Charante.
               
               The tent he of this ſayd moneth, the Lord of Montbrun and Myrabell departed from the Campe to go into Languedocke, a iourney pretended by them long tyme before, ſo that they might lead thither their Regiments, and for this cauſe at the ſiege of Poic
                        •
                     iers, as is aforeſayde, the Lord de Pontais Marſhall of the Princes Campe, aſwell in theyr owne name as for other, Colonelles, Captains and Gentlemen of Dauphyne, were ſutors for leaue to goe for a certaine tyme into Dauphyne, and the more to enforce theyr motion, they ſhewed howe long they had followed the Campe, and that their Souldioures wearyed with ſo continuall warre, ſtoode in néede to be releeued with the freſhe aire and fellowſhippe of their Countrey, and laſtly as their generall feare to bée ſo euill wintered as the yeare before, dryue diuers numbres to retire without order to the Townes holden by the Religion in 
                     Ʋiuares,
                  
where they had ſure aboade, ſo if they bée not ſomewhat reléeued of theyr long and lothſome trauell alwayes in a campe, it is alſo to be feared that by little and little they doe not abandon their Enſignes, and leaue their Colonelles in the fields without Souldiors: The ſame being already reuealed vnto them by certaine numbers of their Soldioures, they could do no leſſe than cōmend their ſute with humble requeſt in themſelues for leaue and libertie to depart nowe that the ſiege of Poictiers is rayſed: The Princes anſwered that they coulde not order their requeſt and ſatiſfie the tyme together, bicauſe they were as yet incertaine what would bée the ende and iſſue of the ſiege, and therefore they thought it conuenyent that they taryed till the ende of the Monthe of September, hoping (after they had ſeene the reſolute proceedings of the Catholyques) to beſtowe their armie in garriſons to reſt all wynter: This anſwer qualified their requeſts with expectation of y• end of Septembre. When the armie being returned from the countrey of Touraiue,
                  
and ſoiourning néere to Fay la Vineuſe, their ſute was eftſoones put vpon new tearms: for which cauſe the gentlemen, capteins, and colonels of thoſe countrey men, aſſembled to deliberate vppon the motion: ſome were of opinion to purſue in generall a leaue and libertie of the Princes, ſeeing their tyme of September is expired: But others iudged the preſent ſeaſon moſt inconuenient to entreate for leaue, conſidering the ſtate & diſpoſition of the warre, euery day enclinyng to battayle, where they were bounde in dutie to bée, onleſſe they wold deface the honor of their actions paſſed. Which laſte opinion, ſo ſettled into the moſt of them, that they reſolued vniuerſally bothe to mortifie their deſire to go home, and alſo to giue ouer to attempte further leaue, attendyng eyther by battayle, or by ſome happie peace, to make them ſelues frée of the warre, and ſo returne and remayne quietly in theyr houſes.
               And thus the Lord de Montbrun and Myrabell remayned in the Campe vntyl the tyme wherein they thoughte to execute

theyr enterpriſe: wherein after they had communicated with the Lorde de Verbelet brother to the biſhop of Puy in Auuergne, and many other as wel of Dauphyne, as the countreys thereabout (as of purpoſe to haue their company in the voyage) they went to Angouleſme, to the end to tary there for their furniture and ſtrength.
               This béeing knowne in the Campe, many came to Angouleſme to aſſiſt the voyage, ſo that they were in all, about foure hundred horſemen in very good poynte to fyght, with certeyn numbreof ſhotte on horſebacke, with the whyche the ſayde Lorde de Mountbrun, Mirabell, and Verbelet, departed the fouretéenth day of the moneth of October, and takyng theyr waye by Perigueux, came to Solliac the Sondaye the ſixtéenth of October, aboute twoo of the clocke at after noone. They thoughte there to paſſe Dordonne, but it was ſo ſwelled by the greate raynes falne certeyn dayes before, that it was not poſſible to wade ouer. By whiche difficultie they were

conſtrained to ſtay there, ſendyng for ſuche boates as they could find, by which they beganne to ferry the ſame day and all the next night, not with ſuch ſpede (in reſpect of their fewe boates) but certaine numbers were not yet paſſed in the morning. Which being eſpied of the Catholike garriſons thereby, and ſpeciallye they of Sarba, ſent out three ſkore horſſemen with certaine footemen and Payſantes to viewe the number of ſuche as were yet to paſſe, and what watche and garde they kept. Who with others to the number of two hundreth, ſéeing neyther order vſed, nor any ſhot his matche kindled, fell vppon them, and diſcomfited them wythout reſiſtaunce: manye were ſlaine, and the reſt ſtript into their ſhertes, and ſo ſent ouer the paſſage to followe their companie: Some vſing a ſpeede aboue the reſt in paſſing the day before, the better to refreſhe them at their eaſe, were ſette vppon in the night within their lodgings, and ledde away priſoners by the Catholikes: Amongeſt whom were the Lord de Quintel, a Dauphynois,
                  
                  Mormoiron de Veneſin, guide to the whole company, A Phiſition called M. M
                        •
                     rle with thrée others: the Lord de Sarraz a Gentleman of Viuares, was taken by the ſame a little before, but forthwith ſet at libertie.
               The noyſe whych the Catholykes made in charging them in the water ſide, gaue the Alarum to thoſe that had alreadye paſſed the Riuer, béeing in a Towne not farre off, who falling forthwith into araye and order of defence, after they hadde taryed ſometyme to receyue them that eſkaped to their ſuccoures, began to marche towardes Acyer, wherein they entred the next morning, and from thence wythoute other let, they went to Oryllac in Auuergne, from whence they departed, as ſhall be héereafter declared,
               After Niort was taken, the Kings brother determyned to beſéege the town of S. Iean de Angely in Sainctonge, and for that ſame effecte drue hys armie and power on that ſide. The Lorde of Byron,
                  
marſhall of his camp, about the x. of October, acompanied with certeine cornets of horſmen, came to ſommon the towne for the King: to whom the garriſon made an aunſwer by the Lorde de la Ramiere, that they ment not to ſurrender the town by other compoſition than a generall peace including the publike quiet and profit of the realme of Fraunce, wherupon he returned. And captaine la Motte accompanied with xv. or xx. horſemen, went forthwith to ſkome and ſkoure the wais within halfe a league aboute the towne, and ſpecially of that ſyde to Niort, fynding within a village certeine footemen of the catholiks, wherof ſome were ſlaine, ſom put to flight, and v. or vj. taken and ledde priſoners into the towne.
               In the meane whyle they of the towne prepared for the ſiege, vſing great deuyſe and diligence in fortifying dyuerſe partes of it, ſome did beate downe parte of the ſuburbes of Aulnis and Tailleburg, too cutte from the Catholikes all conuenient meanes too encampe there. Some fylled vp the ditches in neceſſarie

places, in effect they lefte nothing imperfect which neceſſarily belonged to the fortification of the towne, ye better to endure the ſiege. The L. de Pilles gouernour there for the matters of warre (as is ſayd) made a viewe of the footemen, whiche were a thouſand or .xj. hundred of all ſortes, as well ſtraungers as others, Immediatly after this muſter, the L. de Perſonne arriued there with .xxx. or .xl. horſſemen, and then (bycauſe they would omit nothing tending to the defence of the Towne) they beganne to make fire workes, with other artificiall engines to annoye the enimies.
               About the .xiiij. daye of this moneth,S. Iean de Angeli beſieged. the Kings brother planted hys ſiege before Sainct Iean d'Angely, aboute three of the clocke in the after noone. The Lorde of Gouas regimen with certeyne other, was lodged in the Suburbes of Aul
                        ••
                     s: dealing not that daye with the Suburbes of Taillebourg, as fearing they could not enter but with great perill. They within the Towne hadde forſaken this Subburbe, bycauſe they would not put theyr men to the hazarde in kéeping it: Albeit,

the Catholikes forbare not to ſeaſe vppon it the next daye, and lodge within it. The Proteſtantes fortifyed the Fort or place of defence without ye gate d'Aulnis, & filling it with earth, rammed vp the gate, omitting nothing neceſſarie, eyther to force or pollicie, wherein, to enforce a general diligēce in their fortificatiō, proclamations were pronounced thorow the Towne, that all people, as well men, women, as children, able or apte to trauell, ſhold labour and worke at the rampiers, and that euery one ſhould haue alwayes before his dore, three or foure ſackes ful of dong, to be employed in neceſſarie places. According to theſe commaundementes, there was a common aſſiſtence at the rā
                  piers, as well of ſtrāgers, as people of the towne, by whom was performed a wonderfull indeuour.
               As ſoone as the Catholykes had made them ſelues Lordes of the Suburbes aforeſayde, the Proteſtantes made a ſallie with fortie horſſemen, by the gate De Matta, and ſet vppon the Suburbes of Aulnis, where they killed foure or fyue men, and then fell on ſkouring the wayes

towardes Nyort, tyll the place of execution, where they founde an Italian on horſſebacke, and brought hym into the Towne.
               About the .xviij. day of this moneth, the Proteſtantes made an other ſallie by the gate d'Aulnis, and iſſuing out aboue the forte, they deſcended within the ditche by a ladder: there were of this faction (and conducted by Capteyn la Motte.) Cl. ſouldioures with white ſhirtes aboue their garmentes, who charging ſo happily vppon the Suburbes d'Aulnis, founde the Catholykes playing at Cardes, and ſo withoute any watche to diſcouer them, they killed about thrée ſcore or foure ſcore Souldioures, and then retired vppon the falſe trenche of the ditche by the helpe of their harquebuſears, whiche were vppon the fort of the gate. They wanne in thys exployte two footemen enſeignes .xl. or .l. harquebuſears, certeyne morrions, corcelets, and pollaxes of ſtéele, whiche they caried into the towne, looſing not aboue .ij. or .iij. of their companie.
               The Catholykes in the meane whyle drue neare their Artillerie whiche they

planted ſo aptely in a vyne towardes Nyort, as it might beate as well the gate of Nyort, as the bulwarke of the Port d'Aulnis, and alſo the tower betwéene the two gates. Their batterie which they beſtowed there, was foure Canons and a Colueryne: Afore they diſcharged any batterie, they demanded to parley, & for that cauſe, would that the Lord of Pilles ſhould haue come foorth of the towne vpon their faith, which the Proteſtantes thought not conuenient for their ſafetie: albeit, in hys place, they ſent oute of the Towne la Riuiere, who was no ſooner withoute, than the Canon beganne to beate, whiche cauſed him to cutte off hys further proceeding with ſpéedie returne.
               Thus the batterie beganne the xxij. daye of October, beating the Tower of the Towne neare to the Port d A'ulnis, and continued all the daye, and towarde night it enforced a breach a fortie or fiftie paſe wyde, wherevppon the Catholykes ſent one of their companie to viewe it, who being come to the brink of the ditch, and diſcouering hym ſelfe to ſuruey the breache, was killed with a ſhotte: ſo that

that daye paſſed without aſſaulte or any other ſpeciall attempte or acte. In the night the Proteſtantes with great diligence repaired their breache, and lette downe to the ditche certeyne labourers and Souldioures, to ryd awaye the ruyne and broken ſtuffe of the Wall falne into it. Theſe labourers and ſouldiours afore they came oute of the ditche, they ſette vp a pretie Wall of a mans height, to make the place leſſe acceſſible. Beſydes, the Proteſtantes kéeping ſtyll a carefull mynde of their Towne and eſtate, conſidered diligently where, and howe they might bée annoyed by the batterie planted in the Uyne, whiche hadde there remeyned about eight dayes, withoute diſcharge of Canon: wherevppon they caſt a trenche wel flancked behynd the breach, vppon the whiche they beſtowed certeyne Veſſelles and hoggeſheades to paui
                     •
                  e their ſhotte. In the effecte, the breache was ſo ſupplied, as the place was ſtronger than afore.
               From this batterie, the morrowe after came certeyne thunders of the Canon

againſt the Forte of the Port d'Aulnis: and lykewyſe thrée or foure diſcharges agaynſt the Porte of Nyort, not forbearing notwithſtanding their firſt batterie. But ſéeing thys batterie, brought foorth ſmall effecte (not many dayes after) they beſtowed in place of the Canons, fyue Coluerins.
               Remouing the ſayd Canons to the entrey of the Suburbes d'Aulnis, both directly before and alſo ſo neare the ſayde Fort, that onely the ditche was betwéene them. From thence beganne a vehement batterie agaynſt the ſayde Forte, as well by theſe Canons as the Coluerins planted in their place, whiche beſtowed certeyne bollettes flanker wyſe, within the ſayde breache euen to the Caſtell. The batterie continued all the daye, all that night, and all the nexte morrowe of one violent furie without ceaſing, ſo that both the Fort and the Portal (by whiche is the ordinarie entrie into the Towne) were almoſte beaten to pouder.
               In the meane whyle, the Proteſtantes made a couert waye betwéene

the Forte and the gate, to the ende, that the ruyne falling from the gate, ſhould not annoye nor hynder the entrey of the Fort.
               After this long and vehement batterie, the L. de Guytinieres demaunded to ſpeake with the Proteſtantes, and vnder the honoure and vertue of their word, entred the Towne the foure and twentie day of this moneth, aboute two of the Clocke at after noone. He laboured to induce them to render the Towne, but the Lorde de Pilles remayned conſtant in his firſte aunſwere, that there could no other price buy the Towne, than an aſſured peace, to the profitte and quiet of the Realme. Wherevppon the Lorde de Guitinieres returned againe and came to the Campe without other effecte of hys purpoſe.
               Hée was no ſooner out of the ſayde Towne, then the Catholykes ruſhed fiercely to the aſſaulte ſo vnlooked for, that the Proteſtantes doubted of their ſauetie, the rather bycauſe the aſſaulte was maynteyned as well at the breache

of the fort as on the right and left ſyde of it within the ditch, the better to come to the gate of the towne which they had battered (as you haue heard). And for their more eaſie comming to the breach of the forte, they had prouided great numbers of pyonners to beare ſackes full of earth and caſt them vpon the breach: who beſydes turning vp ye earth, threw ſtones againſt the proteſtantes, by which they greatly greued diuerſe of them: They preſented vpon the breach .vj. target men followed with a good number of ſhot, who albeit ventured farre to enforce the proteſtants, yet (being repulſed) they retyred without any great effects. This aſſault laſted from thrée of the clocke in the after noone tyll night, during the which was great waſte of ſhot and powder by the proteſtantes in ſuſtaining ſo hoat aſſault: in the nyght they fortified and repaired their breaches as well as they could, as they alſo for bare not to do euen in the tyme of the batterie, filling them vp as faſt as they were made with ſackes of dung. In thys night alſo they entrenched them ſelues within the fort, whereby the breaches, the morrow

after, were put in defence.
               Albeit the Lord de Sanſac (after the ſiege of Charite) was ſent for to go into Touraine to ioyne with the catholikes camps as is ſayd, yet (whether it were by countermaundement or other ſpecial occaſion) he ſturred not from where he was: And yet in the ſame moneth of October, he beſieged the towne of Noyers in Bourgogne, the which without great reſiſtāce he tooke by compoſition, the ſame notwithſtanding not obſerued, becauſe forty of the ſouldiers that defended it, beinge led to Troy in Champagne, and afore they entred priſon, were cut in péeces by the people.
               After he had taken Noyers, be determined to beſiege Vezeley in Bourgogne gouerned at that tyme by the Lord de Sarazyn. There was for the garde of it onely two companies of footmen vnder captaine Rybaupierre, and the young Lord de Sarazyn with two cornets of horſmen of the Lord de Bloſset, and of Belanſeau, with certaine numbers of gentlemen retyred thither to ayde the ſiege. The Lord de Sanſac had to furniſh this ſiege about .xxij. enſignes of footmen, whereof the Lord de Foyſly was

colonell of ten cornets of horſmen, foure cannons and two culuerines.
               He arryued with his horſmen to ſuruey the towne the ſixt of October, retyring at night to lodge at Aquiens and S. Pere. villages ſeituate at the hil foote, vpon the toppe where of ſtandes the city.
               The eleuenth of the ſame moneth he made approche wyth three of his companies of footemen, at the gate du Barle, otherwiſe called S. Stephen: certaine of the towne, but ſpecially the Nobility that were there, iſſued out, and repulſed preſently the ſaid three enſignes, whereof two were put to diſorder and flight afore they could get to Aquiens, where they ment to make their retrait. In the chaſe were killed about ſixe and forty, and as many hurt, all the Captaines, Lieuetenaunts, enſigne bearers, and ſergeaunts of theſe two companies, were there killed, ſauing thrée which were led priſoners within the towne: the thirde company hidde them ſelues within a tuft of vynes from whence (being not diſcouered) they retyred in the night to Aquiens, notwithſtanding thys charge and chaſe, the Lord

                  de Sanſac, marched with his campe the ſatterday, the eyght of this moneth, and towards the euening inuyroned ye town, the ſame euenyng hée approched his artillery, which the tenth day followyng in the morning began to batter a Towre of the ſyde of the gate du Barle, right againſt the watring place, the ſame contynuing ſo vehemently two full dayes, that at the ſecond dayes ende, a corner of the towre fell to the earth: The wedenſday the twelfth day he remoued foure of hys peeces of the ſyde of S. Pere, thundring a new batterie againſt the gate called the wickette, aboue the which eyght enſignes of footemen came and pitched the thyrtenth of this moneth, remaining there till the whole armye diſcampped. The fouretenth day hée remoued alſo two of his péeces, and planted them agaynſte a Tower called the Colombs, to the ende (wyth more eaſe) to batter the ſayde wickette, agaynſt the which the battrie endured till the next daye. When hauyng nowe beaten two breaches) hee gaue the aſſaulte to them both at one inſtaunte, offerynge to ſcale on that

ſyde of the Cordeliers: His aſſaultes were reſiſted, and his people ſo repulſed, that they were out of hart eftſoones to return: and therefore the night following, aboute midnight, he rayſed his ſiege, and retired to Auallon hauing loſt at the aſſaultes & in the time of the ſiege iij. or .iiij. hundreth men as well footemen as horſſemen: Of the Proteſtantes ſyde, there were ſlayne and hurte, only ten men, wherof the Lord Sarazyn was killed with the Canon, béeing in the firſt Tower that they battered, whome the Lorde de Bloſsar ſucceded in place and charge, choſen by the common voyce and opinion of the multitude, in reſpect of his vertue and wiſdom in defence of the Towne. The Lord of Sanſac rayſed not his ſiege for other purpoſe thā to prouide other Canons, all his others beyng eyther crackt or burſt in theſe batteries.
               The Princes being at Sainctes, aſſoone as they were enformed of the ſiege of S. Iean d'Angely determined to go into Gaſcogne with two or thrée thouſand harquebuſears on foote, and al their horſmen, leauing the remeynder of their footemen to ayde the Townes wherein were garriſons:

they had two principall reaſons to induce them to this iourney, as to drawe the ſiege from S. Iean d'Angely eſ
                     •
                  eming the campe would followe them, and alſo to ioyne with the Uicountes forces, ouer whom (as is ſayd) the Mongomery commaunded. They departed from Sanctonge about the beginning of the ſiege, and with their horſmen as well Frenche as Almayns, (who after this voyage had ſent their cariage to Roche▪
                   and ſhotte on foote, whereof ſome were led by the Lorde de Rouray) tooke their way towardes Montauban: And becauſe ye riuer of Dordoune, (by which they muſt pas) was not at that tyme paſſeable without veſſels, the Lord de la Beſſonniere (by whoſe meanes as is afore ſaid the town of Oryllac was taken) departed with a hundred horſes, and gathering together as many boates as hée could fynde along Dordonne, cauſed them to be brought to Argentall, to the end the Princes army ſtayed not at the paſſage there, albeit comming thether about the x
                     •
                  v. of this month, they were conſtrained to ſtay ther almoſt eight dayes afore their whole army could paſſe. In which meane

while certain of their army ſummoned ye town of Sourd in Auergne to be rēdred to ye Princes, to the obediēce & vſe of the King. wherunto as thei refuſed at ye firſt: ſo, cōſidering ye cōdition of their owne ſtate, with the preſent force of the enemy, yelded vpō couenaunt to ſet open the gates and pay ſixe thouſand frankes, not to be committed to pillage: the L. of Montbrun and Mirabell being come to Orillac (as is ſayde) their companies lodged within a league of the towne in a village called Arpaion, to reſt their horſes which were weary wt long trauaile, where the L. de Montbrun fell ſick of a cōtinuall ague, y• ſame partly cauſing y• aboad & ſtay of ye army, albeit féeling by ye courſe of his ſickneſſe, y• hée was not able to make preſent departure from thēce, imparted ye ſame wt the L. Mirabell, to ye end ye voyage lingred no lōger, whervpō the L. Mirabel wt .4. C. horſmē put him ſelf on ye way ye .24. of ye ſame mōth to perform his iourney into Languedoc: he had (amongſt others) in his cōpany ye L. Foulques, who not many dayes before came to to y• ſaid Orillac wt .lx. horſmē, of purpoſe to accōpany the L. Mirabell: their departure was neither ſo ſecret, nor their iorney ſo

ſſrely conueyed, but the Papiſtes which were in certain towns & caſtells about Orillac, wer ſpedily aduertiſ
                     •
                  ed, who cōmaū
                  ded ye towns mē of euery village to ſoūd ye alarū bell, to ye end to warne & diſcouer y• place thei paſſed by, & ſo ſet vpō & diſcōfyt them. According to this charge the To
                        •
                     ſain was ſounded at the ſame inſtant that the Lord Myrabell and his troupe diſcended from a hill .ij. leagues from Orillac, whervpon the garriſon of Roilliac (hauing ſene the troup paſſe by thē in negligent order, and leauing wtall their owne charge made no ſmall ſpede by a croſſe waye a thwart the hill, & ſet vpon them ſodamly in ye village where the Tocſam was ſounded & the ſame in ſuch ſubtill ſeaſon & ſort, as afore they were diſcried) they killed .vj. or. vij of ye 
                  Mirabells company & ſo retired, leading with them certain priſoner: sye troup notwtſtanding moūted aboue y• village wher being ringed & drawen into battell order, they diſcouerd in ye tops of ye hils concours of people from all parts to intercept them in a ſtrait by which they ſhould paſſe their guydes (beſides) bringing them further increaſ of fere & daunger by general flockes

the popular ſort to ſet vpon them in that ſtrait, whereupon they were conſtrained to turne backe, and retyre to their quarter of Orpayon, and there to conſult of a ſafe meane to paſſe.
               The Lord Verbelet, in the meane while remayned at Oryllac, as gouernour in Auergne, vnder the princes, according to the authoritie gyuē him at his departure frō ye camp. Within few dayes after his comming to the towne, and being acknowledged of the garriſon as their gouernor, ordeyned that thrée hundreth har quebuſears on foote, and thrée hundreth pykemen ſhold bée enterteyned for the garde of ye towne: for whoſe pay he leuied of the inhabitants a loane of ten thouſande Frankes, and ſo muſtered his men of warre vppon the beginning of Nouember.
               And now (to let ſlip no neceſſarie matter paſſed in October) The Lord of Saint Heran, gouernor for the King in Auergne, departing from S. Floure, with certeyne Gentlemen of his trayne, came to the caſtel of S. Salpic
                        •
                     , wher-knocking with ſome inciuill vehemencie at the poſterne, the Gentlewomā of the place, whoſe huſband

with certaine ſouldiers, and garded the Caſtell▪ diſcended and ſimply opened the gate, to whom the Lord de S. Heran ſayd he was come thether to beſtow garriſon in the Caſtell: the gentle woman anſwered that this errand was without néede, becauſe that as the place was already furniſhed, ſo ber huſbande (as ſhe thought) would not admitte any newe numbers, where with as ſhe offered to haue ſhut the gate & returne into the Caſtell, the Lord S. Heran thruſt ſo rudely at the gate, that the gentlewoman being throwne to the ground, he entred the gate by force vpon her, by whoſe ſkrike or crye, one of the houſholde ſeruauntes diſcended ſpedely, and ſeing his miſtreſſe vpon the ground, diſcharged his piſtolet, and hurt the Lord S. Heran in the arme, who alſo fearyng further perill, flong out of the poſterne, which immediatly was ſhut vppon hym, albeit he cauſed all, or moſt of his troupe to remaine ſtill afore the ſayd Caſtell, to withſtand that no man ſhold enter till he ſent new forces from S. Flour, whether as he ſpéedely repayred, ſo he diſpatched from thence certaine numbers of footemen to

ioyne with the troupe hée had left afore the Caſtell, with charge not to departe till it were taken: M. de Sall
                        •••
                     s, to whome bothe the place and charge belonged, lay very ſicke, who in reſpect of his ſmall ſtrength hauing not aboue ſixe ſouldiers, and withall douting ſpedy ſuccours, made no great reſiſtance but yelded the Caſtel by compoſition to haue only their lyues ſaued, whiche albeit was faithfully promiſed, yet traiterouſly perfourmed, becauſe both her huſbande was killed, and ſhe led priſoner to Saint Floure, charged to be the onely cauſe of S. Heran's hurt.
               The taking of the towne of Oryllac, (whereof is ſpokē before) amazed greatly them of Auergne, wherefore hauing gathered people from many partes, determined to beſiege it, afore they within could haue meane to fortify them ſelues. And for this purpoſe, the Lorde Rochebonne gouernour of Puy and the graunde pryor of Auergne, with their regimentes of footmen, came to Marzillac in Roargues, attending there (as it was ſayde) certaine

cannons which ſhuld be ſent from Rhodes to batter Orillac. In the meane while alſo the Lord de Saint Heran, with no leſſe diligence aduaunſed at S. Folure the other forces and alſo the Nobilitie of Auergne, whom hée ſummoned ſpéedely to repayre thether: Albeit hearing in the heat of his diligence, of the Princes comming to Argentall, be let fall his enterpryſe.
               The men of Auergne fearing the princes would ſeaſe vpon the lowe countrey called la Lymagne, & ther to winter, in reſpect of the generall fertility of that place, drew in troupes of paiſants & comminalties into the ſtraites of the moūtaines, by which they imagined the army ſhoulde paſſe, and there hewing downe greate numbers of trées, beſtowed them athwart the highe wayes to trouble the paſſage of the horſſemen.
               The reſt of the countrey were beſtowed by the Lorde de S. Heran in townes and Caſtels▪ to the end they ſhould not be ſodenly taken: the princes beguyled their opinion as not paſſing ye way, but directed their iorny ouer Dordone & ſo into Quercy
                  
and beneath Cadenat, paſſed the Riuer of Lot, and ſo from thence arriued at Montaubon, in Nouember. 1569.
               The Lorde de Mirabell and Foulques, (hauing remained about Oryllac, ſince the charge they hadde neare to Rolliat) tooke way about this tyme with their troupes to ende their voyage: who paſſing the riuer of Lot beneath Cadenat, and after they had trauerſed the mountaines of Rouarges and Sauennes, arriued withoute let at Priuas and Aulbenas, townes in 
                     Ʋiuarez, holden by thoſe of the religion.
               The ſiege continued all this whyle afore S. Fean d'Angely, where the King, the Quéene mother, and Cardinal of Lorrain, were in perſone, The morrowe after that the breache of the Fort was aſſaulted, the King procured the proteſtants to be commoned withall, to the ende to render the Towne by compoſition: Wherein they vſed this perſuaſion, the rather to entice them, that his Maieſtie hadde determined to erect a puiſſant Armie to make warre in Allemaigne, wherein as they might ſteade that ſeruice in ſpeciall turne, ſo his Maieſtie was carefull not to ſpill men of

ſuch experience & value, and other wayes, if they would not embrace his Maieſties offer and compoſition, he would thunder vppon them all hys forces till he hadde wonne the Towne. They aunſwered as before, that they would not render the Towne till there were a peace aſſured to the profit & quiet of the whole realme: where vppon the King required to ſpeake with the Lorde de Perſonne, as well in cauſes concerning the Towne, as to ſende him to the Princes in the meane and matter of peace: Whereunto the Proteſtantes condeſcended, and ſent oute of the Towne the Lorde de Perſonne, receyuing in hys pleadge and hoſtage the Lorde de Guyteniers. After the King hadde conferred with the Lorde de Perſonne, they grewe to capitulations as followed:
               Firſt, that if the Lorde de Pilles were not ſuccoured within ten dayes, to render the Towne to the King, their lyues and goods ſaued.
               2 That for the aſſurance of this, there ſhould bée deliuered in hoſtage .ij. Knights of the Order, and they to bée ſent eyther

to Rochel or Angouleſme, at the Proteſtantes choice.
               3 That during this ſpace of ye .x. dayes, truce ſhoulde bée betwéene them, with charge that neyther they ſhould fortifie in the Towne, nor they without vppon their trenches, nor yet approche the wals of the Towne.
               4 Laſtely, that in the meane whyle the Lorde de Perſonne ſhould go to the Princes with a Gentleman of his Maieſtie, to treate of peace. According to the whiche the ſayde L. de Perſonne with the Kings Gentleman went to the Princes in the Gentlemans place the L. de Guytiniers was ſent oute of the Towne to the Campe.
               They which the Princes lefte (as you haue hearde) at Sainctes, to defende the Towne, maynteyned their charge tyll now. And hearing that Sainct Iean d'Angely was in parleye, and at point to yéeld, fearing withall, that it was their lot and turne to bée beſieged nexte: They forſooke the Towne and retired to the other garriſones whiche were theraboute: wherin the King forgatte not to embrace the

oportunitie, ſending foorthwith certayne companies to ſeaſe vppon it, to the ende, that by that meane the waye myght bee cloaſed from them of the Religion, beyng at Angouleſme and Coygnac, to goe or come to Rochell: Lykewyſe they of Rochell ſhould bée harde to ſende ſuccoures to them.
               The Lorde of Bricquemau laye all this whyle in the Towne of Bourg-dieu in Berry, (as hath bin ſayde) by reaſon of his ſickeneſſe: During whoſe aboade there, his troupes made ordinarie warre vppon the garriſon of Chasteau-roux, vppon Indre, wherein the Lorde of the place reteyned thrée companies of footemen for the Catholykes. There were often incurſions & enterviewes betwéene them: the ſame continuing almoſte ſixe wéekes, in which tyme were killed of the one and other ſyde, almoſt two hundreth men. After the ſayde Lorde Bricquemau was reſtored to health, he retired in thys moneth of Nouember with his troupes to Charitié.
               
               During the ſiege of S. Fean d'Angely, ye town of Nimes in Languedoc was taken

by the religion the .xv. of this moneth, and by this meane: There is a mylne in the towne neare to the walles, and to make it grynde, there comes a ſpring or fountayne not farre of, thorow a ſluſe or creuiſh in the wall dreſſed with grates or barres of yron: They of the religion in that countrey practiſed intelligence wyth the myller, by whoſe ayde they pluckt vp by night the ſayd yron grate, and ſo conueyed into the towne by that creuiſh and channell, about a hundreth ſouldiers, who 
                     •
                  id them ſelues within the myll, attending the houre to execute their enterpriſe, in the meane while they ſent from Pryuas and Aubenas two hundreth horſſemen, and euery one a harquebuſhear behynde him, who being in good point afore the gates of the towne at the houre appointed, they within the mill iſſued out, and got to the gate, which with certaine engines and inſtrumentes apt to countermyne the locke, they ſet open, and ſo the companies without, entred & made themſelues Lords of the town: the Lorde of S. Andre gouernour there, conſidering of his preſent perill, thought to ſaue hymſelfe

in the caſtell, albeit as he lept out of a window he brake his leg and ſo was taken, dying within two dayes after: there were ſlayne in the towne at this entrie about a hundreth or ſixe ſcore men, and within fewe dayes certaine miniſters of Juſtice: Incontinently arriued at Nimes the Lord de S. Romain brother to the L. de S. Chaumont, ſent thither by the Princes to gouerne in their abſence the countrey of Languedocke, he had with him in companye a great number of horſmen, beſides many that came to him as the Lorde de Foulques, with the troupes which he brought from the camp. In the meane while they of the caſtell denied to render, making maruelous defence, notwithſtanding they were but few in number: there were ſundry attempts in vaine to winne them, with certaine mynes ſorting to no effect, and yet after certaine monethes the Caſtell was put into the handes of them of the towne.
               And now touching the ſiege of S. Iean d'angely, it hath bene ſayd that the Lorde de Pilles promiſed to render the towne if he were not reſkewed within ten dayes,

which being paſſed, & he voyd of ſuccours, the L. of Byron ſummoned him to his promiſſe, to whom the L. de Pilles aunſwered, that albeit he beleued that either they had ſtayed the L. de Perſonne there, or els where, or at leaſt had not ſent him to the Princes, yet if they woulde inlarge hys tearm, he would render the towne, whervpon they gaue him .ij. dayes more, wtin the which he diſpatched forth of the towne by the port Matta, a gentleman to go to Angouleſme & prouide ſuccors. In ye meane while, the thurſday the .xvij. of Nouember the L. de Guytimers entred the Towne with certaine captaines and marſhalls or harbengers for lodging, wyth intent to take poſſeſſion of the towne, wherof Guytyniers gaue this manifeſt inkling in ſaying to the L. de Pylles, that as that night he gaue ye watch their charge, ſo it ſhould fall to his lot to do it the next day.
               The gentleman ſent to Angouleſme for ſuccors vſed ſuch diligence as the L. de S. Seuerin accompanied with .l. or .lx. gentlemen on horſbacke, entred without let S. Iean d'Angely by ye port Matta, the fryday being the .xviij. of this month, which as it

chaunced contrary to the general opinion of the catholickes, ſo it amazed moſt of all ye L. de Guityniers, thinking nothing leſſe than to go out of the towne againe: albeit ſeing in the friday morning certain numbers of ſtraunge gentlemen muſtring in cōpanies about ye town, he chaunged his opinion and was forthwith put out of the town wt ſuch as entred with him not with ſtanding the cōming of theſe ſuccors: ye L. de Biron cōmoned with ye L. de Pilles at ye gate of Nyort, whō as he ſūmoned to perform his promis to ye King in yelding the town, the day of cōuention being expyred, ſo L. de Pilles told him that he had receiued ſuccors, and therfore diſcharged of his promiſſe to render ye town, wherin ye L. Byron caueled wt him in that his reſcue came not from ye princes, with perſwaſion alſo that he ſhould not ſtand ſo much on the help of foure or fiue horſes come to him, and therupon cauſed to be read alowde the capitulations agréed vpon betwene thē. The L. de Pilles was conſtant in his opinion, alleadging y• of what value or numbers ſo euer hys ſuccours were, they were ſuche as both ſuffiſed hys néede and

contented him, charging them vppon the inſtant to drawe backe from the walles. Immediately the batterie began of freſh, as wel vpon the old breach which was vpon the forte or towre of the wall, as againſt the forte of the gate d'Aulins, and alſo againſt the caſtel, againſt which were bent three cannons: this battrie brought downe to the earth the caſtell gate, from which, they went vppon a baſtion or platforme of earth before the caſtell: this being well noted of the proteſtantes, they made an other paſſage within the ditche, beneath the firſt, and neare to that baſtyon of earth, they made an opening or window in the wall of the towne, without the which and within the ditche they ſet vp a cloſe pale or couert to flanke the Caſtell. In the meane while the Catholikes growing colde in their battrie, and yet continuing it eyght dayes, beate downe a part of a towre of the Caſtell of that ſide to ye ſubburbs of Tailebourg, called the hangmans Towre, together with a great ruine of the walles from the caſtel to the olde breach.
               During this battrie, the proteſtantes

made a ſally with fifty or forty horſmen, and thrée or foure hundreth footmen by the gate Nyort, vppon the which they erected a brigde of woodde to diſcende to the ditch.
               The horſmen of this ſally were led by captaine la Motte, who charged vpon two cornets of horſmen which were in garde on that ſyde to Nyort, whereof certaine were killed, and ſome loſt their ſtanderds, and one of their enſigne bearers led hurte into the towne, whereof he dyed forthwith: the footemen were gouerned by diuers Captaines, who, charging the Papiſtes in their trenches, made them forſake them, and loſe their culuerynes, which were forthwith choked and fyre put in fyue or ſix barrels of powder. They tooke alſo in this diſaray an enſigne of the footemen, with many other armes and armors of the Catholikes, carying all into the towne whether they retyred aſſone as they had effected their enterpryſe: they killed in this ſally about thyrty or fortie Catholikes, and loſing but one of theyr owne which was hurt in the retraite, beſydes him that ſet the powder on fyre, who was a litle ſinged.
               
                  Not many dayes after this ſallie, the Catholikes remoued their Canons planted in the entrye of the Suburbs d'Aulnis, and pitched them vppon the brinke of the ditche on the right ſyde of the Caſtel, very neare the battered fort of the gate. There were in this batterie ſix Canons, beating as well within the entrey of the ſayd fort, as againſt the Wall from it to the Caſtel, which was alſo beaten with the other thrée Canons afore ſayde. The Coluerins ceaſſed not alſo to thunder as well flankerwyſe as to the olde breache.
               This batterie was of ſuch violēt force, that in .iij. dayes and an halfe (which was the ſpace it endured) there were diſcharged aboue xv. or .xvj. hundreth ſhots of Canons, and many killed that labored to relieue the breache. In which vehement extremitie, the L. de Pilles ſent oute by the Port Matta, the ſame Gentleman, whom he vſed afore in the ſupplie of ſuccoures: by whoſe ſecond diligence, the Lord de S. Auban, a gentleman of Daulphine accompanied with .xl. horſſemen, enterpriſed to come to the reliefe and ſuccoure of the

ſayde Towne: Who (notwithſtanding) was ſo encountered in the waye, as he was forced to retire with the loſſe of thrée of his people, and alſo the Gentleman his guyde.
               The .xxix. day of Nouember, Sebaſtian Luxenbourg, Coūte de Martigue, Knight of the Order, Capteyne of fiftie men at armes, and Lieutenaunt generall to the King in his Duchie and countrey of Britayne, beyng at the batterie, was ſtroken in the head with a harquebuſhot, whereof he dyed, to the generall griefe of the Papiſtes.
               In the beginning of December, about nine of the clocke in the morning the Catholykes demaunded to parley with the Lorde de Pilles, whereunto he liſtened with leſſe difficultie, in reſpecte he was not furniſhed wt munition of war for one aſſault more if it had bin offered, neyther had he hope to bée ſo ſpéedily ſuccoured as his perill required: which was the cauſe that the .ij. of this moneth, after he had eſtabliſhed extréeme actes and prouiſions for the garde of the ſayd Towne, he was

enforced to render it vpon the couenantes following:
               1 That the Proteſtants ſhould depart the Towne their goods ſaued, with their horſſes and armour and banner diſplayed.
               2 That they ſhould not beare Armes for the generall cauſe of Religion in .iiij. monethes after.
               3 That their whole companies, as well ſtraungers as inhabitauntes, might retire whither they would in all ſuretie.
               4 That they ſhould bée ſafeconducted to their place of ſuretie where ſo euer it were, by the Lord de Byron: according to which compoſition▪ the morrow after, the iij. of this moneth, S. Fean d'Angely was yielded into the handes of the Lorde de Guy
                        ••
                     iers. The Lord de Pilles departing the ſame daye about noone, by the Port de Matta with .viij. hundreth footemen of all ſortes, and about .C. horſemen, taking hys way to wardes Angouleſme. Notwithſtanding, the conduct and preſence of the ſayd Lorde de Byron, the moſt parte of the footemen were ſpoyled and diuerſe ſlayn, and the baggage of the horſſemen taken ageinſt their promiſſe of fayth. During

this ſiege, dyed in the towne about a hundreth ſouldiers & certain nūbres of laborers: of ye catholiks ſide, without ye town, dyed aſwell of ye hand of the enemy as by diſeaſes, aboute two thouſand, amongſt which were many great Lordes, gentlemen and Captaines ſlaine, as the greate Maiſter of the artillery, whoſe office was giuen to the ſaid Lorde de Byron: the gouernment of the towne was giuen to the Lord de Guitiniers, and for the garde of it, the king beſtowed eight cōpanies of footemen: The ſame day the King, Quéene mother, the Cardinall of Lorrain, wyth diuerſe great Lordes of the Court, entred the towne, and viſited aſwell the forte of the ga
                     •
                  e▪ 
                  Aulnis, and the Caſtell, as the firſt breach of ye Tower on the wall, & ſo returned to their places, where they were lodged afore.
               Certaine of the Catholickes (immediately after the towne was geuen ouer) went towardes the yles of Marans and Mare
                        •••
                     es, holden of long by them of the religion, from whence they were nowe withdrawen by ſpecial commaundement from Rochell, whereby the catholickes entred

and ſeaſed vppon them wythout reſiſtaunce.
               In this time were erecuted in Fraunce certaine iudgements diffinitiue, pronounced afore againſt thoſe of the reformed religion, whoſe proceſſes were begon and purſued by the kings procurers from the beginning of ye warres, aſwel againſt ſuch as were out of the realme, as thoſe that maintained part with the Princes. The firſt ſort ſorſooke the realme immediately after the ſecond peace, as being denied to enter their houſes & goods contrary to the couenauntes of the ſame, and leſſe able to liue (without mortall perill to their perſons) in the townes of their propper habitation, being filled with garriſons of the contrary faction, as hath bene touched in the beginning of theſe diſcourſes: the other ſorte, (forſed eftſoones to fall into armes) were knit and tyed to the army of the Princes, to reſiſt the voluntary infringers of the peace, and coniured enemies to the whole realme: both the one and other were procéeded agaynſte by perſonall adiornements in thrée ſhort

dayes, and for default of apparance their goodes were ſeaſed to the Kinges vſe, and gouerned by ſpeciall Commiſſioners of ſequeſtration: many ydle officers buſied themſelues to effect the execution of their goodes: in many prouinces the ſaid iudgements did ſuſpend and hang, vntill after the battell of Montgontour, when they awarded generall and ſpeedy proceſſe againſt all men by defaultes, proceeding to execution in Effigie and adiudication of their goodes to the King, wherein (ſuche was the liberall zeale of the Judges) that they executed by Effigie, ſuch as were dead long tyme before.
               It hath bene ſaid before that ye L. de Sanſac left the ſiege of Vezeley by reaſon bys cannons miſcaried: and nowe hauyng gotte newe prouiſion of Artillery to the number of twelue or thyrtene peeces, and being withall aduertiſed by certaine of the Towne of Vezeley that the Lorde de Traues, with a great parte of the Nobilitie preſent at the firſt ſiege, were departed and lefte the Towne, came to beſiege it of freſhe: Hée battered ſtill

the tower of ye 
                  Port du Barle, right againſt the watering place: ſoone after he remoued his batterie to that ſyde of the gray Fryars, following with ſo vehemēt an aſſaulte, that they came to hande ſtrokes vppon the breaches, albeit he was repulſed. During this ſiege, Albert de la Chaſſe, a Bourgeys of the Towne, wrotte letters to the Catholykes, reuealing the partieular ſtate of the Towne: He threw his letters ouer the wall into a fielde where the Catholykes came and found them: and as he was going to the Wall with a letter, readie to conueye to the enimie, he was taken with the facte, and charging a ſchoole maiſter, as partie to hys treaſon, were both hanged foorthwith.
               The batterie was ſuch, as there were ſpent aboue thrée thouſande and fyue hundreth ſhottes of Canon, and all not able to force the Proteſtantes, which made the Lord Sanſac rayſe his ſiege the .xvij. of December. 1569. loſing in this ſiege about .xv. hundreth men, amongſt whome the Lorde de Foyſsy, Colonell of hys footemen was hurt to death with a ſhot vppon the trenches. Within the Towne, amōgſt

others, M. Iaques Perrin, a Miniſter, was killed with a Canon.
               The warre dyd ſtill aggrauate in diuerſe places of the Realm contrary to the opinion of ſuch as thought it ſhould haue qualified and vtterly quenched by the battaill at Montgontour. They of Charité (wherof hath bin ſpoken before) ſtrengthned them ſelues with great numbers of men of warre comme with the Lorde de Bricquemau and Borry, with their retinue: they maynteyned ordinarie warre againſt ye garriſons of the catholikes thereaboutes, making many enterpriſes, & one winning of an other.
               The L. de Leſpau a gentlemā of Berry & one called la Roſe, ſergeant maior to Sanſerre, attēpted an enterpriſe vpō the town of Bourges in Berry, by meane of intelligence with a Souldiour of the Towne, called Vrſin Pallus, to whom was promiſed a great ſumme of money with a bill for the aſſuraunce payable within two monethes after hée had ſatiſfied hys promiſe: This enterpriſe hadde bin of long practiſed, and for the executiō of it, the parties to the practiſe, imparted it with the

Lorde de Bricquemau, de Guercy (Liuetenant to the Lorde Admirall, ouer hys men of Armes, and Gouernour at the preſent of Charyte for the King, vnder the Princes) to the Lorde de Borry, Baron of Reury, des Eſſartz, with others Lords and Captaynes in thoſe quarters: Who vnderſtanding the enterpriſe at large with the meanes to execu
                     •
                  e it, iudged with it as a thing verie conuenient to be purſued.
               This Vrſyn Pallus in the meane while reuealed it to the Lord de la Charſtre gonernour of the towne of Bourges and countrey of Berry, and alſo to Capteine Martyn keeper of the greate towre of Burges, who aduyſed him to enterteine the enterpriſe and aſſure to them of Charite, day, place and meane to effect it, who lykewyſe applyed him ſelfe to their inſtructions.
               In the meane while the ſayde Gouernour of Charſtres omitting no preparatiue fitte to welcome them, deuyſed gynnes of fyer and traynes of powder within the ditches of the place aſſeigned: He beſtowed alſo two grates, the one at the entry

of the little Forte, and the other at the dore or falſe porte by whiche they enter into the greate towre: bringyng laſtly into the towne diuerſe horſemen and footmen Italians, for their better ſuretie and defence.
               The daye and howre ſpeciall for this purpoſe, was aſſeigned by the ſayd Pallus, on S. Thomas night, the one and twenteth of December at two of the clocke at after midnight, whiche they of Charite fayled not to obſerue in poynt. And bycauſe they were diſperſed in diuerſe places, the place of generall méeting was at Baugy, a Caſtell taken before by the barron of Reury, about ſix leagues from Bourges: There met about a M. or twelue .C. harquebuſheares on foote of the troupes of the Lorde Borry and Loruaye, with thrée cornets of horſemen guided by the Lorde Bricquemau, all which in very good poynt obſerued both the houre and place aſſeigned called la Grange Francois halfe a leage from Bourges, where lykewyſe mette them the ſayde Vrſin Pallus, aſſuring them ſtill of the facilytie of the enterpriſe,

and that he bring them to the great tower without daunger, whereunto (to couer all cauſe of doute) hée offered to bée their firſt leader.
               They of the religion vnder the fayth of his worde, made march firſt and formoſt, with him the Lorde de Leſpau, accompanied with twelue, aſwell Captaines as ſouldiers, and entred by a wicket towarde the fort of the falſe port, where they pitched ladders to enter within ye falſe port, which was fyue foote aboue ground. After him entred the baron Reury with fiue and twenty men, and then the Lord de Sarts with fifty ſouldiers to ſuſtaine the firſt: but as his troupe entred, the cordes of the grate were cut, when they alſo within applyed their ſeuerall engynes to vſe and put fyre to the traines, and at the inſtant the artillery beſtowed in flanks thundred vppon them that were to enter, as alſo Captaine Martyn, with his number of armed men, charged ſuch as were vnhappely entred, who ſeing them ſelues and enterpryſe betrayed, deuiſed and labored for their ſafety aſwell as they could: ſome lept from the wall downe, ſome gat out

of the grate, the ſame being ſomewhat hyer becauſe Buyſiere, ſtewarde to the late Lord d'Autricour was incloſed vnder it, being notwithſtanding taken frō thence by his company, who not able otherwyſe to effect their enterpryſe, were conſtrayned to retyre.
               They killed of thē of ye Religion twelue or fourtene aſwel captaines as ſouldiers, and almoſt as many kept priſoners within the towne, beſydes ſuch as were hurt, the Lord de Leſpau, the baron of Reurye, de Leſſarts, des Milles, with certain other were taken within the groſſe towre.
               After this, they of Bourges fearing y• courſes y• they of ye religion made euen to their gates, aduertiſed the king of their neceſſity, who ſuccored them ſpedely with ſixe cornets of horſmen, which had bene before at the ſiege of S. Iean d'Angely, they arryued at Bourges vppon the ende of December.
               The Princes being come to Montauban, (as is ſayd) executed the cauſe of their comming, adioyning to their army the forces of the two Vicounts and Montgomerye.
               
               
                  In this time the king ſent back to Poyctyers, the Duke d'Aumall, with three cannons, and one culuerine guyded by the Lord de Gouas and his regiment of footemen: And ſo beſtowing his campin garriſons to wynter (lycenſing afore the Italiās to go home) his Maieſtie came to the Towne of Angiers, wherein hath bin ſince (as is ſayd) certain conference for peace. (⸫)
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knight Ryder ſtreat, at the ſigne of the M
                     •
                  rmayde: For Lucas Harriſon and George Byſhop.
               
            
         
      
   