
      
         
            
            
               
AN EXQVISITE COMMENTARIE VPON THE REVELATION OF SAINT IOHN. VVHEREIN, BOTH THE courſe of the whole Booke, as alſo the more abſtruſe and hard places thereof not heretofore opened; are now at laſt moſt cleerely and euidently explaned.
            By PATRIK FORBES of Corſe.
            
            
               REVEL. 1. 3. Bleſſed is he that readeth, and they that heare the words of this Prophecie, and keepe thoſe things which are written therein: for the time is at hand.
            
               monogram
               TOBIAS
            
            LONDON Printed by W. HALL, for Francis Burton, and are to bee ſold at his ſhop in Pauls Churchyeard, at the ſigne of the Greene Dragon. 1613.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST MIGHTY MONARCH, MY MOST GRATIOVS SOVERAIGNE LORD, IAMES KING OF GREAT BRITAINE, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, &c. GRACE AND PEACE, WITH ALL INCREASE AND CONTINVANCE OF HAPPY AND ROIALL STATE FROM GOD THE FATHER IN OVR LORD JESVS CHRIST. THE KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.
            
            
               
                  FOr a token, though poore in my part; yet that gratefullie I remember your Highneſſe Princely mind, in keeping mee an eare againſt ſinistrous delation, and giuing ſo gentle warning of your good pleaſure therein, this part of my miſreported paines, I humbly preſent vnto

your Maieſtie: to whoſe Souer aigne skill in theſe diuine ſecrets, (by your royall writings well witneſſed to the world) beſides common allegeance, all pens, and of all men imploied on this Prophecie, owe proper homage: as not only to the moſt glorious patrocinie, but therewith alſo the moſt learned cenſure. In both which, I doe yet more relye on your Maieſties experienced benignitie, then I preſume either of merit for the one, or ſufficiencie againſt the other. I know the too iuſt complaint of the wiſeſt, vpon the great abuſe of that excellent gift of printing, both to the diſgrace and detriment of learning, while (each man dotting after the brood of his owne braine, and vainly promiſing to himſelf the ſame applauſe of others, which his own partiall heart yeeldeth him) no end is of making many books: ſo as the inexpert ſtudent, in ſearch of letters weilding amidſt infinite variety, is caſt in ſuch doubt of choiſe, that, taſting about, before he happilie fall on oughtworthy to feed on, appetite is ſpent, and he filled with he cannot tell what. I know alſo that as it was not permitted each Painter to practiſe his skill on the roiall Effigie of Alexander, ſo were it intollerable preſumption for

each Pamphlet to vſurpe the ſhadow of your Highneſſe Name. Neither hath ſelfe-weining ſo ouerſiled mine eies from the ſight of mine own ſlenderneſſe, but that ſincerely I acknowledge, in this ſo learned an age wherein much is excellently well written, and yet infinitely more paper miſerably ſpoiled, that hundreths more gifted then I, might well be pardoned to put vp their pennes, and, ſo, much leſſe to currie credit to their vnſutable works, by ſhrowding them vnder the ſhelter of ſo ſacred a vaile: yet how great ſoeuer be my imparity to ſo high attempt, the ſubiect of this my labor is of ſuch a ſurpaſſing eminency, as, if it hath pleaſed God onelie
                  •
               wiſe by my weakeneſſe to bring forth any one ſparkle of new and true light for more cleare vnderſtanding thereof (wherein, for ought that hithertils hath been ſaid of any, the moſt learned yet acknowledge an vntried depth of which anie one point opened may bee a competent recompence of much paines) I hope it ſhall ſomewhat excuſe me of too great temerity, either in writing or in vowing, what I write, ſo highlie: and ſhall heerewithall encourage the better gifted ſoberlie to ſearch out what heerein hath eſcaped

me alſo. Now heereof as your Maieſtie can beſt of all men iudge, ſo am I the bolder to vndergoe the hazard of ſo high a ſentence, for that of your Maieſties knowne clemence I am certaine to report either praiſe or pardon.
            
               Your Maieſties humble Subiect PATRIK FORBES of Corſe.
               
            
         
         
            Ad eundem. IOANNIS FORBESII filij Epigramma.
            
            
               INgenio pollet, paciſque Minerua refulget
               Artibus, aſt eadem parmamque haſtam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   trementem
               Fulmineumque enſem bello metuenda virago
               Concutit, ac trepidare vetat virtutis amantes,
               Peſte per argolicas latè graſſante cateruas,
               Placandum miſſa num
                     •
                  n Chyſeide Calchas
               
               Fretus Achille canit. Cantu Philomela ſecunda
               Dicetur Cuculo; calamis ex virgine factis
               Cedet Apollineus Pollex; Aſino
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Mida
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                  
               
               Iudicibus: vulgus praeponet Stentora Vliſſi.
               
               Non humili ſubiecta toro, at laquearibus altis
               Fax appenſa domum illuſtrat fulgore coruſco.
               
                  
Haec tria Forbeſius vaſti intra maenia mundi
               Altè veſtigans oculis, ac mente peragrans
               
                  Europam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Aſiam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                   rotaeque ardoribus altae
               Candentē 
                  Lybiam, & queis nomen Americns olim
               Addidit inuentis, ſeris radiantia flammis
               Littora; quae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   
                  Magellanus circū aequora vectus
               Antipodum procul arua polo ſubiecta notauit:
               Illis doctrinam, validas contingere vires
               His, alijs decus eſſe videt; ſed cuncta ſub vno
               Pectore non habitare locis quae Diua triformis
               Noctiuagis ambit per muta ſilentia bigis.
               Vnum vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   excipio, cui Magna Britānia tanto
               Rege beata ſubeſt, Iacobi nomine Magni
               
               Clarum, hac tergemina qui fulgens laude per orbe,
               Finitimos, ſtellas veluti Phaebaea minores
               Lampas, è ſolio reges intermicat aureo.
               Ergo huius (tenuis quē noſtra Camaena vocandi
               Affari caſu metuit) conamine multo
               Et precis & ſtudij expreſſas & ab aethere miſſas
               Luminis aetherei ſcintillas (queis liber olim
               Viſibus humanis ſeptena ob clauſtra negatus
               
                  Agno poſt reſerante legi, patefactaque vati
               Porta poli poſſet penetrari) ſubijcit acri
               Cenſurae patrocinium mentemque priore,
               Sperans Forbeſius fretus comitate benignam:
               Vt tenebras valeat tam celſo è culmine terris
               Pellere, tutelaque ingenti ſpernere caecam
               Inuidiam, victorque virûm volitare per ora.
            
         
         
            
            
            THE AVTHOR TO THE Chriſtian Reader, grace and peace from God the Father in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               IF God did but command, yet were all diſobedience excuſeleſſe; if but promiſe, yet were wee holden, againſt all apparant impoſſibilities to beleeue, and hope euen againſt hope. But this magnifieth his mercy exceedingly, and taketh from all men all pretext of defection, that in his written word (in a ſingular compaſſion of our weakeneſſe) hee not onely ſetteth downe the rule of our waies, and proponeth the ground of our hope; but alſo to his ſeruants in all ages, hee hath foretold ſuch future caſes, as the ſtrangeneſſe whereof, might either diſcourage them in the courſe of the one, or ſhake their conſtant keeping of the other: and that ſo farre forth, as the wiſe in each time, had not onely enough whereon to ſtay their hearts, euen in the midſt of moſt greeuous calamities; but, being placed as it were in the light of diuine reuelation, they might cleerely perceiue the courſe and reaſon of God his wiſe diſpenſation, and reioice in the aſſured

expectation of ſuch euents, as neither the World dreamed of, and were much contrary to all their vngodly deſignes. Thus the Lord alwaies armed his Church, but moſt carefully in theſe laſt times, vnder the Goſpell. Which albeit it might appeare to haue beene leſſe needfull, for the huge meaſure of light and gracefull diſpenſation, therein beyond all former ages; yet, in reſpect that Satan, ſeeing his time to be ſhort, then chiefly bended his whole rage and full force of deceit (ſpecially in that huge myſtery of iniquity growing on ſo in all effectual working, with al power, ſignes, and lying wonders, in all deceiueableneſſe of vnrighteouſneſſe and ſuch ſtrong deluſion, the ſonne of perdition ſitting as God, euen in the Temple of God, that, if it were poſſible, the very elect might haue beene deceiued) therefore the Lord himſelfe in the daies of his fleſh, gaue hereof not obſcure warnings; his Apoſtles diuerſly thereafter; and laſtly, in this prophecie, is the whole miſchiefe, in the parties, their practiſes, the Church, her condition thereby, God his manifold wrath thereupon, to the full ouerthrow at length of all the enemies, and deliuerance of his Church; ſo at large and cleerely ſet forth; as we are not onely now to beleeue the things told vs before; becauſe they are alredy in a great part come to paſſe: but alſo, by the cleere light here opened to ſee what yet reſteth to be performed: & with calme and ioifull minds (in a moſt delightfull light) to behold and diſpiſe all this preſent terrible and reſtleſſe endeauour of Dragon, Beaſt, and falſe Prophet, by their emiſſary frogs: as where by they are but haſtening

on to themſelues ſuch a foile, as the wonderfulneſſe thereof ſhall make the place to bee called, euen in Ebrew Harmageddon, and ſhall giue matter euen of an Ebrew ſong: When thereupon, not onely a great multitude in Heauen, the foure beaſts and twenty foure Elders: but by a powerfull voice from the Throne, all God his ſeruants, al that feare him both ſmall and great, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of ſtrong thunderings, ſhall ſing together Halleluiah.
            
            Now the golden programme (bleſſed is he that readeth &c.) ſet ouer the gate of this goodly edifice, as it giueth to conceiue, and both wakeneth and warranteth to ſearch after ſome rare inſight, ſo did it chiefly incourage me to ſtep in and much ſtirred, in ſoberneſſe, to ſuruey the ſingularities. Wherein, as the Queene of Saba ſeeing Salomon, by helpe of God, and to the praiſe of his truth in this, I found ſo much more then I preſumed, as no ſpirit was left in mee. Now, here withall, the earneſt petition of Saints pouſſing thereto, and after the ſtory of Chriſt in the fleſh, and of his Church raiſed by Apoſtolike labors, this falling in fitly in the courſe of my trauels to bee handled: yet nothing ſo much carried me to the publike reading thereof, as a holy indignation at the dealings of Romaniſts in our quarters too careleſly expoſed to their ſeduction. They had nothing more frequently in mouth then the antiquity, glory, & multitude of their Church, the conſent of Nations, Counſels, and ſucceſsion of many Ages, with diſdaineful demands, where our Church was before Luther; and whether we eſteemed

all our Forefathers ſo many ages paſt to bee condemned, who liued and died all in the faith and Communion of the Church of Rome? with ſuch ſpeeches largely amplified and cunningly coloured, amongſt a ſimple people; as ſheepe for the moſt part without ſhepheards; I found by experience and credible information, that not onely many altogether ignorant were corrupted, but euen diuers inſtable ſoules, who had ſhewed ſome beginnings of learning, and louing the way of truth, were rather quite alienated therefrom, or caſt in dangerous doubts: ſo as oftner then once, men otherwaies well ſtabliſhed, haue euen with ſollicitude both by word and writ required of mee how the hearts of the weake might be ſtaied againſt theſe obiections. To whome as both waies, in the time, I gaue ſatiſfaction, ſo, it haſted me to the publike interpretation of this prophecie: whereby euen the moſt ſimple, not wilfully ſhutting their eies againſt an ingyring light, may cleerely ſee how that whereof they glory moſt, turneth moſt to their ſhame, and that, wherwith they moſt reproch our Church ſpeaketh ſtrongly for vs. If this ſeemeth ſtrange to any, they haue not yet learned, that, as great is the miſtery of godlineſſe, ſo alſo is that of iniquitie: and to know the hid ſecrets of either, none euer ſhall attaine: who by the heauenly light of the word, goeth not higher then all authority, multitude, cuſtome, or conſent of men. Now, albeit, at firſt, I minded nothing leſſe then to write any further thereon, but ſome ſhort note for mine owne vſe, of ſuch things wherein my iudgement did vary

from moſt part, or all enterpreters: yet cloied with continuall requeſts to write at large, what by voice I deliuered, I was induced to take a mid courſe, neither to write ſo ſhortly as I intended, nor at ſuch length as they required: but ſo, as who were my auditours, reading it, might remember what further they had heard, and others might ſo farre bee ſet in way, as by their owne eaſie paines, to find out what for more cleere explication is requiſit. I haue labored, though not ſo farre as my owne diſpoſition would haue carried mee, yet ſo farre as giuing to ſuiters ſome contentment I could, to be ſhort, and not burthen the reader with any tedious diſcourſe of commonly knowne matter.
            On the firſt three Chapters to buſie my ſelfe, except ſo farre as was neceſſary for coupling them with the reſt of the prophecy. I thought it needleſſe: ſo much being already written thereon, and by ſo many both learned and godly men. Whoſe trauels on the reſt of this prophecie, by this my doing, I am ſo farre from either deſpiſing or condemning, that from my heart I both reuerence their godly and learned labours, and ſincerely acknowledge my ſelfe to haue beene much helped thereby. But this being ſuch a worke, as wherein one wrong ſtich will carry thorow all the ſeame a ſenſible errour, and being of ſuch ineſtimable worth, as meriteth ſtill to be wrought on, till, in whole and each part, it keepe ſentence, I haue, hereto, in all ſinglenſſe and ſound affection contributed my ſparkle: expecting and hartily wiſhing others after me to doe the like, for more and more cleere light, till the Whore bee

euidently ſet naked before the eies of all the World, and the Bride, in her vpright beauty, be diſcerned of all men. Vſe it therefore with ſuch heart, as thou haſt it of me: praiſing God for that which is cleerely from him, and in Chriſtian compaſſion, excuſing what is of mine infirmitie.
         
         
            IOANNIS FORBESII filij.
            
            
               Epigramma de ſcopo Authoris.
               
                  FOrbeſius, Româpompam iactante, dolebat
                  
                     Ʋno orbem obtundi nocte dieque ſono:
                  Oſtenditque feram hoc ſigno ac Babylonanotari.
                  Inunc, conſenſum maecha moleſta crepa.
               
            
            
               Eiuſdem ad Zoilum.
               
                  CAece, Theonino quid dente incognita mordes?
                  Non tibi, ſed doctis, Zoile, ſcriptalegis.
               
            
            
               Eiuſdem ad beneuolum lectorem.
               
                  NEleuiter ſummam ſolum, bone lector, arenam
                  Liba, neu 
                        •
                     icco rade profunda pede:
                  Hic ſulcanda via eſt, huic te duce numine oportet,
                  Etpoteris placi
                        •
                     ae credere tutus aquae.
               
            
         
         
            
            The Summe of the Booke.
            
               
                  THis Booke is that written record of the things in Viſion, heard and ſeene by Iohn in Patmos; which according to the commandement giuen him, hee ſent to the ſeuen Churches of Aſia. Whereof it is, that beſides the inſcription in the firſt three verſes, the whole is an Epiſtle, hauing a ſalutation to the ninth of the firſt Chapter: a valediction in the laſt verſe of all: and the body of the matter in the reſt.
            
            
               This body hath for the moſt part a propheticall narration to the ſixt of the laſt Chapter: and thence the generall concluſion.
            
            
               The narration hath two parts: the firſt is of things which partly then were, and partly were alſo to bee done thereafter. And this part hath, firſt a goodly viſion of Chriſts preſence, operation, and diſpenſation, in and towards theſe ſeuen Churches, and which in common concerneth them all. And ſecondly, a particular accommodation thereof to each one according to their proper condition, good or euill, or mixed at that time: In which reſpect, this part is ſaid to be of things which were then exiſtent; as it is alſo of things to be done thereafter, becauſe of the future good or euill promiſed, or threatned.
            
            
               The ſecond part of the narration, is of things which were to be done thereafter; concerning firſt and properly

the whole militant Church. Like as the whole euents thereof were to fall out after the time of this trance: how ſoeuer for cleering the working on of theſe euents, ſome circumſtances and beginnings are in one or two places deduced higher. And this ſecond part hath a generall introduction to the ſpeciall Storie: Chap. 4. and 5. and the ſtory of ſpeciall euents thenceforth.
            
            
               The introduction hath two parts: firſt a goodly type of the true Church militant, according to that conſtant and inuariable condition ſhee euer holdeth in all her changes, wreſtlings, ſufferings, victories, kythings and eclipſes. For expreſsing accordingly of all which, as diuers and conuenient types thorow this Prophecie are taken; ſo alwaies in all caſes this of the Throne, Beaſts, and Elders, euer holdeth thorow all. This conſtant condition hath God his conſtant preſence as King and Lord, fixing his habitation and ruling in the midſt of his Church: her gracefull ſtate herethrough, as which is a royall prieſthood to him: his generall and conſtant diſpenſation to this end, terrible for her, and gracious towards her: and her dutifull worſhip of him againe. Chap. 4.
            
               In the ſecond part of the Introduction is ſhewed by whom, and in whom it is that ſhee hath all this preſence, protection and graces, and ſpecially (thus artificially to bring on the ſtory of ſpeciall euents) by whom it is that ſhe hath this ſingular benefit of this reuelation. The dignitie whereof is ſhewed, firſt in the retired eminencie of the matter, and ſecondly, in the worthineſſe of the Perſon reuealer. Chap. 5.
            
               The ſpeciall ſtorie is thence of which the abſtruſe ſecrecie locked vp in God his counſell, as by a ſealed Booke in God his right hand it was figured: ſo the manifeſtation

thereof to vs is typically expreſſed by opening of the ſeales: in which the whole Story being comprehended, ſix of them opened, yeeld alſo many types of theſe firſt ſorrows, wherewith God plagued the world for reiecting the Goſpel. I h
                     •
                   ſeuenth yeeldeth 7. Trumpets, whereof the firſt ſix haue the ſecond euils: and the ſeuenth (vpon induration againſt all former puniſhment) affordeth ſeuen vials of the laſt wrath for full and recureleſſe deſtruction of the enemies, and the Church her conſtant, gracefull, and quiet ſtate thereupon.
            
            
               The beginnings of ſorrowes, are, firſt the powerful preaching of the Goſpell, in it ſelfe properly the firſt bleſsing: yet to the world 
                     •
                  adly impugning that which muſt Conquer and Ouercome becomming the ſauor of death, is the firſt and mother plague, begetting bloudy warres, ſtrange famines, greeuous pestilences, and not ſome beaſts, God his foure great plagues ſeuerally and iointly. Againſt all which notwithſtanding, the rage and induration of enemies ſtill groweth, and that to ſo huge and cruel effuſion of the bloud of Saints, as in God his iuſtice, cried for no leſſe then the full and finall deſtruction of that afflicting ſtate. Which neuertheleſſe, in God his wiſe diſpenſation, is reiourned till the accompliſhment of the reſt of Martyrs in that honour of ſuffering. And that the Church might attend this the more patiently, ſhe getteth in the time, relaxation from open perſecution, and the ſufferings of Martyrs become honourable. Thereafter that bloudy ſtate, through inuaſion of barbarous and vnco
                     •
                  th nations, ſuffereth ſuch ſtrange alteration as the whole face thereof is turned, and it receaueth a deadly wound, ſo farre as might make way for the ſucceeding huge miſchiefe in the ſeuenth Scale. Chap. 6.
            
               
               Before the opening whereof to a particular manifeſtation of the euils therein (for more cleering of the matter, and, in a diuine artifice, to imply that this ſecond miſchiefe was hatching euen in time of the firſt ſorrowes) a ſummary view of the whole ſequell thereof is giuen: in a deadlie euill to ouergoe all the face of the viſible Church, worſhip and profeſſors therein. Againſt which the care of Chriſt for preſeruing his true Church is ſhewed, and her double condition firſt vnder and in time of the miſchiefe, by a myſtical number of ſealed ones, and of whome, and how that number is made vp, to the ninth verſe: and ſecondly her condition victorius ouer the euill, as the ſame condition is offered to Iohn his perception; firſt by ſeeing and hearing: and ſecondly by information to the end of the ſeuenth Chapter.
            
            
               For particular explication of that which in the ſeuenth Chapter was ſummarily portended, the ſeuenth Seale is opened, and yeeldeth ſeuen Trumpets, as alſo many ſignes giuen of diuers degrees of iudgements, whereby God was, as it were, to charge vpon the World: theſe in cōpariſon are lighter or heauier. The firſt foure are lighter: firſt through cold ſhowers of ſelfeloue and fierie contention, mixed with crueltie in the viſible Church, followeth a deſtruction, in part, of true ſpirituall life and religion both in weake, and in ſuch as appeared ſtrong Chriſtians. Secondly through the fire of ambition amongſt Church-men, a corruption, in part, of the common worſhip and a death in ſuperſtition. Thirdly through hereticall prauity, ariſing vpon deſpitefull pride, bitterneſſe, and preſumption of great knowledge, the very grounds, and chiefe Doctours are poiſonablie infected to the death of many therein. Fourthly darke ignorance, and a decay in

part of true light and learning, both in diuine and humane ſciences, Chapter 8.
            
               Now theſe foure lighter euils were but alſe many ſteppes to the fift, and firſt of three great woes in the fift Trumpet. When not in part onely, but through the fall of great Paſtours from Heauen to the loue of the Earth: and thus, loſing the Key of knowledge and of the Kingdome of Heauen, and becomming Miniſters of the Keyes of darkeneſſe and of Gehenna; ſo great a ſmoake ouergoeth the whole face of the viſible Church, as all light therein is eclipſed. And out of this darkeneſſe ariſeth that huge miſchief of Antichriſt, in the abominable army & helliſh head thereof, for puniſhment whereof (if ſo be they could haue beene cured) the Mahometan armies are looſed from the Eaſt: after they had beene a ſpace in God his patience tied vp from their firſt ranging, now againe with Turkiſh furie to make deſolate both by ſword and poyſonable doctrine the third part of the Earth. This ſixth euill and ſecond great woe working no repentance, but rather further induration in Antichriſtian workes Chap. 9.
            
               A preparation is for Antichriſt his full, recureleſſe, certaine, and neere approaching ouerthrow. Chriſt, in a ſort, returning with the weapon of his warfare, the little booke now open, and the bold and powerfull preaching thereof: ſetting thereto fit inſtruments: who, by diligent ſtudy of ſcriptures are inabl
                     •
                  d to preach the Goſpell widelie Chap. 10.
            
               And being inſtructed with faculty thereto, by aſsiſtance of Chriſt they apply the right rule of examination, and thereby find that Antichriſt hath long obteined the place and title of the viſible Church. The true Church all the while larking within the compaſſe thereof: and being

ſecretly intertained with a hid but powerfull diſpenſation of grace: by few, vnknowne, and albeit afflicted Miniſters yet preaching long without great bloodſhed: till at 
                     •
                  ength Antichriſt perceiuing them to apply the rule, they are for a ſpace cruelly murthered and barbarouſly intreated, euen with applauſe, thorowout all Antichriſt his domination, but God ſtirring vp others in the ſame ſpirit, who vigorouſly oppoſe themſelues, a viſible ſeparation by diuine warrant, is made from Antichriſt his fellowſhip and contagion: feare taketh him and his followers: great commotions enſue thereupon: and his Kingdome is in a part weakened. This farre preparation and beginnings of his fall hauing wrought on euen in the height of the ſixth euill and ſecond great woe vpon men of the Earth: then the ſeuenth Trumpet ſoundeth to his vtter fall, by ſeuen Vials which it yeeldeth of the laſt Wrath. The ſummary effect whereof (in a preconceiued ioy vpon the ſigne giuen) is in a gratulatory ſong of the Church denounced in the end of the 11. Chapter.
            
            
               Before the particular explication whereof (for more cleering the reaſon of ſo huge a ioy of the Church, and the equitie of ſo determinate a iudgement againſt the enemies) according to that cleere ſight which the Tabernacle of Teſtimony now opened in Heauen yeeldeth to God his ſeruants of the enemies and their dealings, a large narration thereof is incerted: and thereafter their great and iuſt deſtruction (ſummarily aboue denounced) is exponed at length. Both which parts of ſtory the holy Ghoſt ſetteth forth vnder the names of two great ſignes ſeene in Heauen. The firſt in the 12. 13. and 14. Chapters, the other to the end of the narration.
            
            
               The firſt ſigne is double, in the party aſſailed, and the

aſſailer: the aſſailed party is the Church, in her firſt ſeed, and in her ſeed of ſucceeding times. The aſſailing enemy againſt bo
                     •
                  h, is the Diuell that old Serpent, but in different manner. Againſt the Primitiue Church or firſt ſeed, directly, in open rage, by his inſtruments thereof the Roman Emperors: firſt labouring to keepe downe the Church from riſing: next cruelly perſecuting her being raiſed: third
                     •
                  , being reſtrained from open perſecution, through that protection the Church got by Conſtantine the Great. Whereby as by wings ſhe was freed from his open rage, labouring to drowne her by that inundation of barbarous Nations, which, neuertheleſſe in God his wiſe diſpoſing prouidence, turned to the defacing of that perſecuting Empire. Yet ſo, as, in the time the true Church, by degrees, paſſed to the Wilderneſſe (whereto the wings gaue occaſion) and lurking there, was fed, as was Iſrael and Elias: no more any true viſible face thereof appearing, then thoſe three yeeres and an halfe of famin in the daies of Elias: or the ſame ſpace, when Antiochus Epiphanes aboliſhed the daily ſacrifice, and ſet vp the abomination of deſolatiō in place therof. Ch. 12.
            
               Satan highly incenſed for his miſgiuing endeuors againſt the firſt ſeed, tak th occaſion of this flight of the Church to the Wildernes, to bring in roome the Beaſt of his working and authority, by him to make warre againſt the Church in her ſeed of ſucceeding times. This Beaſt is the ſame kingdom of Rome: but vnder the pontificality, by lying ſignes & wonders, and falſe pretence of Chriſt his power, ſo bewitching the world, as, through voluntary ſubmiſsion of the 
                     •
                  en of the earth thus deceiued, the kingdome of Rome, vnder it, recouereth that ancient glory, luſtre, eſtimation & ſubiection of Prouinces, which it had loſt in the

deadly wound it got in the fall of Caeſars, all the earth wondering and following the Beaſt. Chap. 13.
            
               All the time of this preuailing euill, euen in the greateſt height thereof, Chriſt had ſtill his true Church firſt lurking; and albeit not perceptible to the world, yet inioying the preſence of her head, hauing powerfull and plentifull diſpenſation of grace from him, and worſhipping him heartily and truly. Secondly, by degrees breaking out, and contesting with Antichriſt in great ſuffering and much bloodſhed, to the 14. verſe of the 14. Chapter. Where the Story falling in againe to the ſame point of time and matter, whereat (for incerting this interiected narration) at blowing of the ſeuenth Trumpet Chap. 11. it had left off: what, there, in a gratulatory ſong was ſummarily denounced, the ſummary execution thereof is here propounded (ſo to bring in the large narration of the effect of the ſeuenth Trumpet in the ſeuen Vials thereof) to the end of the 14 Chapter.
            
            
               This ſummary propoſition is at length handled in the 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. and 20. Chapters: and thereupon the gracefull eſtate of the Church ſhewed Chap. 21. and 22. And this whole matter is that other great ſigne ſeene in heauen: hauing the greatneſſe of the errand, and the diſpoſing of the inſtruments for execution thereof, Chap. 15.
            
               The execution in ſeuen degrees: firſt by diſcouerie of the filthineſſe and hypocriſie of the Beaſt his characterized followers, their perſons are deſpiſed. Secondly, their common worſhip becommeth ahominable. Thirdly, euen their grounds and chiefe Doctors are ſeen corrupted & deadly: and therewith in God his iustice, becauſe they had been bloudy murtherers of the Saints, they in their courſe get bloud to drinke. Fourthly, the ſtill waxing light of the Goſpell,

as the Sunne diſcouering their darke works, burneth them vp with indignation and deſpite. 5. Thus Antichriſt his kingdome becommeth contemptible, loſing much of the wonted luſtre and magnificence▪ to the great torment of their minds, they euen gnawing their tongues for ſorrow. Sixthly, Peoples, tongues, and Nations falling from the obedience thereof, it is left naked and weake: whereby a way is prepared for the Eſterne kingdomes, and moſt ſpecially the Iewes ſparſed amongſt them, to come into the obedience of faith. In which perilous caſe of their kingdome the Dragon, Beaſt, and falſe Prophet beſtirre themſelues, and iointly bend their whole malice, power, and deceit by their emiſſarie falſe Teachers, to ſeduce the Kings of the earth in their quarrell againſt the true Church. But for ſuch a mighty foile to both the ſeducers and the ſeduced, as ſhall make at length the long blinded Iewes, turning to the faith, to concelebrate the victory. 7. This miſerable euent in the enemies, prognoſticated againſt all their buſie indeauors in the ſixt Viall, is now in the ſeuenth fully executed, with ſo ſtrange a commotion, alteration and ouerturning of the ſtate of the earth, by ſo vncouth plagues, as was not ſince the beginning of the world. At all which notwithſtanding, that Antichriſtian body, deuoted to deſtruction, ſtill obſtinately blaſphemeth. Chap. 16.
            
               This ſo huge a deſtruction, ſo ſummarily in the ſeuenth Viall deliuered, is henceforth more largely and cleerely exponed, according to that grouth of light which that time ſhall bring with it, laying open to the view of the Earth, the parties deſtroied, and the manner, meaſure, and euents of their ouerthrow. Theſe are, the Whoore, Chap. 17. and 18. The Beaſt and falſe Prophet Chap. 19 and the Dragon (for an abſolute victorie) Chapter 20. Of the

Whoore is ſhewed, who ſhee is, and by whom ſhee ſhall be deſtroied: The Whore is the City of Rome borne vp to be a Lady of Kingdomes, and a mother harlot corrupting the Earth with ſpirituall fornication, by the pontificality the eight and laſt ſort of ſoueraigne heads ouer-ruling that ſtate, and with whom it ſhall fall for euer. Her deſtruction ſhall bee by theſe ſelfe ſame Kingdomes and States, who, before deceaued with her, had beene ſpeciall props of Antichriſt his power. but at laſt eſpying the abhominations thereof, fall from him and become inſtruments of God his iuſt indignation againſt the Whore Chap. 17.
            
               The greatnes, certainly, inſtant performance, & equitie of her irreparable ruin, is Rhetorically amplified, Chapter 18.
            
               Whereupon, and the conioined fall of Antichriſt her aduancer, by the ſword of his mouth who iudgeth and fighteth righteouſly, whoſe name is that word of God, is miniſtred to the Church ſuch matter of ioyfull praiſe as ſtirreth alſo at length (God powerfully turning their hearts) the Iewes to ioine in the concelebration of the ſame victory, Chap. 19.
            
               The Dragon, Satan, who by Conſtantine his conuerſion and Chriſtianity by lawes eſtabliſhed, had beene bound vp, from open rage, a thouſand yeeres, (all which time, howſoeuer the moſt part of the World, through Antichriſt his preuailing deceit, were dead in ſuperſtition and blindnes, yet the true Church, who receiued not his character, liued the life of God, being partakers of the firſt reſurrection, and Chriſtian religion was in account) is therefore againe let looſe to practice open cruelty; and thereto, ſtirreth all his forces from all quarters. But yet by the power of the Goſpell preuailing,

maugre all his endeauours, the reſt of men who haue long laien dead in blindnes and error, riſe alſo the firſt reſurrection: there is a new face of a world, all enemies being ſo ouerthrowen, as the Church hath a moſt gracefull and quiet ſtate, for that Satan is now taken againe this ſecond time, and ſo as hee neuer getteth any liberty hereafter, either by errour to deceiue, or perſecution to diſturbe the Church her quiet; hee being now not onely bound vp for a thouſand yeeres as that firſt, but ſo as his deſtruction now begunne holdeth on till that full point it ſhall haue in the laſt iudgement, and the Church her raigne hereupon ſhall accordingly, not be for a thouſand yeeres onely, as at the firſt, but for euermore; hauing now performed in her and to her whatſoeuer reſted (foretold by the Prophets) vnaccompliſhed for her gracefull and quiet ſtate and her enemies full deſtruction here; and, in that, the myſtery of God is fulfilled: ſhee hauing no more to expect but the comming of her Lord for tranſlating her to glory.
            
            
               From the ſixth verſe of the 22. Chap. is the concluſion of the Booke, wherein, for procuring to this prophecie due regard and carefull obſeruation, it is commended from the truth and fidelity of the matter which is from God by a glorious diſpenſation, and miniſtry deſeruing credit, from the neere approaching performance of things prophecied, and from the perfection thereof, in this, that it cloſeth vp the Canon: ſo as no more is to be expected either for light or manners, but hearts to be erected in earneſt wiſh and attentiue expectation of our Lord his comming. Euen ſo come Lord Ieſus.
            
         
         
            
               
               
                  DIuinus quidquid vates, contexerat altis
                  Sphingibus hic dextré Forbeſius referat.
                  Sic ſibi promeruit nomen per ſaecula; foelix
                  Qui ſimili expendit pauca talenta modo.
               
               
                  Andreas Aidius Scoto-Britannus.
            
            
               Ad patrem ſuum colendiſſimum Patricium Forbeſium à Cothari de pererudito eius in Apocalypſin Commentario Iohannes Forbeſius filius.
               
                  VAtibus haec olim ſanctis imperuia, Ioua
                  Innuit: Iſacidis quiſque Propheta ſuis:
                  Poſt vatum Deus haec, etiam tunc aſpera, nato
                  Fulminis oſtendit, caetibus ille Aſiae:
                  Presbyteri Deus haec patefecit, peruia tandem,
                  Patricio, varijs gentibus indepatent:
                  Peruia nulla via eſt talis ſine Flamine Sancto,
                  Quo duce (teſte libro hoc) inuia nulla via eſt.
                  Ingentem veteres, amplam Zebedeia proles
                  Obtinet hinc laudem, Forbeſiuſque ſuam.
                  Pectus ob haec tacitae pertentauere Sionis
                  Gaudia, quae prae ſe vate canente tulit:
                  Hinc etiam Ionias Hilarauit Apoſtolus vrbes,
                  Oblectauit enim littera miſſa viros:
                  At duce Patricio lector pius intime noſcens.
                  Geſtit, & exultat; laetitiaque fremit.
                  Propter aquas vitreas ignitas, moſis & Agni,
                  Turbae tenens palmas, nobile cantat epos;
                  Diuinum, a quo lux, numen ſuper ardua tollens,
                  Forbeſij, per quem, nomen in alta ferens.
                  Hinc tua progenies noua pectore gaudia voluit,
                  Dum te, chare pater, Neſtora quiſque cupit.
                  Neſtor eris, nec Neſtor eris, ſed corpore quanto
                  Mens preſtat, tanto Neſtore maior eris.
                  Victa cadunt ictu annorum, collapſa putreſcunt
                  
                     
Corpora, at ingenijs ſtat ſine morte decus.
                  Eſto quidem, arctatam vinclis & ſuſpirantem,
                  Admeliora animam liberet inde Deus
                  Quantaque terricolis tua per ſpicientia praebet
                  Gaudia, caelicolis mens tua tanta ferat;
                  Te tamen haud triplicis venturi terminus aeui
                  Finiet, aut lucem nox ruitura tuam;
                  Daedala ſed magni dum ſtabit machina mundi
                  Ingenij viues per monumenta tui:
                  Te monſtrante micat primoque oriente relicto
                  Ardua caelorum Phoſphorus vſque petit,
                  Donec protulerit vultus ſplendore decori
                  Aeternum aeternus Phaebus ab axe diem;
                  Tum clarus multis in milibus aera carpens
                  Te ſiſtes album Principis ante thronum.
                  Indeque cum Chriſto clamore per aſtra ſecundo
                  Coelica tendentem turma ſequetur ouans.
               
            
            
               Ad Papam Romanum idem. Apoc. cap. 13. verſe 2. commentarij in id caput ſectionibus 1. 2. 5.
               
               
                  QVis renuat diadema tuo ſubmittere ſceptro?
                  Nam merito in terris diceris eſſe Deus:
                  Cui ſua mundi huius Deus imperiumque thronumque
                  Tradidit, & vafris vincere poſſe dolis.
               
            
            
               Ad ciues Romanos idem. Apoc. cap. 17. verſe. 16. Sect. 14. & cap 18. verſ. 8. 21. 22. 23. Sect. 8. 14.
               
               
                  QVid gelidae torpent dextrae, ſalientia pulſat
                  Cordapauor, mutat pallidus or a tremor?
                  Non Elephante vehens Pyrrhus, non feruidus oris
                  Currit ab heſperijs Hanibal arma ferens:
                  An quiae terribilis magis eſt Cothariſtius heros,
                  Qui Romaman cipiti coelitus enſe quatit?
               
            
            
               Ad Ieſuitas idem. Apoc. cap. 16. verſ. 13. 14. ſect. 8. 9.
               
               
                  VOſne eſtis triplici ranae de gutture, iuſſae
                  Obſtrepero regum corda ciere ſono?
                  
                     
Quis iubet ergo ſacrum praetendere nomen Ieſu?
                  Num fucata gerens cornua fronte fera?
                  Quid ruitis veluti ſtimulis furialibus actae?
                  Speſne Orci in veſtro totalabore ſita eſt?
               
            
            
               Ad Papiſtas omnes idem. 
                     Apoc. 7. verſ. 10. ſect. 7.
               
               
                  ADeo noſtro veluti perenni
                  Fonte promanans & ab eius Agno
                  Lux ſalutaris fluit atque pleno
                  voluitur alueo.
               
            
            
               Ad Authorem commentarij idem. 
                     Apoc. cap. 16. verſ. 9. & 10 ſect. 6 7.
               
               
                  NOn Troas flexit Nereus, non regia Virgo
                  Exitium patriae vaticinata ſuae:
                  Maternum est, ſoboles ſi ſit Troianarebellis
                  Diuiniſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      minis conſilijſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tuis.
               
            
            
               Ad Iudaeos idem. 
                     Apoc. cap. 9. verſ. 11. ſect. 7 & cap. 16. verſ. 16. ſect. 10. & cap. 19. verſ. 2. 3. 4. 6. ſect. 4.
               
               
                  SAncta ſanctorum ſoboles parentum
                  Quae dementra (proh dolor)
                  Faſcinans veſtros animorum ocellos
                  Meſſiam prohibet ſequi?
                  Scilicet promptos, ſimulans Abaddo
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  Agni cornua, territat.
                  Ergo cum magnis petit Armageddon
                  
                  Vis Papiſtica copijs:
                  Per Perathaeum via ſiccaeoïs
                  Fietregibus alueum.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſine fine quando
                  Ibit dirus 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
                  Omnis Abrami canet Halleluiah
                  
                  Laetans progenies boni.
                  
                     Ʋoce clamantes alacri Halleluiah
                  
                  Gentes gaudia proferent.
                  
                     Halleluiah, ter, quater Halleluiah
                  
                  
                     Tota Eccleſia concine
                           •
                        .
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            AN EXQVISITE COMMENTARIE VPON THE REVELATION OF SAINT IOHN.
         
            CHAPTER 1. 2. 3.
            
               THis Booke is the third part of the Euangelike Story, and hath the condition of the Church, from the Aopſtolike times, till the finiſhing of the myſtery. It is for the moſt part Propheticall, and accordingly, vttered in a ſtile agreeable to the maieſty of ſo high myſteries, which were reuealed to the beloued diſciple, and in goodly and conuenient types, in one continuall trance exhibited: with commandement of ſending a writen record thereof to the ſeuen. Churches of Aſia, and vnder their names, the whole militant.
            2 Of this it is, that beſides the inſcription, in the firſt three verſes, the whole is an Epiſtle: whereof, the ſalutation

is to the 9. of the firſt Chapter. The valediction in the laſt verſe of all. The reſt is a narration of things heard and ſcene, to the 6. of the laſt Chapt. Whence is the generall concluſion.
            3 Theſe things, for their diſtinct time, end, and maner of reuelation, are two, and accordingly, the parts of narration. The firſt, is of things which are, and which ſhall come heereafter, that is, which both, in propriety of Chap. 1. 19. ſtory, then were exiſtent, according to the conſtitution of theſe ſeuen Churches trewlie expreſſed, and for their particular inſtruction: and yet ſo, as the things to come are therein alſo reuealed, for that the promiſes or threatnings, to, and againſt each, according to the good or euill, praiſed or taxed in them, are future: and for that, in theſe ſeuen Churches, the holy Ghoſt hath, in great depth of wiſdome, ſo liuely paterned the diuers caſes that may befall, as none euer hath beene, or in any age ſhall bee, which in one of theſe, as in a liuely example, may not clearely read her owne cauſe, and learne wiſdome. Wherethrough it is, that this firſt part of narration, in the firſt three Chapters, for end and manner of reuelation, differeth from the ſecond, in that, albeit in ſome reſpect, the firſt be of things to come, and for inſtruction of the whole Church, yet it is properly, of things then exiſtent, and firſt, for the vſe of particular Churches: whereas the ſecond thorow the reſt of the booke, is only, of things which muſt bee done heereafter; and whoſe vſe, is firſt and properly, for the whole militant Church, and therefore, to the perception thereof, Iohn behooued to goe vp to heauen, Chap. 4.
            4 Before the firſt part is a goodly and glorious viſion of Chriſt, not acording to the proper verity of his perſon, but according to his preſence and operation in, and towards his Church, and in ſpeciall regard of theſe ſeuen of Aſia: and therefore, commonly concerneth them all, as we ſee that from it are taken theſe properties

and attributes which are fit to expreſſe his particular diſpenſation towards each, and ſeuerally applied, as in them he worketh.
            5 The Church of Epheſus, is commended, in that ſhee hath ſuch a preſence of Chriſt, ſo painefull, powerfull, zealous, watchfull, patient, and conſtant a miniſtry, that albeit the myſtery of iniquity was working, and falſe teachers were buſie to aduance it, yet they were ſo watchfully marked, and mightely reſiſted, that errour was borne downe, and truth helde place: but ſo, as at length, through falling from the firſt loue, a ſtep was made to Apoſtaſie. And therefore ſhe is warned to repent and doe the firſt workes vnder paine of remoouing the Candleſticke.
            6 In the Church of Smyrna, errour and lies did ſo farre preuaile as heretikes durſt blaſt of the name of the true Church, and depiſe the pouerty and abiect ſtate of true profeſſors, yea cruelly perſecute and blaſpheme the way of truth.
            7 Pergamus is praiſed, that, albeit, ſhee dwelled where Satan his throne was: yet ſhe kept God his name, but hauing this note of weakenes, that albeit they kept themſelues pure, yet Idolatry and ſpirituall fornication was tollerated by them, euen the doctrine of Balaam and Nicolaus Againſt them and their followers, the Lord fighteth with the ſword of his mouth.
            
            8 Thyatira is praiſed for her workes and loue, and ſeruice, and faith and patience, and that her workes are more at the laſt then at the firſt. But hath this note of infirmity, that albeit ſhe dranke not of Iezabel her cup, nor committed fornication with her, yea and was waxing in loue and workes thereof, yet ſhee had not either the knowledge or the courage to challenge her whoredome as ſhee ought, but euen tolerated, that Whore, whom God will caſt into the lake of fire and brimſtone, euen the bed of torment, as alſo hee threatneth that hee

will caſt into great affliction that commit fornication with her, except they repent, and kill her children with death.
            9 In the Church of Sardis, if they could remember what they haue receiued and heard, they were happy: but vpon defect hereof they are taxed, that hauing a name that they liue they are dead, & that their works are not perfect in Chriſt his ſight: Howſoeuer among them God hath his number, whoſe hearts and liues are anſwerable to their profeſſion. To whom is promiſed that they ſhall walke with Chriſt in white. And the reſt are warned to repent and watch; leaſt he come vpon them in an howre that they know not,
            10 Philadelphia hath an open dore ſet before her, into which to enter for any humane aide, ſhee is of little ſtrength, but what Chriſt openeth, none ſhal be able to ſhut; and what he ſhutteth, none ſhall be able to open: ſo that at the feet of this Church, notwithſtanding her little ſtrength, yet the enemies, are faine to bow and giue their names. And hereupon ſhee hath the promiſe to be eſtabliſhed as a pillar, not to goe out any more, and that on her Chriſt will write his name, &c. So as to haue this honour permanent to bee Chriſt his true Church, that new Ieruſalem from heauen, which ſhall neuer be moued.
            11 In Laodicea they thinke themſelues ſo ſetled, gifted, and ſtrengthned as they become ſecure and vainely preſumptuous. This bringeth in a cold indifferency, in matters of God his worſhip, men becōming Luke warme and neither cold nor hot, the very next ſexe to plaine Atheiſme. Chriſt, for ſoueraigne medicine againſt this euill, calleth vp to his true riches, wiſdome, banquet, and hope of his throne whereto we attaine by fighting and ouercomming, as did our Head.
         
         
            
            CHAP. IIII.
            
               THe ſecond part of this propheticall narration, is henceforth to the 6. of the laſt Chapter, of things to fall out after the time wherein Iohn had this reuelation, and concerning, firſt and properly, the whole militant Church.
            2 In this, is firſt, the preparation of the Apoſtle to the perception of theſe myſteries, and then, the things reuealed. The preparation is in the firſt and beginning of the 2. verſ. of this Chap. and is, by ſight, by inuiting voice, and the euent of both in Iohn.
            
            3 In the firſt, beſides the thing which he ſeeth, are two circumſtances; of time, and the ſeer his diſpoſition. The time, is after the perception of the former things, wherein no intermiſſion is to be imagined, but onely the order of manifeſtation noted, all being but one continuall trance, vpon one and the ſame Lord his day. The ſeer his diſpoſition is, that he yet looked, ſhewing a holy deſire and earneſtneſſe, not reſting in things already ſeene, but intending ſtill his eies to ſee more. Which diſpoſition, beeing in ſobriety and ſincere affection, is neuer fruitleſſe in any. That which, for preparation, Iohn ſeeth, is an open doore in heauen, a ſigne of an entrie, opened vnto him to the ſight of heauenly things, which neither are earthly, nor of earthly mindes comprehended. Mat. 3. 16. Acts 7. 56. Gen. 28. 17. Thus, Iohn Baptiſt ſaw the heauens opened, ſo did Stephen the firſt Martyr: Iacob, vpon ſuch a ſight, called L
                     •
                  z, Bethel, the houſe of God and gate of heauen: and the Lord moſt plainely, ſhewing what by this frame of ſpeech is meant, when hee would tell of a more plentifull diſpenſation and ſight of heauenly things: hereafter, Joh. 1. 51. ſaith he, yee ſhall ſee the heauens open.
            
            4 In the inuiting voice, are two, what the voice

was, euen one and the ſame of a trumpet, which firſt ſpake to him Chap. 1. And next, what the voice vttered: wherein, is the commandement, and end thereof. The commandement is, Come vp hither, whereby is required, in Iohn and all hearers and readers hereof, a riſing aboue themſelues, from the earth and all earthly affections, to enter at the doore, opened by God, to ſee his ſecrets. For as God his true Church, conſiſteth of ſuch as are not 1. Cor. 2. 14. of the world, ſo neither is God his diſpenſation towards them, neither their gracefull ſtate thereby, to naturall and worldly men perceptible. And heereof it is, that throughout this Propheſie, heauen, in oppoſition to the earth, is taken for the ſtate of the true Church, as the earth is for the worldly ſort. The end of the commandement is, that he might ſhew him things which muſt bee done heereafter; which ſort of things, are moſt difficile to know, and yet we muſt deſire to vnderſtand. But the Lord doth nothing, but that he reuealeth to his ſeruants 
               Amos 3. 7. 
               the Prophets.
            
            5 The euent, in Iohn, cleereth the end of the commandement. This euent is, he is rauiſhed in ſpirit: not as if this were an other trance the former being paſt; but, to ſhew a further intending of ſpirit and degree of rauiſhment, now requiſite, for perception of more hidde and retired matters then were the former; which were, firſt & properly, of things then in earth exiſtēt, & concerned particular and viſible Churches: whereas the things following are not only future, but concern, firſt and properly, the whole militant, which with the eies of faith, we muſt behold, as alſo her condition. And this is, to all fleſh impoſſible, to whom God openeth not heauen, yea and whom he bringeth not vp, and to whom he ſheweth not the ſame, when they are come thither. For in theſe matters, before we enter in the Lord his Sanctuary, wee are but beaſts, Pſalm. 73. 17. 22.
            6 This is the preparation. The things offered to Iohn his perception, follow thorow the reſt of the booke

and haue two parts. For as the whole, concerneth chiefly the ſtate of God his Church, and God his adminiſtration in grace towards her, and wrath againſt her troublers: ſo before the ſtory of ſpeciall euents, is put, in this and the next Chapter, a goodly viſion of the generall condition of God his Church, and his adminiſtration for and towards her. As we ſee in the beginning of the propheſie of Ezechiel, the like viſion of God his generall Ezek. 1. adminiſtration in the world: and as, before the firſt part of this propheticall narration, a viſion was put, to ſhew the operation of Chriſt in his Church. The firſt part then of the two, is in this and the next Chapter, and may well be called a generall introduction to the ſpeciall ſtory. The other part, hath the ſtory of ſpeciall euents, to the 6. of the laſt Chapter.
            7 In the introduction, are firſt, a goodly type of the Church militant, as in, and againſt all troubles, it hath, and euer ſhall ſtand ſtable, through God her King, in the midſt of her reſident, and his generall diſpenſation, towards her gratious, and for her terrible, in this Chapter. And next, his particular diſpenſation of this preſent reuelation and things therein, for her inſtruction and comfort: the excellent dignity, of which particular benefit, is by many arguments, ſhewed in the 5. Chap. And both theſe, are here for great vſe. The firſt, for ſtabliſhing the heart of Iohn and all Chriſtians, againſt the manifold dangers, wreſtlings, decaies, and apparent eclipſes of the Church, in the courſe of the ſubſequent ſtory, by ſetting downe in type, ſuch a ſtate thereof, as whereto alwaies, at leaſt with the eie of faith, wee may looke in the midſt of moſt deſperat calamities. The other againe, endeareth the particular gift, and ſhould greatly ſtirre to ſtudy, as whereof, with good reaſon, it was ſaid in the beginning, Bleſſed are all that read and obſerue, &c.
            
            8 In this type of the Church in this Chap. her gracefull ſtate is ſhewed: firſt, in the preſence of her King, euen God himſelfe, dwelling and ruling in the midſt of

her: ſecondly, in her dignity, which ſhe hath of her Lord: thirdly, in God his diſpenſation for, and towards her: fourthly, in her dutifulneſſe againe to her Lord, in al true worſhip and hearty praiſe.
            9 God is deſcribed from his office and from his nature. His office, in that, as onely King, Lord, and Head of his Church, he ruleth therein, and ſteadfaſtly fixeth his habitation in the midſt thereof, as which he hath choſen to be the place of his feet, euen the mountaine wherein hee delighteth to dwell, yea wherein hee will dwell for euer. This is ſhewed by one onely throne ſet in heauen, Ezek 43. 7. Pſal 68. 16. and one onely ſitter thereon; the other thrones being in the circle, but His onely in the center. His nature, more to our capacitie, then as it is in it ſelfe, incomprehenſible, is ſhadowed by three iewels; all of great worth; a Iaſper, Sardine, and Smaragde: the Smaragde hath this ſingular, that 
                  •
               t is diffundit in manner of a Rainebow about the throne. Now, albeit I am perſwaded that the perfit knowledge, of the natures and vertues of theſe iewels, would giue a ſight of ſome analogy to God his nature, ſo farre as earthly and ſenſeleſſe things may expreſſe him to whom nothing is like, and that ſome thing alſo might be pretily ſpoken hereof, yet in ſo high a matter, beeing my ſelfe in expert in the nature and qualities of pretious ſtones, I dare not be bold: and what others, perhaps vpon more knowledge deliuer, I rather it bee ſought in themſelues, then I ſhould ſpeake in ſuch matters, vpon any man his credit. This ſeemeth certaine, that heerein, the holy Ghoſt giueth vs to take vp, the trinity of that one, who accordingly, after, of the beaſts, is praiſed thrice holy. Wherein, as the Father, by the Iaſper, and Sonne, by the Sardine, ſo the holy Ghoſt, by the Smaragde is ſignified: Whoſe ſingular note, of beeing diffundit about the throne as a rainebow, hath a ſweet analogy both to his proceſſion and name, particularly giuen him by the Lord, of Comforter. Neither is this to bee eſteemed a vaine ſpeculation, becauſe in this ſame Chap.

the holy Ghoſt is ſet out in ſeuen burning lamps, and the Sonne at length, in the next: for the conſideration is much diuers, and no leſſe neceſſary, for a diſtinct vnderſtanding of the perſons, as in them, and each of them, one and the ſame deity ſubſiſteth, according to their inward relation, ſo, ſitting in the throne: and for the knowledge of them, according to the outward oeconomy or diſpenſation towards vs. For hereafter in this Chap. the holy Ghoſt is deſcribed, more according to his graces and vertue in vs, then in the former conſideration: and the Sonne in the next Chapt. is deſcribed, as Chriſt and Mediator betwixt God and man: in the firſt conſideration, both being one with the Father, ſit in the thron; in the ſecond, for expreſſing God his outward diſpenſation of grace, in the Mediator, by the ſpirit of ſanctification, they are deſcribed before the throne.
            10 Thus is the preſence of God the King of his Church. Now her goodly and graceful ſtate, herethrough is ſet out, in the type of twenty foure elders; whoſe place, number, and dignity, are to bee obſerued. Their place is round about the throne, noting their attendance, open ſight, and eaſie acceſſe. Confer with this whole type, the forme of the campe of Iſrael Nomb. 2. Their number is twenty foure, for all elect, (for this is the type of the true Church, according to the purpoſe of grace) who are of Iſrael his twelue and Iſraelites indeede, and who are builded on the foundation of the lambe his twelue Apoſtles: for theſe are the firſt borne written in heauen to whom Heb. 12. 23. we all come. For as none had lot of inheritance in Canaan, who could not deduce his pedigree from one of the Chap. 21. 14. Patriarchs, ſo the new Ieruſalem is builded on twelue foundations, bearing the names of the twelue Apoſtles. This Church is larger then that of Iſrael properly. And as of Chriſt and his Church, Dauid and his ſtate was a 1. Chron. 24. & 25. & 26. & 27. type, ſo accordingly, hee not onely diſtributed all the Prieſts, ſingers, and porters of the Temple in twenty foure orders, but alſo the King his ſeruants monethly were

twenty foure thouſand. Such a diuine harmony is in the word of truth. Now the dignity of theſe, is firſt, in their venerable and reſpectfull maieſty, through the image of their Lord and ripe knowledge, beeing no more children, but all Senators. Secondly, they are all Kings, by their thrones and crownes of gold. For, there are thrones ſet for iudgement, the thrones of the houſe of Dauid. Thirdly, they are all prieſts as clothed in long white robes. Pſal. 122. 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            11 In this Church, the diſpenſation of her God in her, is twofold. The one terrible, againſt her enemies, for her protection: the other gracious, towards the ſaints. The firſt is expreſſed by lightnings, thundrings, and voices comming out of the throne; as in Scripture commonly, his terror in iudgement, is by theſe expreſſed. At the giuing of the law, God gaue out his terrour Exod. 19. & 20 Heb. 12. 18. in a mount that could not bee touched, in blackneſſe, darkneſſe, ſound of trumpet, and in voice of words, which they who heard, beſought they ſhould heare them no more. But ſpecially, when his iudgements are ſet forth in deliuery or auenging of his Church, thus they are deſcribed Pſalm. 18. and 46. and almoſt euery where. This is the more to be aduerted, for the oft occurring of theſe words in this Propheſie, and alwaies in this ſenſe. His lightnings, are his ſwift conſuming puniſhments compared to arrowes Pſal. 18. His thundring, is his horrible terror, as blackneſſe, darkeneſſe, and tempeſt, with which, thunder ordinarily is ioyned. His voice, is his fearefull rebuke, when he ſpeaketh in diſpleaſure Pſalm. 2. and 9. 5. the Lord ſpeaketh fearefull things in his wrath, but hee will ſpeake peace to his people, Pſalm. 85. For wee are not come to the mountaine which cannot be touched, nor 
               Heb 12. 18. 24. Pſalm. 89. 7. 
               to the ſound of words, &c. but to the bloud of the Couenant that ſpeaketh good things Now, theſe are ſaid to come out of the throne, for that, as he ſheweth ſaluation out of Sion; ſo is he zealous for her: and all men heere-vpon, feele either, mercy or wrath, as they are of her, or fight againſt her. For, in the palaces of Ieruſalem God is knowne

for a refuge: Pſal. 48. 61. There is he great, there hee breaketh the Bow, the Speare, the Sh
                     •
                  eld, the Sword, & 
               Pſal 68. 35. 
                     •
                  er. 25. 30. Amos 1. 2. Ioel. 3. 16. Pſal. 61. Pſal. 27. 
               the battell. He is terrible, out of his holy places: He roareth out of Sion, and vttereth his voice from Ieruſalem. This protection made Dauid to place all his ſecurity, in being in the Lord his Tabernacle: where the Lord would place him on a rocke, and where he would repoſe vnder the wings of the Lord.
            12 The other part of God his diſpenſation is gracious in threefold graces, as the firſt was in threefold iudgments. The three graces, are the ſpirit of ſanctification, the pure word of God, and the faithfull Miniſtery thereof. The type of the ſpirit of ſanctification, are ſeuen Lampes burning before the throne; ſeuen for perfection of all graces: burning, both for illumination, and purging power: Lampes, for this worke in our hearts, in which hee infundeth and nouriſheth the oile of grace to faith and loue: our ſound ſtate wherein, is compared Math. 25. by the Lord to wiſe Virgins, hauing oile in their lamps, and wee are warned to haue our lamps burning, and that wee quench not the ſpirit. They are ſaid to be before the throne, as Chap. 1. for the Spirit his ready and 1. Theſ. 5. 19. plentifull outward operation ſtill ioyned with his two ſubſequent inſtruments in his owne children. Sect. 9.
            13 The ſecond grace, is the firſt outward meane of the ſpirit, the pure word of God: the type whereof, is a gla
                  ••
               ie ſea like to Chriſtall. It is before the throne, as euer ioined in his Saints with the ſpirit, and for that therein wee may ſee the glory of God with open▪ face: Iſai 59. 21. 1. Cor. 3. That the word of God for the purging and refreſhing vertue thereof, is compared to water, is euident by the ordinary ſpeech of al Scripture. Hereof, the Lauer placed in the entry to the Tabernacle, was a type, to which in Salomon his Temple ſucceeded the braſen ſea, whence this, here hath the name. It is of Exod. 30. 1 King. 7. gla
                  •
               ſe, for the calme ſtilneſſe thereof: for God his word is not as thoſe raging waters which ſtirre vp mud Iſai 57. 20.
               
and durt; but like thoſe ſtill running waters, by which Dauid was led, Pſal. 23, And as the ſoft running waters of Siloam which refreſh the City of God. Pſal. 46. Therefore, Iſai. 8. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . beſides their ſtilneſſe, they are cleare as Chriſtall, much excelling that Sea in Solomon his Temple, which was of Braſſe, both for the open and cleare ſight, (for which it is alſo before the throne, as I haue touched) and alſo for that this Sea admitteth no mixture of any other Ciſterne. It is not mixed with bloud, as that, Chapter 8. much leſſe with bloudy worſum, as that, Chapter 16. Finally it admiteth nothing except the fire, Chapter 15.
            14 The third grace, and ſecond outward meane of the ſpirit of ſanctification, is the faithfull Miniſtery of this Word: for it pleaſeth God to ſaue the world by the fooliſhneſſe of preaching. The type hereof are foure 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . Cor. 1. 21. bodied wights, tranſlated in our bookes, beaſts, through the pouerty of our tong, which affordeth but one word for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . They are called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in relation to the two former graces. For, albeit the ſpirit bee the ſpirit of life, and life it ſelfe; yet as wee ſee neither what way the wind commeth, nor which way it goeth, ſo know wee Iohn 3. 8. not the way of the ſpirit, although wee feele the force of it. And howbeit the word of God bee liuelie, and of it, as of an immortall ſeed, wee are begotten to immortality, yet it hath not that outward naturall and bodily life in it, which men haue who miniſter the ſame, who therefore are called liuing wights by their Miniſtery, begetting in vs the life of God, and ſo are our ſpiritual Fathers, Gal. 4. 19. And this is the third great grace of God vpon his Church, that hee hath giuen gifts to men, and raiſed vp to vs Prophets of our Brethren. In them are ſhewed firſt their properties, common and ſingular, and next their function. Of their common properties, the firſt is their place, betwixt the throne and the Elders, as Miniſters & diſpenſators of grace from God to thē, as alſo for al their function, whereof hereafter. Thus placed, their number

is foure, as ſufficient to go to all quarters, like theſe foure Miniſters of God his generall prouidence and diſpenſation, Ezech. 1. foure Chariots of Braſſe, Zach. 6. the 4 Angels, Cap. 7. Their next cōmon property is, that they are full of eyes, noting vigilancy and knowledge, for they are Watchmen, and ſhould bee able to teach, exhort, rebuke, improue and conuince. For their place, and calling, whereby they haue to looke continually to the Throne, to the Elders, the Church, and to themſelues, as placed for lights and examples to their flockes; they are full of eyes before, behind, and within. Act. 20. 28. 1. Tim. 4. 16. Their laſt cōmon property is, that each hath ſixe winges in all, anſwerable to the number of the Elders, and ſo placed, as all are for flight (not as of the Seraphim, Iſai 6.) in ſuch ſort as they can intend flight no where, whether they haue not wings to carry them, hauing wings round about as well as eyes; to ſhew, aſwel as knowledge and care, ſo promptitude and fitneſſe to helpe diligently, and miniſter a word in ſeaſon to the weary, to ſtrengthen the weake, to confirme the ſtrong, to raiſe them who are fallen, to bind vp the broken hearted, to beate downe the lofty, to ſeeke what is looſed, and bring home what is ſtrayed. The ſingular property of each is: the firſt, had the face of a Lyon, ſhewing courage; the ſecond, the face of a Bullocke, noting patience and labour; the third, of a man, for prudency: the fourth, of a flying Eagle, to ſignifie, as a contempt of baſe, ſo, a ſharpe ſight in heauenlie things; as the Eagle ſoareth high, and is able to looke in the Sunne at No one-day. Now, theſe are not here ſo attributed, ſingularly, to each; as if they were vtterly depruied of the other properties, which cannot conſiſt with their vertues, which euer draw all theſe together in ſome degree, as theſe foure. Ezech. 1. are deſcribed, each to haue all the foure faces: but here, they are diſtinctly attributed, to ſhew God his wiſe diſpenſation in his Miniſters of grace, ſo dealing aboundantly to all, as yet his diuerſity

of graces is to bee ſeene in each one. Further, if we conſider rightly, ſince the Apoſtles who excelled in all: the firſt ſucceeding Miniſters of the Goſpell, were like Lyons for courage, ſubduing all, and taking the ſpoile, none able to reſcue it. The next, for bloudy perſecution and conſtant ſuffering, were bullockes. The third, for prudent ſpying out of Antichriſt, were men. And therefore Chap. 13. to count the number of the beaſt, is counted wiſdome, and the witty are inuited thereto, and Chapter 17. the mind which hath wiſdome, findeth out who the beaſt is. The fourth ſort are of them, who, Antichriſt being reuealed and knowne, ſhall ſee as Eagles, and ſoare vp to the beholding of the hid ſecrets of God his word; when the Angell ſtandeth in the ſunne, Chap. 19. as the dayly growth of knowledge in theſe and other miſteries of the Kingdome, giue not onelie ſure eſperance, but already great proofe. Now this diuerſity of gifts, God giueth as hee findeth expedient, and as they may beſt ſerue for his honour and good of his Church, hee requireth the vſe: ſometime courage, ſometime patient ſuffering, ſometime prudency in both, ſometime a deepe ſearch of Scriptures, and of the dealing of God; as according hereto, we ſee theſe foure to vtter themſelues, at the opening of the Seales, Chapter 6. Conſider alwayes, how conueniently theſe eyed and winged wights are ioyned to the glaſſie Sea: as the ſea in Solomon his Temple was ſet on twelue buls, and on the borders of the baſes for the Caldrons were Lions, 1. King. 7. Bulles and Cherubins: the Cherubins, for their face & flight, anſwering to both the man and flying Eagle, in this place. So ſweet is the conſent of Scripture. Thus are their properties common and ſingular. Their function is firſt deſcribed in generall, and next, from the ſpeciall end thereof. The generall is, God his worſhip, wherein, are two things; Firſt, their continuall diligence night and day, in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, waiting on nothing elſe: for who is ſufficient for theſe

things? ſee Paul his example, Act. 20. Secondly, is the function or worſhip it ſelfe, wherin they kith ſuch diligence, which is, they are publike Heralds of God his praiſe, euen thereby teaching others to doe the ſame: according to the ſpeciall end we ſee hereafter; whereto, the forme is ſubſtantially framed. For they aſcribe to God all holineſſe, euen triple holineſſe to that triple one. Now, if our God bee holy who ſanctifieth vs, that, as he is holy, wee may bee holy alſo; this teacheth vs to ſtudy to our ſanctification; for holineſſe becommeth his houſe. Hee is onely Lord, therefore to bee ſerued; hee is God therefore to bee feared; and as Pſal. 93. 5. hee is not holy without authority, but is Lord and God, ſo hath hee not authority without power, for hee is almighty: ſo that we may and ought to put our whole truſt in him alone; and as hee hath all power, ſo is hee conſtant and true, as hee who is eternall and without ſhadow of changing, who, yeſterday, and to day, and the ſame for euer, is, was, and to come: his holines is the more admirable, as ioyned with abſolute power, and ſuch a power as is not alterable: his truth giueth aſſurance of his promiſes, to repoſe thereon: here is all Religion. Thus is their function in generall. The ſpeciall end is, to bee leaders of the Elders, that is, the Church, in this ſame duty of publike worſhippe and thankſgiuing, by going therein before them. This end is clearely ſhewed in that when the foure beaſts gaue praiſe, the twenty foure Elders fell downe, following their very words, as it were, ſaying Amen to them: and this is that fourth point which wee noted to bee in this Chapter, the worſhippe returned to God by his Church.
            15 Their worſhippe is by outward geſture, and by ſpeech. The geſture is threefold, proſtrating, adoration, and caſting their Crownes, all down to him that ſitteth on the Throne, and to none elſe, in caſting their Crownes, confeſſing their vnworthineſſe in themſelues,

of that high honour whereto they are called. Their ſpeech, hath the honour giuen to God, and the reaſon thereof: for, God will haue all our worſhippe and reaſonable ſeruice to proceed of knowledge, not as the Samaritanes, who worſhipped they knew not what. The honour giuen to God, is, all whereof, by ſigne they confeſſed Iohn 4. 22. themſelues vnworthy. The reaſon is, for that hee created all things, and that for himſelfe, as whereto no forraine cauſe, but his owne will ſtirred him, aboue which to ſearch any cauſe, is not onely groſſe ignorance, but preſumptuous impietie. And this reaſon concludeth ſtrongly: for hee, of whom are all things, & for whom are all things, ought onely of all things to receiue all honour.
            16 Thus haue we the type of the true militant church of Chriſt vpon earth, but heauenly, ſuch as alwayes, by powerfull protection, and gracious diſpenſation of his Spirit, Word and Miniſtery thereof, hee hath preſerued in the greateſt power of darkenes, which, though the World cannot ſee, nor learne their ſong; yet the lightned by faith will perceiue and reioyce. This ſight made Moſes to deſpiſe the pleaſures of Egypt, and chuſe to be Chap. 14. 3. Heb. 11. 24. Pſal. 122. Pſal. 84. Pſal. 27. 4. Pſal 48 2. Pſal. 87 3. Eph. 2. 5. afflicted. This made Dauid to make ſo great account of the Courts of the Lord, as to make it the head of all his deſire to dwell in his Tabernacle, to behold his beauty. Ieruſalem is faire in ſituation, the glory of the whole earth, and City of the great King. Glorious things are ſpoken of thee, O City of our God. Euen here, wee are quickned together with Chriſt, and raiſed together with him, & ſit with him in the heauenly places. This is the Church Math. 16. 18. builded on a rocke, againſt which the gates of hell preuaile not; which, though men haue often afflicted from Pſal. 129 1. 2. her youth, yet haue they not preuailed againſt her. For the Lord her God is with her, and the ioyfull ſhout of Numb. 23. 21. a King is in the middeſt of her. Herefore it is, that through all this Booke, howſoeuer to expreſſe the diuers conditions of the Church, in her ſpeciall wreſtlings,

ſufferings, eclipſes, victories, diuers types are brought, yet this of the throne, elders and beaſts, in all her alterations, ſtill holdeth through all.
         
         
            CHAP. V.
            
               THe firſt part of the introduction to the Story, was in the fourth Chapter, in a goodly type of the militant 
                  •
               hurch, and God his generall diſpenſation in her. The ſecond part is in this Chapter: wherein is ſhewed, in whom, for whom, and by whom it is that the Church hath all this preſence, protection and graces: and in ſpeciall, (for bringing on the ſecond part, in the ſtory of ſpeciall euents) by whom, and for whom, ſhee hath this particular benefite of this Reuelation; the great dignitie whereof, albeit it appeareth ſufficiently by that which in the former Chapter was ſeene, it being from ſuch a King as God, to his owne Church; yet here it is more plainely ſhewed in two great points. The one is, the retired highneſſe of the matter, ſurpaſſing the reach of all Creatures: the ſecond is, the ſingular worth, and prerogatiue of that perſonage by whome it is reuealed.
            2 The retired height of the matter, is declared firſt by the naturall condition of it, in it ſelfe: and next by the imbecility of all Creatures in attaining thereto. The condition of the matter is, according to the manner of men, ſet forth in foure circumſtances. 1. That it is in the hand of him that ſitteth on the throne. 2. It is a book. 3. Copiouſly written. 4. It is moſt ſurely ſealed. That it is in the hand of God, not onely is ſhewed the eminency thereof, but alſo that the whole caſe of his church, and wrath on the world for her hard entertainement, are directed by him as the worke of his owne right hand; as

alſo his carefull memory of it, keeping the record therof in his right hand, as men doe of theſe things they hold moſt deare. It is a booke, for the certainety of things, regiſtred in God his booke: Pſal. 139. according to the manner of men, who carefully put in Regiſter that whereof they would haue the record abide ſure. For properly God hath no booke, but is his owne booke. It is copiouſly written, in that the inſide of Fzech. 2. 10. the roll (for bookes muſt bee vnderſtood, according to the manner of that time) not ſuffiſing to containe the whole; it is written alſo on the backe: and this ſheweth, beſides the certainety of the matter, ſo carefully and amply recorded, the ſpeciall prouidence of God in al the particular caſes of his Saints, as, whoſe wandrings are counted, teares are regiſtred, and haires are numbred. It is ſealed with ſeuen ſeales, to ſhew the abſtruſe Iſai 29. 11. ſecreſie, as perfectly cloſed vp, which the number of ſeuen implyeth.
            3 Now beſides this condition of the matter in it ſelfe, the retired eminency thereof is declared alſo by the imbecility of all creatures to attaine thereto, proued by a moſt ſure argument, euen experience, which is heere ſet out after the manner of men: in that all beeing by publike edict prouoked to the opening of the booke, all come ſhort of it. Which firſt euent of imbecility of all Creatures, is more cleared by a ſecond euent in the Apoſtle, who thereupon mourneth a ſore mourning: Here then are to bee obſerued, the Herauld, the tenor of the Proclamation, and the double euent aforeſaid. The Herauld is a ſtrong Angell, hauing a ſtrong voice, ſuch as becommeth the Herauld of a great King, for making all Creatures heare him. And euen herein is implyed an amplification of the imbecility of creatures, as which all are prouoked, and haue lawfull warning. The tenor of the Proclamation is, Who is worthy to open the booke, & looſe the ſeuen Seales thereof? ſhewing, as a free eſſay offered to all, yet that to atchieue it, was required great

worthineſſe. The firſt euent, is the inſufficiencie of all creatures, whereof, according to the ordinary maner of Scripture, is put a perfit enumeration, of thoſe in heauen, in earth, and vnder the earth: neither Saint nor Angel being found worthy of this work. And their weaknes is amplified, in that al were ſo far from the worthines of taking and opening the booke, as none were able to looke vpon it. The iudgements of God are ſo great a depth. Vpon this firſt euent, followeth a ſecond, in Iohn: who hauing beene called vp to heauen, to ſee ſuch things as afterwards were to be fall the Church, hee is at the firſt, brought almoſt to deſpaire of ſeeing ought: whereupon, in a holy, albeit infirme, affection (hauing forgot on whoſe breaſt hee had leaned) as zealous of the Church her good, and hartely ſorry ſhe ſhould remaine depriued of ſo great benefit, hee mourneth, and mourneth much; an affection now rarely found in any. And certainely, ſo long as, for obtaining ought out of God his hand, for our comfort, wee looke to any creature, wee ſhall reape but mourning, till wee ſee him, who onely is worthy, to bring vs grace from the father.
            4 The ſecond great argument, of the dignity of this reuelation, is the worthy perſonage by whom it is reuealed, to whom God gaue it Chap. 1. And of him are to bee obſerued two things. Firſt, his performing of that, wherein all creatures had ſuccumbed; and ſecondly, the euent and effect following thereupon. In the performer, are firſt, Iohn his knowledge of him, and next, the fact performed. Iohn his knowledge, is firſt, by information, and ſecondly, by ſight. In the information, are the occaſion, the informer, and what he informeth. The occaſion, is Iohn his mourning, whereof the informer would comfort him. For it is moſt true, that as, holding our eies on creatures, we can reape but ſorrow: ſo, till in conſcience of our owne wants, and felt experience of the vanity of all refuge to any creature, wee learne to mourne and mourne much, we finde no ſolid ioy, either

for peace of conſcience, or light of reuelation. Our diuels are not caſt out but by praier and faſting. Daniel had then greateſt reuelation, when he had bene in heauineſſe Mat. 17. 21. Dan. 10. 1. three weekes of daies. The informer, is one of the elders. Now wee muſt conſider, whereof, theſe twenty foure elders are the type, and, what perſonage Iohn heere beareth: which duly weighed, wee ſhall not maruell, how this ſonne of thunder is informed, of one of the elders. Iohn, heere, is the type of one entring in heauen to know God his ſecrets. Now heauen and the twenty foure elders, are the type of God his true Church, as hath beene cleared. As then, the true Church is the pillar and ſtable ſeat of truth; ſo without it, is neither ſaluation, nor any true knowledge: for God is knowne in Iuda. Hereby 1. Tim. 3. 15. then is ſignified, that all true knowledge of Chriſt, is in Pſalm. 76. 1. his Church. The information hath, firſt, a dehortation from mourning: ſecondly, a deſignation of the ſingular perſonage: and thirdly, his prerogatiue to performe: the dehortation, as it is grounded on the comfort, hee was to ſhew him, ſo hath it this vſe, that true light bringeth euer true ioy. The deſignation of the perſon performer, is by two titles. 1 That Lion of the Tribe of Iuda. 2 That root or ſyour of Dauid. In theſe are to be obſerued, firſt the titles, and next, whence they are brought. He is a Lion, but with this note, that he is of Iuda. Satan is a Lion, and a roaring Lion, that Lion, whom Sampſon rent, & out of whoſe mouth Dauid, pulling 1. Pet. 5. 8. Iudg. 14 6 1. Sam. 17. 35. Gen. 49. 9. Nom. 24. 9. his ſheepe, killed him: but this Lion of Iuda, taketh the prey, and none is able to reſcue it, whom, when he lyeth downe, who dare ſtirre him vp? Hee is the root or ſyour of Dauid, by Iuda and Dauid to ſhew the true Meſſias promiſed of their ſeed. Theſe titles, are brought, the one from Geneſ. 49. the other from the 11. of Iſaiah, the one from Moſes, the other from the Prophets. They haue Moſes and the Prophets, ſaith Abraham in Parable; thither Chriſt ſendeth the Iewes, for true knowledge of himſelfe. So then, the elders informe, but out Luke 16. 29. Ioh. 5. 39.
               
of Moſes and the Prophets; to ſhew, that as, onely in the Church true knowledge is to bee had; ſo, no voice ſhould, there, be heard, but of the Scriptures. Search the Scriptures, for they beare witneſſe of mee. The third Ioh. 5. 39. point, whereof the elder informeth Iohn is the prerogatiue, of this great perſonage to performe. And it is ſet downe in this one word, hee hath obtained to open the booke, &c. of which, more heereafter in the ſong. This farre knowledge Iohn getteth by information; the other degree of knowledge, is by ſight: wherein, the ordinary degrees of true illumination, for ſtabliſhing of a ſoule in certainty of truth, heere, in great wiſdome ſet downe, are carefully to be marked. The firſt is the information of the Church and authority thereof, as Auguſtine calleth it, Opportunum inquirendi exordium. In which reſpect, Libro de vtilitate credendi. hee ſaith in another place, and in the perſon of one ignorant of Scripture, Ego Scriptur is non crederem, niſi me eccleſiae commo
                     •
                  eret authoritas. Yet, in this degree, albeit Contra Epiſt. fu damentalem. cap. 5. of great moment, the ſoule reſteth not, but hath, next, to aduert not onely what, but alſo whence the Church ſpeaketh: neither in this yet canſt thou acquieſce, till, beſides both theſe degrees, God by his ſpirit open thine eies to ſee and behold: ſo as now, thou beleeueſt, not onely for that the Church ſo ſaith; but becauſe by her teſtimony, out of the word, God hath lightned thy minde to ſee and know, Non iam hominibus, ſed ipſo Deo i
                     •
                  trinſecus mentem noſtram firmante atque illuminante, 
               Ibidem cap. 14. as ſaith the ſame Auguſtine. In the ſight then of this perſon priuiledged aboue all creatures, as Iohn ſeeth him, are firſt, his place and geſture in it, and next his deſcription. The place is betwixt the throne, and the foure beaſts and twenty foure elders: his geſture is that hee ſtood. In both which is expreſſed, his adminiſtration betwixt God and his Church, towards both 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . His deſcription is that he is a lambe, but of ſtrange note. Hee is the lambe of God, which taketh away Iohn 1. 29. 1. Cor. 5. 7. the ſinnes of the world, and our true paſſeouer. His

notes are firſt, that he ſtood as though he were killed, not that ſo it was in apparance and not in truth, but this form Heb. 10. 14. of ſpeech is put, to ſhew the continuall recent vertue of his death eternally effectuall before God, as whereby Heb. 9. 12. once for all hee hath purchaſed eternall redemption. His Zach. 3. 9. ſecond note, are his ſeuen eyes, and ſeuen hornes, the ſeuen ſpirits of Iehouah, euen that full perfection of Pſal. 45 7. wiſdome and power wherewith hee is annointed aboue Iohn 3 34. his fellowes, hauing receiued the ſpirit without meaſure, to rule all things according to the high authority giuen him of the Father, of whom hee hath receiued all power Mat. 28. 18. in heauen and earth: ab
                  ••
               dantly ſo inſtructed with all that ſerueth for perfect execution of his royall, prieſtly, and Propheticall offices. Thus is the knowledge which Iohn had of this perſonage, followeth his fact, which is, that hee went and tooke the booke out of the hand of him who ſate vpon the throne, &c. for, as by him onely wee haue all bleſſing from the Father (whom none knoweth but the Sonne,) ſo particularly, this diuine reuelation. Mat. 11. 27.
            
            5 Thus is his fact and performance of that which no Creature was able to looke vpon. Followeth the euent enſuing hereon, in all which the dignity of this Reuelation appeareth clearely. And this euent is much different from that, which, deſpaire of getting the book opened, wrought in Iohn. For, now vpon cleare ſight, and aſſurance of one taking the booke, and worthy to open the ſame, is raiſed an excellent ioyfull ſong of praiſe; wherein fall to bee marked, firſt the occaſion. 2. The Singers. 3. The quality and tenor of the ſong. And 4. the order of ſinging: That they ſee the Lambe take the Booke, it occaſioneth the ſong. The Singers are the 4. Beaſts, the twenty foure Elders, the Angels: And laſtly, all Creatures. Of theſe, the foure beaſts, and with, and following them, the twenty foure Elders, raiſe the ſong: the Angels in courſe ſucceed, and ſing their part: then all Creatures. Laſtly, theſe who raiſed the ſong, ſing the

laſt paſſage, and ſo cloſe it. The quality and tenor will appeare through all, in the parts thereof. In the foure Beaſts, and twenty foure Elders, who are Precantors, are noted; firſt, their diſpoſing of themſelues to ſing. 2 the quality of their ſong, and 3. the tenor or ſubſtance of it. They diſpoſe themſelues by conuenient geſture, & by fitte inſtruments of praiſe. Their geſture is, falling downe, and that before the Lambe, as before they did before the throne; for hee is to bee honoured as the Father, and ſuch is the Father his will, that who honoreth the Father, they honour the Sonne alſo Their Inſtruments Iohn 5. 23. of praiſe are th
                  •••
                Harpes, golden Vialls full of odours, and voice ioyned therewith. Harps are known Inſtruments of praiſe through all the Pſalmes. The Odours are interpreted praiers of Saints, powred out of golden Vials, that is, faithfull and pure hearts: the ſpeech is from the Leuiticall Miniſtery, wherein Incenſe was offered on the golden Altar, and had a typicall relation to our Chriſtian ſacrifices of prayer and thanks giuing, Pſal. 141. 2 (which Dauid ſought that they might bee directed before God, as incenſe) the golden Vials of the Legall worſhip being types of faithfull and cleane hearts, for faith is more precious then gold, and our prayers are odors and ſmell ſweetely through Chriſt, the golden Altar. 1. Pet. 1. 7 Now with both theſe the voice is ioyned, to ſhew all earneſt endeuour to magnifie the gift of God in this benefite, euen with inſtrument, heart, and voice, as Dauid in the Pſalmes often. For God will haue all, outward, Rom. 10. 9 10. and inward. Here is no ground for praier to Saints, departed; an Idolatrous errour fondly builded here on Scripture miſtaken: and yet, euen in their ſenſe, giuing thereto no warrant: for, giue, that here the Saints departed, were ſaid to offer vp praiſes to God, as no doubt they doe alwaies; what reaſon is that for vs to pray to them? but, as I haue ſhewed, all this is of the Church Militant, here ſpoken. Thus they diſpoſe themſelues to ſing. The quality of their ſong is, that it is a new

ſong, which ſort ordinarily is of moſt account, the deſtruction of Sathan his workes, 
                  •
               eſtitution of all things, redemption of man is a new worke. Behold I make all 
               Iſai. 43 19. Chap 21. 5. 2. Cor. 5. 17. 
               things new. In Chriſt Ieſus wee muſt all become new Creatures: for old things are paſt away. Theſe ſame, Chapter 4. did ſing a ſong to him that ſate on the throne: but it was the old ſong for the old worke of Creation: here is a new ſong, ſo much the more magnifically ſet forth and ſung, as the worke of Redemption (that is the new work) in all degree of compariſon paſſeth the old.
            6 The tenor or ſubſtance of their ſong hath firſt, the praiſe of the Lambe his worth
                  •
               neſſe to take and open the booke, and next, the reaſon thereof. The praiſe, for the forme (whereby, in 
                  
                     •
                  maeb
                     •
                  an manner, they anſwere to the Proclamation of the ſtrong Angell) is exceeding delightfull; ſhewing now als triumphing ioy, as before, the ſight of impotency in all creatures bred to 
                  
                     •
                  ohn a dumpiſh ſorrow. For, where the Angell proclamed, Who is worthy to take the booke and looſe the ſeuen Seales thereof? Theſe, now in exulting ioy anſwer, Thou art worthy to take the Booke, and looſe the ſeuen ſeales thereof. The reaſon of this the Lambe his worthineſſe and merite is his ſlaughter, and the great effect & fruit thereof. Where, take heed, wee eſteeme not, this to bee the reaſon of his worthineſſe abſolutely, but in relation onely to this fact, and all grace procured to his Church. For that we haue any acceſſe to God, or that any bleſſing is obtained to vs from God, it is through the ſlaughter of the Lambe, and merite thereof; & this is that prerogatiue which the Lambe hath: the third point which I ſhewed was to bee obſerued in the Elder his information, in theſe words, Hee hath obtained, &c. And great reaſon is there, why his ſlaughter ſhould bee of ſuch merite For the onely begotten ſonne of God died; and none tooke his life from him, but hee willingly gaue it, as who had power to lay it downe, and take it againe. Ioan 10. 18. The effect and fruit of his ſlaughter, is our Redemption;

which is amplified, firſt, by that which buying implyeth: albeit not put here expreſly, that is, our wretched ſtate, from which hee redeemed vs: for Redemption, of neceſſity, preſumeth bondage, and miſerable was our bondage. Secondly, to whom wee are redeemed, to God. Thirdly, by what price, neither gold nor ſiluer, nor any corruptible thing, no bloud of Goates or Bullockes, but by his owne, that is, God his 1 Pet 1. 18. Heb. 9. 12. bloud. Fourthly, is the large extenſion of his benefit, euen to all peoples, kindreds, tongues and nations; not as that of the Paſchall Lambe in Egypt, to Iſrael onelie. Neither thus, for that all, of all peoples, &c find the fruit, but the elected of all, Therefore it is ſaid, thou haſt redeemed vs out of all, &c. The fift and laſt point, amplyfying the effect of the ſlaughter, is to what condition & eſtate wee are redeemed: euen to be Kings and Prieſts, Chap. 1. 16. 1. Pet. 2. 9. to raigne euen here vpon earth, where we haue the kingdome of grace, vnder hope of that of glory. Now, by all theſe, conſider if his ſlaughter be not of great worth, why hee onely ſhould obtaine to take the booke, &c. and therefore, alone to haue the praiſe of it. In all this ſong and tenor of it, are diuers infallible Arguments, that theſe foure beaſts bee no Angels, but Saints redeemed, as this whole type is euidently of the Church militant, and not of any ſtate in heauen.
            7 Thus was the ſong of the foure beaſts, and twenty foure Elders: the Angels in courſe ſing the next part: in whom, are notable three things. Their place, their number, and their ſong. Their place is about the throne, beaſts and elders, for two reſpects: one of protection, and defence, The Angels of the Lord pitch round about 
               Pſal 34. 8 
               them who feare him, as miniſtring Spirits for the good of the Elect. The other reſpect is, in the Church, and Heb 1. 14. by the Church, to behold and learne the manifold wiſdome of God, For, they deſire to looke in theſe thinges: 
               Eph. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12. And this is one maine point of the myſterie of godlines, that God in the fleſh is ſeene of Angels. To whome the 1. Tim 3. 16
               
Church, for God his wonderfull diſpenſation, in, and towards her, is the cleareſt looking glaſſe of God his infinite wiſdome. Whereupon, that reaſon is brought by Paul for women their modeſt carriage in the church: For the Angels. This ſhould much ſtirre vs to a carefull 5 Cor. 11. 10. beholding of that, whereby euen the Angels are made wiſe; and to a deepe conſideration of our dignity, and care of our wayes, whom God hath made looking Glaſſes to the Angels. Their number, firſt is ſet downe indefinite, in the word many: Next in a definite, but huge number, to ſhew innumerable Angels, and God Pſal. 68. 17. Dan. 7. 10. the onely Lord of hoſtes; all ſet for defence of his Church, for both their place and number; conſider the ſtory of Eliſha and his ſeruant, In their Song is ſhewed 2. King 6. 17. their earneſt affection to the Lambes praiſe, as which they ſing with a loud voice. Next, is the Lambe his worthineſſe to receiue all praiſe: whereof they giue him ſeuen points, as he hath ſeuen horns and eyes. Firſt, power, or authority: for hee hath all in heauen and earth. With authority are requiſite riches. Theſe hee hath, as who is abundantly rich towards all that beleeue, is the 2 Cor. 8. 9. Rom. 10. 12. Coloſ 1. 27. Chap. 3. 18. riches of God in vs, and onely hath gold tried by fire, to enrich the poore. Now authority and riches without wiſdome, are but the weapons of miſchiefe in the hands of a foole. But hee hath alſo all wiſdome, & with wiſdome ſtrength: ſo as nothing is lacking to him, or can let him to performe what him pleaſeth: therefore of all to bee honoured, in all things to haue the glory, & of all things to report the praiſe. Next to the Angels, all Creatures ſing their part, of whom a perfect enumeration is put, as verſe 3. and in their ſong, they affirme what the Angels had ſung before them. This they haue ſingular, that to the Lambe they ioyne him who ſitteth on the throne; to ſhew that they are one, and their praiſe one. That ſinging of praiſe is attributed to vnreaſonable and inſenſible Creatures, it is the ordinarie frame of Scripture ſpeech; to ſhew that all things, in their

owne kind, praiſe God; and that not onely, for that the glory of God, Creator and Adminiſtrator of all, is in them ſet forth; but alſo, for that after a ſort, they reioice for the redemption of the ſonnes of God, hoping therby to bee freede from the vanity whereto they are ſubiect Rom. 8. 19. through the ſin of man, and vnder which they groan together with vs. The laſt paſſage is ſung by theſe who firſt raiſed the ſong, wherin as the angels ioined him who ſitteth on the thro
                  •
               e with the Lambe; ſo theſe, to ſhew the vnity, and that in praiſing both, they praiſe but that one eternall liuing God, they giue all praiſe to him who liueth for euermore. Now in this courſe and order of ſinging, wee haue to obſerue, that as the ben
                  •
               fite belongeth firſt and properly to the beaſts and elders, that is, the Church, ſo they beginne the ſong. The Angels who gather matter of praiſe out of beholding the church, ſucceed in ſinging. Hereupon all Creatures in their kind reioyce (for certainely this type hath a true relation,) the Church laſtly cloſeth the ſong: to ſhew, that as from them it ought to be ginne, whereby all the reſt may magnifie God; ſo the ſinging of the reſt ſhould ſerue the Church for a new vpſtirring to inſiſt in his praiſe. And truely it is a great ſhame, that all both Angels and other Creatures ſhould ioy at our good, and wee remaine ſenſeleſſe: and that the very ſenſleſſe creatures ſhould groane vnder the burden of our ſinne, longing for our full redemption, and wee bee nothing moued. And a huge ſinne is it, in place of raiſing the ſong of God his praiſe, and ſtirring all both Angels and other Creatures to the ſame duty, when we marre all that heauenly melody grieue the good ſpirit of God, contriſt the Angels, who ioy at the conuerſion of one ſinner: and in place of gladneſſe, make all both ſenſeleſſe and ſ
                  •
               ikeleſſe Creatures to groane for griefe of ingratitude.
         
         
            
            CHAP. VI.
            
               THe generall introduction was in the two preceding Chapters: hence is the ſtory of ſpeciall euents, prophetically foretold, and that, by proponing the ſame vnder goodly and conuenient types: of all which, as they are cloſed vp from the knowledge of all creatures, the ſealed book, in the right hand of God was the type: like as the reuelation of them to vs is, by opening of the ſeales, expreſſed. Now then, all beeing comprehended vnder ſeuen ſeales, ſixe of them are opened in this Chapt. and the euents accordingly ſhewed. The ſeuenth, holdeth to the end of the propheticall narration: begetting firſt, ſeuen trumpets, the laſt of which, begetteth ſeuen vials of the laſt wrath. Thus the courſe of the propheſie is heauenly and cleere: all beeing, 
                  •
               o comprehended vnder ſeuen ſeales, as the firſt ſixe containe the beginnings of ſorrowes: the ſeuenth bringeth foorth the ſucceeding heauier euils in the trumpets, in ſixe of which, the ſecond dangerous miſchiefe, in the degrees thereof, is ſhewed. The ſeuenth, hath the third and laſt wrath, powred out of ſeuen vials, to finall deſtruction. All which euils are againſt the world and worldly ſort, in vengeance of the Goſpell and true Church, perſecuted and contemned by them: till, by finall deſtruction of all enemies and troubles, ſhe be beautified with fulneſſe of grace here, to the attent expectation of glory hereafter.
            2 The ſixe ſeales opened in this Chapt. afford ſixe types of the enſuing euils: to all which, this is common, that the lambe openeth, and, that to each proceeding type, is ioyned a ſpeech, giuing the ſignification. To the firſt foure, is common, firſt, that their types are horſes and riders; and next, that to each of them is adioyned a

wakening voice of one of the foure beaſts, to ſtirre to attendance and perception, as of things, whereof, albeit many felt the ſmart, yet none could diſcerne the reaſon, but the valiant, patient, wittie, and ſharp-ſighted, and ſuch as by them were wakened to perceiue. Horſes (whereby not vnlike euents are in Zacharie expreſſed) as ſwift, fierce, and couragious beaſts, ſhew the celerity and the irreſiſtable inuaſion of theſe iudgements. The rider, guiding the horſe, and receiuing power to worke, ſheweth God his prouidence, directing and ruling all theſe euents. What in each type, is ſingular, the particulars will ſhew.
            3 The firſt ſeale opened, bringeth out a white horſe and his rider armed with a bowe, and adorned with a crowne. To the beholding whereof, the firſt of the foure beaſts warneth. Whoſe Lions face, as it ſheweth courage, ſo his voice like thunder, ſheweth powerfull preaching: ſuch as were the miniſters of the Goſpell in this time, abaſhed with no feare. The ſpeech giuing the ſignification, is, that Hee went out conquering and that hee might ouercome. White coloure, beſides that it is the note of gladneſſe, truth, and ſimple pureneſſe, both in Scripture and heathen ſpeech: it is alſo, a note of triumphe. And ordinarily, triumphing Captaines rode vpon, or had their triumphing Chariots drawen by white horſes. The bow, is a weapon ſmiting ſwiftly, and hitting both neere and farre off. The crowne giuen him, ſheweth vndoubted preuailing, for victors are crowned. The type, thus we ſee, accordeth fully to the ſpeech vttered of it. This is the type of the power of the Goſpell preached, whereby Chriſt ſubdueth all to his obedience, as riding on the word of truth and meekneſſe of righteouſneſſe, 
               Pſalm. 45. 4. 5 
               his right hand teaching him terrible things: hauing arrowes ſharpe to pierce the hearts of the King his enemies, whereby peoples fall vnder him. This rider triumpheth alwaies, both in them who are ſaued, and in them who periſh. Theſe arrowes kill all, but differently. Some

are ſlaine to liue, and beeing killed, are cured, who will be cured and heare his voice, while it is to day. Others are killed to vtter deſtruction, in whoſe refractary ſoules, is ſhot in the ſeale of their iuſt condemnation, and of Chriſt his terrour, verſ. 15. 16 17. For this is a ſtrong archer, not like thoſe of Ephraim, who being taught to handle the bow, gaue backe in the day of battell: but euen the true Ioſeph, the feeder of Iſrael, who, though the archers 
               Pſalm. 78. 9 
               ſhot at him and grieued him, yet his bowe abode ſtrong, 
               Gen. 49. 23. 
               through the mighty God of Iacob, and the ſtone of Iſrael. This occaſioneth, but improperly, the ſubſequent euils: and beeing in it ſelfe, the firſt of all bleſſings, becommeth to the world (madly reiecting, and fooliſhly impugning, that which muſt conquer and ouercome) the firſt of plagues, and cauſe of all miſerie and deſtruction.
            4 To the perception of the ſecond type, vpon opening of the ſecond ſeale, the ſecond beaſt like the bullocke, giueth warning: while the patient ſufferers, and who, as calues, yeeld themſelues to be ſacrificed for the Goſpell; both themſelues ſee, and ſtirre others to perceiue, in this ſecond type, a iuſt recompence, on the world, for their bloud ſhed inhumanly. The type is a red horſe, with a rider, to whom is giuen a great ſword. A fit type for expreſſing, both in colour and kind of weapon, that, which the ſpeech, ioyned for explication, ſheweth: that, to him was giuen power to take peace from the earth. This is the type of bloudy warres, a iuſt puniſhment of the Goſpell perſecuted. That who embrace not the word of peace from God, bee embrued in bloud-ſhed. I came not to ſend peace but the ſword, ſaith our Mat. 10. 34. Sauiour.
            5 At the opening of the third ſeale, the third beaſt warneth to behold a iudgement, albeit terrible, yet, which none but the wi
                  •
               e-hearted, ſhould vnderſtand, that for contempt of the Goſpell it was inflicted: others feeling it, but miſtaking the cauſe. The type, is a blacke

horſe, with a rider, hauing a ballance. The opening ſpeech, hath this, ſingular, that it is vttered by a voice from the midſt of the foure beaſts, euen the voice of the Lambe, who ſtandeth amidſt the throne, beaſts, and elders: Chap. 5. 6. to ſhew, that by his direction, all theſe euents are directed and ruled, who hath the ſeuen hornes and ſeuen eies the ſpirits of Iehouah ſent thorow all the earth. This is the type of famine, fitly expreſſed by a blacke horſe, a dolefull colour. And what more lamentable caſe can fall, then that a mother ſhould eate the fruit of her owne wombe, euen her children of a ſpan long? Famine, maketh Lam 2. 20. Lam. 4. 7. ſuch as were purer then ſnow, whiter then milke, more ruddy then the red pretious ſtones, and like the poliſhed Saphirs, to haue viſages blacker then coales. To this horſe and rider, is attributed a ballance, to deſigne exceeding great ſcarſity, when according to the curſe of the law, men ſhall Leuit. 26. 26. Ezek. 4. 16. eat their bread by waight. Agreeably whereto, the voice denounceth ſtrange ſcarcity; but with a caution of not hurting wine and oile: ſo as the want, ſhould be of wheat and barly, the ordinary repaſt of all men, and which might worſe be wanted then wine and oile, which ſerue for the great and dainty ſort, and are ſpent commonly, more for ſuperfluity then naturall neceſſity. Heere then, is a grieuous famine, when the moſt neceſſary things for fuſtenance are abſtracted. The degree of ſcarſity is ſhewed, in that a meaſure of wheat ſhould giue a penny, and three meaſures of barly a penny, three of barly counteruailing one of wheat: the Roman penny beeing in value neere our teſton or tenne pennies ſterling: and the meaſure Chaenix, beeing of all meaſures the ſharpeſt, as which was the ordinary ſtint of a bondſlaue his daies allowance, out of which, at moſt, foure bread could bee baked.
            6 To the perception of the fourth type, vpon opening the fourth ſeale, the fourth beaſt warneth, like a flying Eagle: to ſhew, that albeit God, now, vpon continuance in rebellion and contempt of his former iudgements

bringeth on heauier: yet the induration of mens hearts ſhould bee ſuch, as none ſhould bee able to perceiue God his working, but ſuch as riſing aboue the earth with ſharpe ſight looked on his dealing. The type is a pale horſe, a deadlie colour, and well fitting ſuch a Rider as death, and who is accordingly accompanied, euen with the graue, to expreſſe great mortality; whereto, the commiſſion is large ouer the fourth part of the earth, the executors many; in reſpect that the iudgement chiefly here meaned (peſtilence) which commonly followeth vpon famin, as famin vpon war, commeth ſeldom out ſingle, but accompanied with the former, both ſword and famine, and moreouer with noyſome beaſts, God his foure great plagues, to ſhew here a heape of all iudgements iointly on the world for their induration. Ezech. 14. 21.
            
            7 That to the perception of the two types following, none of the foure beaſts giueth warning, it is becauſe the fift type it ſelfe ſpeaketh, and the ſixt bringeth ſo ſenſible a iudgement for greatneſſe and ſtrangeneſſe, as all, how endured ſoeuer, are compelled in it, to ſee & acknowledge the day of the Lambe his wrath: ſo in it Chriſt his dealing ſpeaketh for it ſelfe, and theſe who made the ſoules of Martyrs cry in the fift type, in the ſixt againe, by iuſt recompence, are made to cry in their courſe, and that iuſtly, to the confuſion of ſuch as would rather heare the beaſts crying, at God his firſt and gentler ſtrokes, than regard the pittifull cry of the ſlaine ſoules. The fift type then vpon opening of the fift Seale, are the ſoules of Martyrs, lying vnder the Altar, crying, receiuing anſwere, and White robes. The ſpeech opening the ſcope of the type, is the tenor of their cry, and anſwere made thereto. Then to come by the right ſenſe of this type; wee muſt weigh the ſoules their demand, and anſwere made vnto them. In the demand conſider, firſt, who cry; ſecondly, the place attributed to them: and thirdly, their demand or petition.

The Cryers, are the ſoules of theſe who were ſlaine for the word of God; as to which they gaue teſtimony, & held that teſtimony; for it is the cauſe that maketh the Martyr; and hee that perſeuereth ſhall bee ſaued. Their place is, that they lie vnder the Altar, by frame of ſpeech from the Legal worſhip, wherein no ſacrifice was lawfull or accepted but at the Altar: at the foot whereof, round about which, and vpon which, the bloud and offering in diuers reſpects were powred, ſprinckled, and offered. For it is the Altar that ſanctifieth the offering. From thence hither a typicall ſpeech is borrowed, to ſhew, that all our obedience and ſacrifices of praiſe yea the offering of our liues and bloud for the honour of God and teſtimony of his truth, is onely accepted in Chriſt, who is our Altar, and ſanctifyer of all our oblations. For properly, neither, ſoules lye nor cry, nor haue robes: ſo as the Romans groſeneſſe, who hereupon build their ſuperſtitious laying of Saints Reliques vnder Altars, is not onely ridiculous, in that vpon things typically ſpoken, they build Arguments of exiſtence in propriety; but alſo impious and idolatrous. In their demand, is firſt their affection or diſpoſition, in that they cry, and with a loud voice: and next, the ſubſtance of their demand. How long Lord, &c. This their demand is ſtrengthned with an Argument from the Nature of God, who is holy and true; whereto it ſeemed very agreeable that ſpeedy vengeance ſhould bee taken vpon men of the earth for ſhedding their bloud ſo cruellie and aboundantly. Now this cry is not here attributed to the ſoules for any ſuch affection in them, who are farre from that, as reſting from their labours, & free of all perturbation: but by this frame of ſpeech, to ſhew, that notwithſtanding all God his preceeding iudgements againſt the world for cruelty againſt his Saints: yet now it had come to ſuch a height therein, as it might well ſeeme that no longer it could ſtand with God his iuſtice, to delay the finall ouerthrow of that

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
bloody ſtate, by which the Martyrs ſuffered: whoſe bloud now ſeemed to cry for no leſſe, and to cry loude; as crying is attributed to the bloud of Abell, as the cry of Sodome is ſaid to haue come vp before God, and as the Gen. 4. 10 & 18. 20. &c. earth is ſaid to cry out of violence.
            8 Thus was their demand. The anſwere hath in it a two-fold conſolation againſt the reiourning of the ſought vengeance. Firſt, by word, and next by ſigne. The firſt hath two arguments of comfort, one, that the delayed puniſhment of their perſecutors ſhould bee but a ſpace. For the hope of the righteous ſhall not periſh for euer. And the iudgement of the wicked ſleepeth not. The ſecond is, the reaſon of the delay, the perfecting of the number of their Brethren in the ſame honour of ſuffering: whereby, as the guiltineſſe, ſo the iudgement of the enemies behooued to grow. Thus a great benefite it is to die for Chriſt, and fooliſh is the world, in troubling the Church, but haſtening on ſo their owne deſtruction: from which it hath no reſpite, but till the Saints bee fulfilled, as had Sodome till Lot was in ſurety. The other conſolation, by ſigne, ſheweth a preſent benefite giuen to the Church, the more patiently to attend the reuenge of their bloud on the world. The ſigne, is long white robes, which in Scripture haue a triple conſideration: Firſt, they are the note of our State towards God: in which conſideration Chriſt and his righteouſneſſe, put on by faith, is our white garment. The ſecond is our condition towards men, where our inherent righteouſneſſe, through Chriſt dwelling in vs, and making vs to ſhine as lights in the middeſt of a froward generation, to the conuiction of gain-ſayers, is our White robe; God bringing forth our righteouſneſſe as the light, and our innocency as the noone day. The third reſpect, is to our ſelues, in which, our garment of glory, in heauen is vnderſtood. Of theſe three, in this place. The ſecond is meaned, as a moſt neceſſary conſolation to the Saints of that time, who were not onely murthered

in heapes, but alſo traduced with horrible calumnies, to eclipſe the glory of their ſufferings: whoſe innocency, God now would bring to light, euen in the conſciences and confeſſion of thoſe who had perſecuted them, to the great glory of their ſufferings, and high account of Chriſtianity, which had beene ſo farre abhorred. In ſumme, the euent ſignified by this fifth type, is, that notwithſtanding the former iudgements of ſword, famine, and peſtilence, ſeuerally & iointly executed againſt the world, for reſiſting the victory of the white horſe, and his Rider, whereby they ought beene terrified; yet the furie of the enemies ſhould ſtill increaſe, and that to ſuch degree of crueltie, as in God his iuſtice required their ſpeedy and finall deſtruction, which neuertheleſſe ſhould bee delayed for a time, but ſo, as the rage of perſecution being mitigated, the Church ſhould become of great account euen before men. Therefore, in this fifth Seale, is put the cry of Soules againſt cruelty, not that here it beganne, but for the hight whereto the enemies were come now therein; as alſo a reaſon of God his patience in ſuch meaſure of wrong, was needfull. And further, hearts are hereby wakened to ſee the equity of the great plague in the ſixt Seale, when God in a great degree performeth the promiſed vengeance, albeit then fully it ſhall bee executed, when vpon powring out of the ſeuenth Viall, they ſhall bee abſolutely deſtroyed who deſtroyed the earth, and the kingdomes of the world ſhall become our Lords: the reſt of Saints being ſlaine by the beaſt, euen the reſt of the womans ſeed, Chap. 12. 17. and 13. 7. and 14. 12.
            9 The ſixth type, vpon opening of the ſixt Seale, 
                  〈◊〉
                a great Earthquake, the darkning of the ſunne and moon, the fall of ſtarres, the departing of heauen, and remouing of mountaines and Ilands from their places, the ſpeech opening the ſignification, is the Kings of the earth, great men, rich men, chiefe Captaines, & mighty men, bond-men and free-men, ſhould haue ſuch commotion

and alteration of ſtate, carrying ſuch imprinted ſenſe and cleare ſight of Chriſt his wrath and vengeance, as they ſhould bee filled with deſperate terrour: ſo ſore a iudgement comming on them, as in a ſort, the ſtate of the world ſhould bee ouerturned; theſe, who were as the Sunne, Moone, and Stars for gliſtering ſhew in their Kingdomes, wealthes, honours, commandements, and great roomes, being darkened, and falling from their places, all their glory and honour (compared to Heauen) euaniſhing as a ſcrole rolled vp: ſuch as ſeemed moſt cloſely hedged about, as Ilands being driuen from their places, and who appeared to bee ſetled as mountaines, yet remouing. Which plague ſhould bee ſo much the more grieuous, as no condition of men (bond or free) ſhould eſcape it: all feeling ſuch deſperate terror and ſorrow, as felt theſe, Iſai 2. as had the Iſraelites at the deſtruction of Samaria, Oſe 10. and as Chriſt foretold ſhould betake the Iewes at the deſtruction of Ieruſalem, Luke 21. Neither is this type to be drawne to any other, or extended to any further ſenſe. To take it of the laſt conſummation is ridiculous ignorance, the ſeuenth Seale as yet not opened, and yeelding more then foure times as much ſtory, both for time, and euents in time, as all theſe ſix preceeding, and to extend it to the decay of the viſible Church, is impertinent, as which matter is handled properly in the ſeuenth ſeale, and ſix trumpets thereof. For albeit, that in this Propheſie, both before, and hereafter, ſtarres be put for Paſtors of Churches, and the eclipſing of Sunne and ſtarres for darkening of ſpirituall light, and fall of ſtarres, for falling of Paſtors from the truth: yet here, where that matter is not handled, and where the holy Ghoſt ſo plainely ioyneth the interpretation, wee ought not iumble ſo diſtinct matters: and the frequent vſe of theſe ſame Allegories, in the Prophets, for euents of this ſame kind might haue taught ſo much, Iſai 13. verſe 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. and 14. 12. and 24. 19. 20. 21.

23. and 34. 40. Ezechiel 32. 7. 8. Ioel 2. 30. 31.
            10 Now, for right accommodation of Story to theſe Seales, wee muſt flie two extremities, wherein many Interpreters falling, breed to themſelues great difficulties, and darken cleare matter. The firſt, is of theſe, who tying themſelues to more ſtrait rules of interpretation thē the holy Spirite hath laid to them, will needes haue theſe ſeuen Seales, as alſo the Trumpets and Vials to bee ſo many knots or periods of time exactlie cutted, within which, the accommodation of each is to bee ſought; whereas they are no knots of time, but types of diſtinct matters; and the whole matter comprehended in ſeuen Seales (whereof, the ſeuenth affording the trumpets & vials, hath the matter of foure times alſe much time, as all the former ſixe) ſheweth the weakeneſſe of this coniecture; yea, the effects of them are ſeene clearely, to bee often of one time, the former holding out long after the beginning of the next. The other extremity, is of theſe, who well perceiuing the abſurdity of the firſt, neglect in the accommodation, all conſideration of diſtinct time; ſo iumbling Seales, Trumpets and Vials, to the confuſion of all order, and light of Story, which in this Propheſie is moſt orderly ſet downe, with ſpecial relation to diſtinct euents. Then let vs hold this rule, that theſe ſixe Seales haue the ſtory of the firſt ſorrowes, as Chriſt calleth them, Mathew 24. 8. as the ſeuenth Seale hath both the ſecond ſorrowes in the ſixe Trumpets, and the laſt wrath in the ſeuenth, by ſeuen Vials. Thus farre then wee haue to reſpect time in accommodation of theſe Seales, that albeit they ſhew ſuch ordinary iudgements, whereby God at all time hath puniſhed, and will puniſh the contempt of his grace; yet here they haue a ſpeciall relation to the firſt time from the writing of this Propheſie, to the ouerturning of the ſtate of the Roman Empire, ſo far forth as might make way to the ſucceeding more dangerous euill in the ſeuenth

Seale, and ſixe Trumpets thereof. Now as theſe beginnings of Sorrowes (ſo called, and of Chriſt himſelfe recorded in the ſame order which here is ſet down) fell out in diuers places, Mathew 24. 7. 8. So alſo in diuers times of that firſt time: now and then here & there, yet alwayes in this order, that firſt the white horſe goeth out: after, the Sword, Famine, Peſtilence, and noiſome beaſts (God his foure great plagues, Ezech. 14. 21) ſometimes ſeuerally, ſometimes ioyntly, as God ſaw it expedient, fitting his iudgements to the growth of induration againſt that perſecuting eſtate, till at length all the glory and face, almoſt of that wicked Empire was ouerturned. And theſe are the proper euils of that firſt time, for that albeit in ſucceding ages, God hath inflicted them on the world, yet neither in ſuch degree as then, neither for any degree thereof vpon the world thereafter, come they in account, in reſpect of heauier woes thē they.
            11 How the preaching of the Goſpell went forth, conquering to ouercome maugre all opponents, beſides the ſucceſſe preceding this Reuelation, it had after Domitian, who now letted it with all his might, a great propagation, as in ſtory is cleare, and whenſoeuer by perſecutors it was croſſed, immediately the red horſe and his great ſword, in God his iuſtice, commeth forth, in bloudy warres, partly with forrainers, but moſt tragically of the Caeſars amongſt themſelues, whereof the Stories are knowne, and too long here to bee repeated.
            12 Now famine ordinarily euer accompanieth or enſueth hard vpon Warres, but theſe times had as ſtrange bloudſhed, ſo vncou
                  •
               h examples of ſcarſity, which the godly who were men, (for that is all the man, Eccleſ. 12 13.) 
                  •
               oted to bee in puniſhment of the Goſpell reiected, See Tertullian in his Apology, and to Scapula, and Cyprian contra Demetrian.
            
            13 As induration grew and cruelty againſt the Goſpell,

how God ſent out all his foure great plagues on theſe perſecutors: conſider the tragicall time of Antoninus ſurnamed the philoſopher, a moſt bloudy perſecutor, and the record thereof in ſtory, Ab Armis nuſquam quies erat, perque omnem Orientem Illiricum, Italiam, Galliamque bella feruebant: terra motus non fine interitu ciuitatum, inundationes fluminuns, lues crebrae, locuſtarum Species agris infeſtae: prorſus vt nihil prope quo ſummis angoribus anteri mortales ſoleant dici ſe
                     •
                   cogitariqueat, quod Antoni
                     •
                   imperante non ſeuierit. The times of Gallus and Voluſianus were more miſerable, and yet more, that of 
                  Ʋalerianus and Galienus: but moſt of all that of Maxentius Maximinus, and Licinius: all theſe foure plagues raging mightily, their Stories, will make any Reader agaſt, and comparing therewith theſe praedictions, to wonder at God his both wiſdome and iuſtice.
            14 Now all theſe plagues working no amendment, but ſtirring them to further rage againſt chriſtians, whom they tooke to bee cauſers of all theſe euils, the fiercenes of perſecution was more intended. Diocleſian ſet himſelfe to roote out Chriſtianity: his Collegue Her
                     •
                  uleus no leſſe bloudy. Hereupon a great and loud cry of martyred ſoules aſcendeth, which till the appointed time of full vengeance obtaine long white robes. Thus God in ſome degree had comforted them before, by imprinting his terror in the hearts of cruelleſt perſecutors. The Edict of Traia
                     •
                  
                ſpake for them when he was forced to put forth, that no Inquiſition ſhould bee made for Chriſtians, much more the Edicts of Adrian, and Antonius Pius, who vnder paine of death commanded, that none ſhould bee delated for Chriſtianitie, except guiltie of ſome other crime. Antonine the Philoſopher, whom no Apologie could mitigate, yet in the Marcoman wars is conuinced of Chriſt his power: when in confeſſion that hee and his Army were ſaued at the prayers of Chriſtians, hee called that Legion Fulminatrix, the terrors affrighting

ſo, Diocleſian and Maximianus; as, wearie of Maſſacring Chriſtians, being ouercome by their conſtant ſufferings, they bequeth their ſtates, and ſeeke ſecret corners wherein to hide themſelues: what was it elſe but a quiet confeſſion of Chriſtians innocency? Maximinus at his tragicall end, ſetting himſelfe to blaſp
                  •
               eme Chriſt, yet is forced to confeſſe him, and to acknowledge himſelfe iuſtly puniſhed for perſecuting the Saints. Licinius is faine to connterfet Chriſtianity. But then it was, that the ſoules got the long white robes, when Conſtantinus embracing Chriſtianity, by publike edicts, Chriſtian Religion is approued and eſtabliſhed, and heathen worſhip abrogated: The Church ſo becomming glorious, and of high account: and all former horrible accuſations, now ſeene and knowne to the world, to bee lies. At this point of time Satan is bound a thouſand yeeres, ſeats are ſet vp, and they ſit on them, Chapter 20 The commemoration of Martyres was alwaies honourable amongſt Chriſtians, and laudably of them, vſed at firſt (howbeit it turned afterward to foule Idolatry) but that the heads of that ſame bloody ſtate, ſhould ſubmitte themſelues to Chriſt his name, and the Church thereupon to haue ſo goodly, free, and peaceable ſtate as wee ſee enſued: that was indeed, to receiue long white robes.
            15 The promiſed vengeance yet behoued to come vpon that bloody Empire, whi
                  ••
                in the ſixth ſeale, commeth in a high degree, when the whole ſtate thereof is ſhaken, and in a manner, defaced by the Gothes and other barbarous nations, whoſe names had beene till then, not heard of: who (occupying the faireſt and goodlieſt Prouinces of the Empire, erecting new kingdomes and ſtates, and changing the names of countries, euery part, almoſt, receiuing new inhabitants) altered, as it were, the face of the world, and eclipſed the glory of that pompous and bloody Empire. And this, out of all doubt, is meaned by the ſixt ſeale: and is that deadly wound which the beaſt getteth in his ſixth head, which wound beeing afterward

cured, that ſtate, in the cured head, continueth the enemy and murtherer of Saints (the reſt of the brethren) albeit in an other ſort, till, for the full, finall, and recureleſſe ouerthrow thereof, we expect a greater earthquake then this, or any ſince the beginning of the world, by powring out the ſeuenth V all of the laſt wrath. That, ſome enterpret this ſeale of theſe ſturres, whereby the heathen perſecuters were deiected, about Conſtantines time; who preuailing againſt them ma
                  •
               e, at it were, a new face of an Empire, by abrogating heatheniſme: it hath no conuenient analogy with this type, and leſſe cleare accommodation to the ſignification, heere ſet downe by the ſpirit. The ſlaughter and deiection of diuers Emperours from their ſtates, ſo long as, in the ſucceeders, the Empire retained the luſtre and ſtrength, (as, in Conſtantine, it was more confirmed and enlarged) was no ſuch vncouth or ſtrange thing in that ſtate, (which was but a very ſtage of Tragedies) as that in ſuch ſpeeches, as the ſpirit vſeth in this type, it ſhould haue beene expreſſed. It is true, that the coincident caſe of Chriſtianity eſtabliſhed, and heatheniſme abrogated, was a great and vncouth thing: but which, in all mens confeſſion, cannot, by theſe ſpeeches of darkening the ſunne and fall of ſtarres, &c. bee ſignified. For that aduancement of Chriſtianty, was in the fifth ſeale by long white robes expreſſed: whereby the ſoules were the more patiently to attend the vengeance promiſed, which is heere in a great meaſure, but then, fully ſhal be executed when the reſt of the brethren, euen the reſt of the womans 
               Chap. 12. 17. & 13. 7. & 14. 12. Chap. 11. 17. 18. & 19. 6. 
               ſeed, againſt whom the Dragon maketh warre by the Vicar of his throne, being ſlain
                  •
               , the kingdomes of the world ſhall become our Lords: and all, both firſt and laſt dead, ſhall be iudged and aduenged, by the finall ouerthrow of that bloody ſtate; which, firſt and laſt, is the murtherer of Saints. Which now, in this ſixth ſeale, receiueth a deadlie Chap. 13. wound, but hauing it cured againe, in the eighth head (therefore called one of the ſeuen) recouereth glory and Chap. 17. worſhip of nations, and holdeth on the aduerſary ſtill; till

out of the tabernacle of teſtimonie open in heauen, at the Chap. 15. ſeuenth trumpet, ſeuen miniſters of the laſt wrath come againſt it: whereof, the laſt bringeth a greater earthquake Chap. 16. then this, to vtter deſtruction of that ſtate for euer.
            That which hath ledde exceeding learned men in this errour of accommodation, both heere and in other parts of this Prophecie, is that wrong conceiued ground, whereof I ſpake before, that theſe ſeales and trumpets are ſections of time; and, finding, that at the opening of the ſeuenth ſeale, ſuch effects enſue, as are anterior in time to this fall of the Weſterne, and great weakening of the Eaſterne Empire, they drawe backe the accommodation. But, as the euils of the ſixe ſeales, which from Chriſt his owne words, I called the beginnings of ſorrowes, being taken whole and together, are anteriour, both in conſideration and in time, to the euill of the ſeuenth ſeale and ſixe trumpets thereof: (as whereby are ſhewed the iudgements of God againſt the open rage of the Dragon in his miniſters, the Roman Emperours, by all the degrees thereof, till induration, at length bringeth this ruine) and as the the ſecond great euill, of the ſeuenth ſeale and ſixe trompets thereof, taken whole, according to that height of miſchiefe whereto it grew, is poſterior, both in conſideration and time, to the former: ſo in comparing parts, the ſecond in ſome firſt degrees of her grouth, is before the full end of the firſt. Heere is the deceit, that men thinke the effects of the ſixe ſeales muſt haue a full end, before the opening of the ſeuenth, vpon their forelaid preiudice. For, euen in the time of Satan his firſt open rage, he was buſie hatching the ſecond euill, the myſterie of iniquity working, euen then; albeit before it could be reueled, or come to any great height, that which with-held, behoued to bee taken out of the way: the ſixt head behoued to be wounded deadly, and the ſeuenth, riſing by the wound, euaniſh in a ſhort ſpace: that the eighth, by 2. Theſ. 2. cure of that deadly wound (the beaſt which was, and is not and yet is (might bewhich all the world, and periſh in the Chap. 17.
               
cup of the laſt wrath. So that Areth as ſaith fitly, that this ſixth ſeale maketh way to the Antichriſt: who, though he was before this well farre aduanced, yet the holy Ghoſt deliuereth his who
                  •
               e grouth in the ſeuenth ſeale: thus diſtinguiſhing diuers caſes, and not preciſelie cutting times. And the next Chapter, containing ſummarily the whole ſtory of the ſeuenth ſeale (before it bee opened for particular explication) ſheweth, that as that miſchiefe was in ſome degrees working on, in time of the ſixt ſeale: ſo, this Prophecie is penned for clearing of matter, and not for calculation of times. Albeit each euill (conſidered in the height thereof, and taken whole and together) is deliuered according to their order in time.
            16 The ſumme then of all this Chapter is, that the Goſpell, going forth in power, ſhould by Satan, ſtirring the Empire of Rome againſt it, ſo bee reſiſted; as God in his iuſtice ſhould puniſh that ſtate, with ſending bloody both inteſtine and forraigne warres, ſtrange famines, and grieuous peſtilences, ſeuerally and iointly, and all his ordinary plagues. Notwithſtanding which, they ſhould ſtil ſo grow in cruelty againſt the profeſſors of the Goſpell, as in God his iuſtice, required no leſſe then full and finall vengeance: the patience of Saints being extreamly proued. Which vengeance, in reſpect, that for good conſiderations, in God his wiſe adminiſtration, (ſpecially, for fulfilling the ſufferings of Saints, and therein the cup of the enemies iniquity) it was to bee for a ſpace, delaied: left the Saints thereupon ſhould be tempted aboue meaſure, God gaue them in that time, great relaxation from perſecution, and high account before men. And ſoone after (in ſuch degree, as in the time, might witneſſe his wrath euen to the conſciences of the aduerſaries, indured againſt all the former iudgements) hee powreth a great meaſure of indignation vpon that bloody ſta
                  •
               e, giuing it ſo, a deadly wound.
         
         
            
            CHAP. VII.
            
               THe ſixeſeales opened, exhibited the particular types of the firſt ſorrowes. The ſeuenth, is to bring foorth ſo huge an euill, as the heart of Iohn, and all hearers and readers, were to bee ſtrengthened againſt the horror thereof. Herefore it is, that before the ſeale be opened, to the manifeſtation of ſo many degrees of a deteſtable miſchiefe, in this Chapter a ſummary view is giuen, of the reſt of this Propheſie; in a generall type of the euill ariſing, of the prouident care of Chriſt to preſerue to himſelfe a Church, vnder and in the midſt thereof: the victory of the Church ouer this euill, and her gracefull ſtate thereupon. Thus, not onely, by a timous praeception of deliuerance, from ſo dangerous a caſe, fortifying hearts, which otherwaies, at long and particular explication thereof, without this praemunition, might haue fainted: but alſo, by this order of handling, in proponing theſe things before the opening of the ſeuenth ſeale, (whereof they are the proper euents) implying, not obſcurely, that this ſecond great euill, was, euen in time of the former ſorrowes, greatly aduanced.
            2 The miſchiefe, is ſhewed in foure miniſters of indignation: by their number, place, and action; portending plainely, that euill which at more length and particularly, in the ſixe trumpets is exponed. Againſt which inconuenience vpon the world, how Chriſt entertaineth his Church, during the time of the euill, is declared to the 9. verſe: From thence to the end of the Chapt. is firſt, the Church her victory, (at length in the ſeuenth trumpet, and ſeuen vials thereof declared) and next, her gracefull ſtate thereupon; which is amplie in the 21. and 22. Chap. inlarged: heere, both ſummarily proponed.
            
               
3 The number, of theſe miniſters of indignation, is foure: for the foure corners of the earth. See Chapt. 4. their place, the foure corners of the earth: to ſhew an euill, which in the height of it, ſhould ouergoe all: as is cleere in the fifth trumpet and end of the 13. Chapter. Their action, is to hold the forue windes, &c. Windes when they are tempeſtuous, are noyſome, but blowing temperately and mildly, they bring a ſweet influence of fertility to the earth, and of purification both to ſea and aire. We liue by emitting and indrawing of breath: and without wind, all things would putrifie. Hence in Scripture to ſignifie the influence of ſpirituall graces, ſpeeches are borrowed: Ioh. 3. Act. 2. Cant. 4. Ariſe ô South and come ô North, blow on my garden, &c. See Ezech. 37. 9. whence moſt cleerely, this ſpeech is in this ſenſe. The with-holding then of windes, ſignifieth the reſtraint of ſpirituall life and grace. The earth, ſea, and trees, are alſo typicall, as is euident in the fifth trumpet, Chapt. 9. where the maine point of this foreſhewed euill, taking exec
                  •
               tion, the miniſters thereof are interdicted, hurting of theſe trees who had the ſeale of God on their fore-heads. This frame of ſpeech, is alſo from the practiſe of enemies in extreme deſtructions. As of Iſrael, Iuda, and Edom, againſt Moab. Marring euery good field, ſtopping euery fountaine of water, and felling euery good tree, 2. King. 3. 19. Deſtroying ſo, the fields wherein, the moyſture whereby, and the things themſelues, which in fields and by moyſture doe grow. The ea
                  •
               th then, is the place of the viſible Church, wherein are trees good and bad, ſome bearing fruit, ſome but leaues: but, as heere it is hurt by this plague, it ſignifieth onely the earthly ones, who are in it, but not of it: for the ſealed ones are not of Chap. 12. 
                     •
                  2. the earth, but, albeit in the earth, yet the citizens of heauen. The Sea, is the common worſhip, wherein men are ioyned, pure or impure, as it falleth, through the lothſomeneſſe or deadlineſſe of the waters, making accordingly Ezech. 47. Pſalm. 1. the trees which grow thereby, good or bad. Trees

are men: of whom, ſuch as are planted in the courts of God, are alwaies freſh and flouriſhing; like theſe of paradiſe. Pſal. 92. 13. & 52. 8. Chriſtians, good and bad, are in Scripture, ſo ordinarily called trees, as it were a vaine thing to heape teſtimonies. This euill then, was to ouergoe the whole viſible Church, doctrine, worſhippe, and profeſſours therein.
            4 Againſt this danger, the care of Chriſt is ſhewed, ordering the ſtate of his elected ones, by imprinting on them ſuch a marke, with the ſeale of God, as thereby, they ſhould eſcape the euill. Herein, come to be obſerued, the perſon actor, and the number ſealed. The perſon is of great note, as being an Angel, but of ſingular quality, euen the Angel of the couenant. This is cleare, by his notes, and by his action. His notes are two. His comming vp from the Eaſt: and hauing the ſeale of God. In the firſt, are notable, the quarter whence he commeth, the Eaſt: and that he aſcendeth therefrom. He commeth from the Eaſt, not onely, as our day ſtarre and Sunne of righteouſneſſe, by frame of ſpeech from naturall lights, which all ariſe from the Eaſt (and heere, conuenientlie, ſheweth him to bee the light and life of his ſealed ones, when ſpirituall darkeneſſe ſhould poſſeſſe all) but this hath alſo a ſpeciall alluſion to the laſt Chapters of Ezechiel: wherein, the goodly ſtate of the Church, vnder the Goſpell, being deſcribed vnder legall types, not only is the glory of the God of Iſrael, ſeene enter into the Temple by way of the Eaſt, and the forefront of the houſe noted to be towards the Eaſt, and the land ſo diuided amongſt the Tribes, as one end of each portion ſhould reach to the Eaſt: but alſo, at the eaſt doore of the inner court of the Temple (ſo ſituated, as, to each doore thereof, men behooued aſcend by degrees, as this Angel aſcendeth from the Eaſt) none were permitted to enter or come foorth but the Prince. All, both Prince and people, worſhipped before that doore, but the Prince onely went in and out thereat. Neither might the people come

in the Temple at all to worſhip, but when the Prince was in the midſt of them: they came in together and went out together, yet at the Eaſt doore, none but hee. And out of the Eaſt doore came the waters, which did grow to a Sea. All, no doubt, to ſhew; that no light ought to come in God his houſe, but the Prince his light; neither any Doctrine flow from the Temple but his; who onely entreth and commeth foorth at the Eaſt doore: in his light, all muſt walke, and worſhip; and therefore, no entry but when hee entreth, no worſhip but when hee is preſent, as in whom and for whom, onely it is accepted, and from whom onely wee are to take the rule thereof. His light riſeth on all his owne children, hauing all their portions reaching to the Eaſt. That this Angel then, commeth from the Eaſt, it ſheweth him to be the Prince: that he aſcendeth, it noteth his cōming to be into his temple, to bee life and light to his ſealed ones, in the midſt of this darkneſſe: euen that lambe vpon Mount Sion, in the midſt of thoſe 144000. Chap. 14. when all the earth followed the beaſt, Chapt. 13. Conſider well, for this ſtate of Chriſt his Church, and his manner of preſence in it, the 11. Chapt. His ſecond note is, that hee hath the Seale of the liuing God. This ſeale, he hath eſſentially, as he is the Image of the inuiſible God; and ingraued 
               Col. 1. 15. Heb. 1. 3. Iohn 5. 26. 
               character of the Father his perſon: hauing life in himſelfe, as the Father hath life in himſelfe. And he hath this ſeale, to ſeale others therewith: giuing life to whom he Iohn 5. 21. Ioh. 6. 27. will, as the Father quickneth whom he will: for him hath the Father ſealed. All faithfull, haue this ſeale; that is, are ſealed therewith. But to haue it in this degree, as therewith to be the ſealer of God his Saints, it is aboue the dignity of all creatures. Hee onely is the Maſter of God his great Seale, ſealing all God his children, with Epheſ. 1. 13. 2. Tim. 2. 19. the holy Spirit of promiſe. The foundation of God abiaeth ſure, and hath this ſeale, the Lord knoweth wh are his. And this alſo he ſealeth vp in vs, by his ſpirit of ſanctification; ſo, as, who call on the name of the Lord, depart

from iniquity. Hauing this Seale, wee need not feare any darkeneſſe of Antichriſt, for our annointing teacheth vs all things: and the honour of our God 4 Iohn 2. 27. ſo requiring, wee haue our Seale in our foreheades, ready to giue account of our hope to all that aske 1 Pet. 3. 15. vs.
            5 Thus are the notes of his perſon. His Action is that, he cryeth with a loud voice, &c. His loude crying ſheweth the greatneſſe of the miſchiefe: for preuenting whereof, as men in ſuch caſes doe, he is ſaid to cry with a loud voice, ſo bewraying care. The Subſtance of his cry, is in a commandement, and the end thereof. The commandement is, not to hurt, &c till we haue ſealed &c. His commandement ſheweth authority, whereby he ruleth all things in heauen and earth, both in mercy and iuſtice. As our brother, God is his God. I go to your God, and my God, your father and my father, Iohn 20. 17. The end of the commandement is, that the ſeruants of God may bee in ſuretie through his Seale in their fore-head. The ſpeech is from the 9. of Ezechiel: where, vpon, the deſtruction of Ieruſalem, Temple, and all to enſue by the ſtate of Babell: ſuch a type of caution is put for preſeruation of ſuch as mourned, and ſighed for the iniquities committed in that City: ſo, here a ſpirituall deſolation, and Captiuity being to come on the viſible Church by myſticall Babylon: the like Caution is prouided for the like ſort. The marking on the fore-head, is put but according to the manner of men, who imprint a conſpectible mark on what they wold haue eaſily diſcerned from common, ſo as the beholders cannot miſſe to ſee it. Not that this Seale was perceptible to Antichriſt, or Miniſters of his deceit and cruelty. For the world ſaw not theſe ſealed ones, neither could learn their Song, Chapter 14. 3. but as I haue ſaid, by this frame of ſpeech, to ſhew their ſure protection by the prouidence of their God.
            6 In the number ſealed, conſider of whom it is, and

what it is. It is of all the Tribes of Iſrael, that is, of all true Iſraelites, the Elect of God, and Iſraelites indeede, Gal. 6. 16. For properly it cannot here bee taken: but the ſpeech is from the Church of Iſrael, and the ordinary manner of the Propheticall denunciations: for, as when the Church conſiſted onely of Iſrael properly, the ſame was little in compariſon to that time, when by the Goſpell the Gentiles ioyne thereto; and as, euen of the Church of Iſrael, though their number were as the ſea-ſand, yet but a remnant was ſaued: euen ſo, in time of Antichriſt his darkeneſſe, the true Church of God Iſai 10. 22. ſhould bee narrow (as Iſrael, yea, but a remnant of Iſrael, as the Temple, while Court and Citie are giuen to the Heathen, Chapter 11.) in compariſon to the ſtate following in the victorie, when (as by ioyning of all Nations, the Church of Iſrael was enlarged) by the comming of theſe out of great tribulation, who with palms and white robes celebrate the victory, and by riſing of the reſt of the dead after a thouſand yeeres, an innumerable multitude ſhall fill the Church. The number then Chap. 20. is a few ſecret ſelect ones, abiding with the Lambe on Mount Sion: while all the earth follow the beaſt. This number is 144000. to ſhew a competent Company, euen then when none appeared to bee left, Of the further myſtery of this number, ſee Chapter thirteene in the end.
            7 
                  〈◊〉
                the 9. verſe is the third type and part of this Chapter, of the Church victorious ouer this miſchie
                  •
               e: ſet downe two waies. Firſt, as Iohn had the knowledge thereof by ſeeing and hearing that company which are the type Secondly, as hee is otherwiſe informed of their caſe. The firſt to the 13. verſe, the next to the end. That which Iohn did ſee of them, is their number, place and habite. The number is innumerable, and that of all Nations, Kindreds and Tongues: to ſhew the largeneſſe of the Church in this ſtate, farre beyond that vnder the euill, and here expreſſed by the names of Nations, Kindreds,

and tongues, according to the maner of Propheticall ſpeech, as is before touched. Theſe haue notes, farre differing from the former, arguing euidently this type to be of the Church victorious ouer the euill. The former, were few marked and ſecret ones, cloſed vppe from a common plague, whoſe ſong none could learne but themſelues: here are innumerable with publike Enſignes of victory, in high and loud ſong celebrating the ſame, and praiſing him by whom. Theſe come not in place till the Tabernacle bee opened in heauen, and the Vials of the laſt wrath, bee a powring out on the beaſt, Chapter 15. 5. Their place is ſtanding before the throne, the place of the true Church, Chapter 4. and accordingly interpreted of the elder, verſe 15. So in this ſenſe, it is ſaid, Chapter 11. to the two reuiued witneſſes, Come vp hither. Their habite is white garments, ſo interpreted v. 14. with palms in their hands, as victors ouer great tribulation, out of which they are come, verſe 14. the Palme with all nations is the ſigne of victory: ſo iuſtly in remembrance whence they are come, theſe celebrate now the feaſt of Tabernacles, victorious ouer the beaſt, his character, name and number thereof, Chap. 15. 1. Thus farre Iohn ſeeth of them. He heareth them cry, and with a loud voice. Here now theſe ſing, and with a loud voice, ſo as all may heare and learne, who will not harden their hearts. To the former was no ſong attributed, they had one, but which none could learne, Chap. 14. 3. except themſelues. Here is a Song in the eares of heauen and earth; The Song of Moſes, and of the Lambe, Chapter 15. The ſubſtance of their Song, as it is excellent, ſo it well fitteth their caſe. Saluation is of our God, and of the Lambe. Antichriſt deriued ſaluation from ſo many, and diuided the praiſe thereof among ſo many, as little part thereof remained to God and the Lambe: Theſe to ſhew a plaine croſſing of all Popery, and a triumph ouer it, acknowledge all ſaluation to be of God in Chriſt, and therefore all praiſe thereof to belong onely

to our God and the Lambe. This ouerthroweth all wherein the Romans conteſt with vs, wee pleading nothing, but that All Saluation is of our God and the Lamb: In which ſong if they would ioyne with vs, al debate were ended. This Song, by times the Iewes (no obſtinate) ſhall learne, and waſhing their garments in the bloud of the Lambe, ſhall come out of great tribulation, being at laſt fully wakened by a voice from the throne to ſing with vs Haleluiah, Chapter 19. All Angels affirme this Song, of whom their place and ſong, Chapter 5.
            8 Thus farre Iohn heard and ſaw of the caſe of theſe. Now from the thirteenth verſe is, what hee learned by information; wherein come to bee conſidered, the Informer, one of the Elders, ſee Chapter 5. Sect. 4. and what hee informeth. Wherein, againe is the occaſion, and the matter whereof, vpon that occaſion he informeth. The occaſion is, Iohn his ignorance, and deſire of knowledge: to the conſideration of the one whereof, and ſo to the deſire of the other, he is ſtirted vp by an Interrogation, What are theſe? ſhe wing an admiration, as of an vncouch and ſtrange thing in the eyes of the world, when men in ſo great numbers ſhall ariſe from vnder Antichriſts darkeneſſe, to the true light of the Goſpell, whereof the daily encreaſe maketh the enemies gnaw their tongues for ſorrow, and amaſeth the world: but greater wonder ſhall yet bee, when vpon the beaſt his fall, the Iewes forſaking their own righteouſneſſe, which is by the Law, and taking hold of the righteouſneſſe of God, by waſhing their long white robes in the bloud of the Lambe, ſhall ioyne with vs in this ſong: ſo as the Church herſelfe with ioyfull admiration ſhall bee moued to ſay, Who hath begotten mee theſe? behold I was barren, whence are theſe? For the ſpeeches after following, ſee Iſai 25. and 49. and 60. Iohn his anſwere hath a confeſſion of his ignorance, and a modeſt requeſt of information: whereupon the Information

followeth; firſt, ſhewing what and whence they are, according to the double demand: and next, ſhewing their gracefull ſtate vpon this their victory, through God his dwelling amongſt them, and copious diſpenſation of grace. Their coming out of great affliction, is the comming from vnder the bondage of Antichriſt: which how great ſpirituall affliction it is, they know who haue gotten the victory, in whoſe mouth God hath put this ſong, Saluation is of our God, and of the Lambe. For this tribulation, ſee the fift Trumpet, Chapter 9. And when God openeth the eyes of the Iewes to ſee their common Sauiour, then ſhall they well vnderſtand what both ſpirituall and bodily affliction they now are in which ſhall endure, ſo much the more their victory: Hee ſheweth their long white robes to bee their iuſtification in the bloud of Chriſt apprehended by true faith, expreſſing the action of faith in theſe words, they haue drpt, &c. Thus noting a great difference betwixt them now, and when their garmentes were dipte in the mire of mens merites, in the filthy ſincke of Antichriſts Indulgences, and puddle of Purgatory: and in Iewes now a great change, no more ſeeking to eſtabliſh their owne righteouſneſſe, which is by the law, or placing it Rom. 103. in diuers waſhings, rites and carnall ceremonies, which cannot purge from ſinne: but dipping their robes Heb. 9. & 10. 4 alſo in the bloud of the Lambe. So liuely the holy Ghoſt painteth out theſe things. Thirdly, hee ſheweth of them, that their ſtanding before the throne, noteth the true Church of God, worſhipping him in truth.
            9 Thus is the victory, now their gracefull ſtate hereupon is ſhewed in a freedome from all euill, and affluence of all good, and that through God his preſence, and protection, and the Lambe his gracious diſpenſation, ſet out in ſo goodly a manner, as many thinke the things here promiſed to bee of the Kingdome of glory; but here in magnifike termes, the goodly ſtate of the

Church is expreſſed according, as for plenty of light & peace, ſhee ſhall bee vpon the deſtruction of Antichriſt, and all open enemies he
                  •
               e in the Kingdome of grace, & no deſcription of the glory to 
                  〈◊〉
                reuealed in heauen: which neither the eye can ſee, nor the eare heare, nor heart of man conceiue, and in heauen is no ſuch diſpenſation of the Lambe as here is noted, who then ſhall ſurrender the Kingdome to his Father, that God may bo 1 Cor. 15. 24. all in all. As in Antichriſt his preuailing, the ſtate of God his Church was ſhewed in the 144000. and the Church victorious ouer him (now diſcouered, and going to deſtruction) in the number innumerable, and their victorious geſture: ſo here the goodly ſtate of the Church (now free of all inuaſion or bondage, and hauing plenty of light and quiet ſtate) is magnifickly expreſſed, and yet but in ſuch frame of ſpeech, as is ordinary in the Iſai 25. & 49. & 60. Prophets for ſuch caſes. This ſtate of the Church is largely handled in the end of this booke, as the firſt (in the hid and ſealed ones) is in the ſixe trumpets, and the victory in the ſeuenth, and ſeuen Vials thereof. Now as I haue ſaid, according to the phraſe of the Prophets, theſe bleſſings are ſet forth vnder things corporall, and ampliſied each by remouing the contrarie euill. They ſhall not hunger for the Lambe ſhall feed them, they ſhall not thirſt, for hee ſhall leade them to the fonntaines of waters, they ſhall feele no burning, for God ſhall ouerſhadow them, &c. the ouerſhadowing is from the cloud in the wilderneſſe: for the leading and feeding, ſee and weigh, Pſal. 23. a profeſſion of theſe graces, which the man of God felt. See Iohn 4. 13. and 6. 27. &c. It is maruaile, how men acquainted with the ordinary ſtile of Scripture, ſhould haue drawne this to any other ſenſe; but hereof more vpon the 21. and 22. Chapters. This ſtate is in theſe few words expreſſed, Chapter 19. The Bride is prepared. And accordingly, in all her goodly ornaments ſhewed to Iohn Chap. 21.
         
         
            
            CHAP. VIII.
            
               THe ſixth ſeale being opened, firſt was exhibited the proper euent thereof in the end of the ſixth Chapter; and in the ſeuenth Chapter, a ſummarie view giuen (for ſtrengthning hearts againſt the terrour thereof) of the whole matter of the ſeuenth ſeale; which heere, now is opened, and ſpeciall euents thereof declared, through the reſt of all this propheticall narration. Of theſe, wee haue, firſt, a generall preparation; and next, the perticular execution. The preparation, hath an incident effect immediatly following vpon the opening of the ſeale: which is, Silence about halfe an houre. To ſhew an attent expectation of great things; whereto well, the portending of them in the former Chapter, might haue erected the mindes. And the waiting for rare or fearefull euents, worketh a ſilent attendance. When the wiſe ſpeake, then all keepe ſilence: and Iob 29. Habac. 2. 20. when the Lion roareth, all the beaſts of the forreſt hold their peace. Beſides this, great things commonly come foorth with proceſſe and preparation. And truly, God who is ſlow to wrath, is, in a ſort forced to poure out heauie indignation.
            2 After this incident effect, is the preparation in the miniſters, and in the orderer of the whole errand. The miniſters are deſcribed by their nature, Angels. Quality, miniſtering Spirits, as who ſtand before God, Luke 1. And inſtruments of miniſtration, Trumpets. In the inſtruments, are noted two things. Firſt, that they are trumpets, and ſecondly that they are giuen to them. That the inſtruments are trumpets, it ſheweth that their miniſtry in this enſuing matter, is to be ſounders of the alarume, and giuers of the figne for inuaſion of the world by each woe, as als many armies of him who is Lord of hoſts: as alſo,

that they are denouncers, & that of great and weighty matter. For, Trumpeters are meſſengers of great things, and, but for great perſonages. In this alſo is implied, that the end of their miniſtry and of theſe iudgements denounced and executed, is to waken vp the dead world to repentance, or make it inexcuſable againſt finall wrath. See the end of Chapter 9. Therefore when the world is not wakened with Trumpets, it feeleth iuſtly full cups of wrath tumbled out. That theſe Trumpets are giuen to the Angels, it ſheweth them to doe nothing without ſpecial warrant and mandate.
            3 Thus are the miniſters; the maſter and orderer of the errand, is deſcribed by his office, and his actions. His office, that he is an Angell: for that, is heere the name of office and not of nature. And this angell differeth farre from the other ſeuen: for he is the Angell of the couenant, cleerely by all his notes. He ſtandeth as the other ſeuen, for hee alſo, in ſome reſpect, is a miniſter: but hee hath a particular ſtand, which is at the Altar, as High Prieſt. He is furniſhed alſo with an inſtrument, but which is proper to the Prieſt, and belonging to the moſt holy place; to wit, the golden Cenſer. He hath alſo ſomewhat Heb. 9. 4. giuen to him, but a rare gift; that is, Many odors, whereby all the praiers, and of all Saints is acceptable. For by him we offer vp ſacrifices to God. In the fifth Chapter, Ebr. 13. 15. the praiers of Saints are called Odors, and heere the odours are diſtinguſhed from the praiers: onely to ſhew, how it is, and in whom that they are odors; that is, acceptable to God. Theſe odours are ſaid to be giuen him, according as he acknowledgeth all things to be giuen him of the Father; as he who is both ſealed and ſanctified, and as mediator, hath receiued the ſpirit without meaſure. This is by alluſion to the Leuiticall miniſtrie, and not to the Maſſe.
            4 His actions are two: one, of gracious diſpenſatiō, another of wrath; as hee, who is both the propitiation for Saints, & trcader of the winepreſſe of Gods indignation:

both an elect precious ſtone, and a ſtone of offence. And our conſolation heerein is great, that to him all iudgement is committed. His action of grace, is the offering vp of the Saints praiers, and making the gratefull ſmoke of them goe vp before God through his odors: and this hath a double conſolation: firſt, that God alwaies in the midſt of wrath remembreth mercy, and is neuer ſo carried in wrath to poure out heauy indignation on the ſinful world, but that the louing care of his elect commeth firſt in place: ſecondly, that the praiers of Saints haſte on indgement on the world, while they ſend vp ſighes and groanes for God his diſhonour, a great incouragement to prav. If Iſrael had turned to mee, how ſoone would I haue humbled their enemies? 
               Pſal. 81. 13. 14 His ſecond action, is a ſigne giuen to his trumpeters, who ſtand attending it from him, to ſet too, to particular execution. The ſigne is, Hee filleth the Cenſer with fire, &c. In token of burning wrath: and with fire of the Altar. For, as the acceptation and ſanctification of all the Samts and their offerings is of him, who is the true golden Altar, ſo all his wrath on the world is from him: in whom, all men, in God his predeſtination, are ordered to their diuers ends, according as they are either giuen to him, and builded on him, or paſſed by, and ſtumble at him. This fire, is alſo from the Altar, for the ſpiritual iudgements that it worketh. For the fire of this Altar hath double effects. It is gracious, nouriſhing, purging, renuing, and ſtrengthning to the elect, Iſai 6. And it is a fire deuouring the aduerſaries, & burning vp the world as ſtubble: for our God Deut. 4. 24. euen a conſuming fire. Chriſt, comming into the world, brought both the one and the other, though the one improperly. Thus, from one and the ſame Cenſer, and one and the ſame Altar, one and the ſame fire, both ſendeth vp a ſweete perfume, and downe a conſuming wrath. As the praier of Elias brought both fruitfull raine and deuouring 1. King. 18. fire: and as the two witneſſes, Chapter 11. are to the godly, candleſtickes and refreſhing oliues; but, with fire out of their mouthes, ſlay their aduerſaries. If I bee the

man of God (ſaith Eliah) let fire come downe from heauen, 
               2. King. 1. 
               &c. Vpon this fire caſt on the earth, follow Lightnings, Thundrings, Voices and Earthquakes, euident types of horrible iudgements and commotions, Chapter 4. And ſo heereby the attending Trumpeters get ſigne to blow the alarum, and denounce particularly the iudgements whereby God was now to plague the blind and obſtinate world. And vpon the ſigne thus giuen them, they ſet too in order to blow. See Ezech. 10 for this caſting of fire, in ſigne of wrath and God his departing from his ſanctuarie.
            5 Thus farre is the generall preparation. The particular execution, hath in each, the denunciation, by the trumpet, and the effect inſuing. And are diuided in lighter or leſſe woes, and heauier and greater. The firſt ſoure, in degree of compariſon, are lighter, and are in this Chapter. The three other, are heauie: whereof, two are thorowout the 9, 10. and a good part of the 11. Chapt. The laſt holdeth to the end of the whole narration. The firſt foure, are als many degrees of the myſtery of iniquity working on to that fearefull height, which is in the fifth trumpet accompanied with a no leſſe deadly euill, for iuſt puniſhment thereof, in the ſixt trumpet: which being ineffectuall to worke repentance, commeth on the laſt wrath in the ſeuenth trumpet.
            6 Vpon the firſt ſound, are ſeene haile and fire mingled with blood: which, caſt on the earth, that is, in the viſible Church, Chap. 7, Section 2. Produce then a terrible effect, That all greene graſſe, &c. The iudgements of God in Scripture are ordinarily expreſſed by haile, fire, Pſal 11. 6. and ſtormy tempeſt. God borrowing ſpeeches from naturall things to ſet foorth his terror. But this ſpeech heere, hath a ſpeciall alluſion to that plague on Egypt, Exod. 9. and Pſal. 105. Now then, to finde the analogy, as heere the burning vp of graſſe and trees, is to expreſſe the decay of ſpirituall life, and moiſture in all true Chriſtianity: and that not onely in weake ones, as graſſe; but in the ſtrong, as trees: ſo, heere we are to ſearch, agreeably to

this effect, what is anſwerable to haile and fire. It is the fire of God his ſpirit, begetting in vs faith and loue, which maketh vs Chriſtians weaker or ſtronger, according to the meaſure of grace giuen vs, and our grouth therein: and that by the watering & moiſtening of ſweet ſhowers of grace, as dew vpon the mowne graſſe, or raine on the thirſty ground. For of heate and moiſture commeth all flouriſhing greenneſſe. Hereof it is, that ſo often, in Scripture, we are exhorted to edifie on another in loue. This burning heat did eat vp our Lord, and in it the Apoſtle burnt: this fire of loue is the band of perfection, whereby we grow vp, as one man in Chriſt. And hereupon, are Col. 3. 4. in Scripture, ſo many atteſtations to be like minded, and deteſtations of debate and diuiſion. Now when this fire of loue is turned into the fire of contention: then they, from whoſe mouthes ſhould droppe, wiſdome and refreſhing ſhowers, ſend out the could haile of their owne affections and froſty ſhowers of ſelfe-loue: which in place of comforting and nouriſhing the hearbes and trees, by wholeſome word and ſound example of life; in contrary, burne them quite vp, as doth haile and fire. This was the firſt euill, which entred into the Church, for the firſt degree whereof, the Church of Epheſus was taxed. Which degree betime growing, not only to coldneſſe in loue, but alſo to fiery contention, and mixed with froſty haile, wrought this fearefull effect, and firſt ſtep to antichriſtianiſme, euen want of true religion, and of the life of God in a great part. This fire and haile, is ſaid to haue beene mixed with blood, for that not onely this euill of firie debate beganne euen while as yet hot perſecutiō laſted againſt the Church by heathen Emperours; but alſo, for that it entred in the Church, in ſuch degree as proceeded to cruelty and bloodſhed. This euill, Satan laboured to bring in from the firſt times of the Goſpell, but that the fire of loue & ſweet ſhowers held things greene. The firſt that greatly kindled this flame, was 
                  Ʋictor Biſhop of Rome: whoſe fi
                  •
               ie headines in a friuolous matter, had it not beene repreſſed

by the graue rebukes of Irenaeus Biſhoppe of Lions, and Policrates of Epheſus, had made a great burning. Euſebius recordeth (Lib. 8.) of the perſecution by Diocleſian, that it was a neceſſary correction of the Church, which had fallen to ouer great a cuſtome of ſin (ſee how greenneſſe was burnt vp) & whoſe paſtors were begun to ſauor of pride and tyranny (ſee the ſtep to the next euill.) Thus wee ſee how the fire was euen mixed with bloud: but ſoone after, how farre this fire brake out, vpon the firſt relaxation vnder Conſtantine, it is wonderfull: ſo as, if the prudent care of that Prince had not bene the greater, that firſt, and famous Councell of Nice, had beene a miſerable proofe of this fire: which beeing but reſtrained, there, for the time, how vehemently, to the diſgrace of chriſtianity, and burning vp of all true religion in the hearts of men, it brake out thereafter, is manifeſt in the ſtory. So, as Conſtantine, in his Epiſtle to the Synod of Tyrus, exprobrateth to them, that he ſaw nothing in Biſhops dealings but an ouerthrow of all religion. This, made Nazianzen to vtter that hard ſpeech: That hee neuer did ſee a good effect of any Synod: becauſe, in ſteade of the fire of loue, mixed with the ſweet raine of health
               
                  •
               ome doctrine, and ſpirit of Chriſtian lenity, the fire of contention, and froſty haileſtones of deſtruction ruled all. Yea, ſo farre heerein, were the Biſhops carried one againſt other, as it is monſtrous, what malice, falſhood, and cruelty, they practiſed: ſo as in the times of Conſtans, Conſtantius, and 
                  Ʋalens, the fire and haile were mixed with bloud. This made ſtill a decay of true religion both in ſmall and great.
            7 Vpon ſounding of the ſecond trumpet, a mountaine of fire is caſt into the Sea; whereupon the third part thereof becommeth bloud, &c. Mountaines in Scripture, are put for high and proud States. Then a burning mountaine, is the fire of ambition, as the firſt was of contention. For, albeit contention ariſeth of pride; yet at firſt, the debate was not directly for prerogatiues

and places, as now, in this ſecond euill is meaned. Remember alwaies, as I touched Chap. 6. Sect. 10. and 15. that ſo, theſe euils are ordered, for courſe of time, as both the firſt holdeth on with the ſucceeding, and the ſucceeding, in time of the formers height, is begun to worke. This is caſt in the Sea, whereas the firſt was on the earth: to note a decay in a higher degree then the firſt, as the ſea is a higher and purer Element then the groſſe earth. The firſt decay was of religion, in the hearts and liues of men. This ſecond, is in the ordinary worſhip, which in great part now becommeth corrupted; and thereby, a great part both of common profeſſours and Paſtors, become dead in ſuperſtition. The creatures liuing in the Sea, are common Chriſtians. The ſhips are the occupiers therein, deſigning Church-men; as is plaine Chap. 18. where ſhipmaſters, marriners and occupiers in the Sea, bewaile the fall of the Whore. The firſt death was different from this. That, was in life and manners, obiected to the widowes, 1. Tim. 5. and to the Church of Sardis, Chap. 3. 1. This, is of another kinde, obiected to Ephraim by the Prophet. When Ephraim 
               Hoſh. 13. 1. 
               ſpake there was trembling, but he is dead in Baal. The alluſion is to Exod. 7. 19. &c. When the waters are healthſome, all things in them liue, Ezech▪
                47. The loue of riches and honor is the root of all euill, which, while men luſt after, they erre from the faith. To this euill, Conſtantine 
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . Tim. 6. 10. his prepoſterous zeale to indew the Church with riches and pompe, much helped. As the voice (then vttered, if their ſtories ſay true) did verifie. Hodie ſeminatum eſt virus in Eccleſia. The common ſaying is well knowen. Eccleſia peperit diuitias, & filia deuorauit matrem. And that, of golden Biſhops and treen Chalices, and golden Chalices and treen Biſhops. This fire of ambition, was much kindled in the hearts of Paſtors, before the Councell of Nice, they beginning to ſauor thereof (as ſaith Euſebius) before Diocleſian his time: but there was laid a ground of ambitious contention, by ordering the

ſeates and prerogatiues of Patriarchs. Ante Concilium Nicenum, ad ſedem Romanam paruus habebatur reſpectus, ſaith Aeneus Syluius eftſoones a Pope. What ſhamefull digladiations followed about dignity and priority of place, what bitter contentions about limits of Dioceſſes, would make any ſound hearted chriſtian bluſh for ſhame to reade them. Iulius Biſhop of Rome, albeit topping a good cauſe, yet ſeeking therein the aduancement of his owne ſeate, is ſo checked by the Biſhops of the Eaſt, as faine to yeeld to time (ſaith Sabelli
                     •
                  us) the whole ſway and maieſty of religion, remained with the Biſhops of the Eaſt, till Phocas the Emperor reſtored it to Rome. It is ſhame to heare, how Leo Biſhoppe of Rome, otherwaies a learned and wiſeman, did chafe at the act of the Councell of Chalcedon, in fauours of the Biſhop of Conſtantinople. How hardly did the Biſhops of Rome take it, that it ſhould be inacted in Affricke, that no appellation were made to them? what a ſtirre they made thereabout? impudently bold to falſifie the act of the Nicene Councell, for maintenance of their ambition: till by authentike copies from Greece their fraud was detected: and they but too meekly, admoniſhed to beware, they labored not to bring into the Church famoſum typhum ſeculi. The contentions of the Biſhops of Rome and Rauenna, of Milain and Papia, would euen amongſt ſecular Princes, bee counted deteſtable. The Patriarch of Conſtantinople, firſt vſurping the title of vniuerſall Biſhop, is worthily taxed of Gregorie Biſhoppe of Rome. Thus then, while men were ambitiouſlie ſeeking themſelues, and careleſſe of religion; corruption entred into the worſhippe, in manifold rites and ſuperſtitious ceremonies: as euen diuers godly men in that ſame time, heauily regreated.
            8 Vpon the third blaſt falleth a great ſtarre, &c. Stars are Paſtors of Churches. This great Starre is the type of great and learned Paſtors: men of high account, yea

and of great ſhining: but who fall from the heauen, (from the truth and true Church) and ſo, their ſhining which ought to haue beene cleare, gentle, and comfortable light becommeth like a burning Torch, noting fiery contentions and burning deſpite, as a blazing flame, in place of a pleaſant calme, cleare light, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Rom. 2. 8. For this diſpoſition in it ſelfe, and working the like in others. This ſtarre hath the name of Wormewood Deut. 29. 18. Heb. 12. 15. as being in the gall of bitterneſſe, and making bitter. Simon Magus is ſaid to bee ſo, Act. 8. 23. the Holy Ghoſt in that one Arch-Heretike, ſhewing the common diſpoſition of all, as full euer of contentions and burning deſpite, which manner the Church of God hath not. The effect here wrought is, that this ſtarre falling in the riuers and fountaines the third part, &c. Here is yet a higher degree of corruption, working on to the great euill. For Riuers and Fountaines are in a degree of purity and ſubtle Nature, aboue the Sea, as the Sea is aboue the earth. Now, as there may bee a decay of Religion in the hearts and liues of men (which is the burning of graſſe and trees) the ordinary worſhippe yet abiding pure and vnmixed with ſuperſtition; ſo may both Religion in men decay, and great corruption enter in the ordinary worſhip (the ſea becōming in a part bloudy) and yet the fountaines and riuers (that is the Scriptures and interpretation thereof) abide ſound, as experience teacheth, how many abuſes will creepe in, & with cuſtome take place, while yet both the word and interpretation thereof is vncorrupted. The teachers (who are alſo Wels and Riuers, bringing waters to the common Sea) teaching more purely then is the practiſe in ordinary worſhippe. But when not onely corruption entreth in the common worſhip, but euen the Scriptures are corrupted with falſe gloſſes and hereticall interpretations, the fountaines being poyſoned, and the riuers which ſhould carrie douce waters to purifie the

common Sea, bringing thither bitter waters, and turning 2 King 2. 19 &c. Exod. 15. 23. &c. the ſweet water of life to bee like theſe of Ierico, & of Mara, then is the euill growne to a high and dangerous degree, and their multitudes, who for any bloud in the third part of the ſea, would haue liued, become dead in hereticall prauity. The verity and accommodation hereof is more then cleare, as principally in Arrius; ſo in all the other Arch-heretikes of that time, men more learned then holy, and more quicke then modeſt, like blazing Comets corrupting the truth of doctrine in a great part. And therefore for the full perfection of euill in this kind, when not onely the third part, but wholy al both earth, Sea & fountaines ſhal be burnt, turned into bloud, and made bitter, and al light eclipſed; the like type is vſed in the fift Trumpet, but with this notable difference, that that ſtarre falleth to the earth, and ſo breedeth the miſchiefe.
            9 The fourth Trumpet bringeth a darkeneſſe in part vpon Sunne, Moone, Starres, day and night. A kindlie degree of euill to follow on the former: and there withal noting yet a higher degree of Apoſtaſie, and aduancement of the myſtery of iniquitie, as the heauenly lightes are aboue fountaines and riuers. This is the type of darke ignorance, comming on the world, firſt in a great part. The former euils aroſe, more vpon contention, pride and bitter deſpite, then vpon ignorance (while men either not aduerting, or maliciouſlie miſcarried they tooke place) but now together with theſe, commeth alſo groſſe ignorance in a great part, darkening all true knowledge. Chriſt is our ſunne whom wee behold in the true light of his Goſpell, whereof when the third part is darkened, ſo farre is our ſunne darkened to vs. The Moone and ſtarres are they in whoſe hearts God ſo ſhineth, as they are able to make the light of the knowledge of God, to ſhine in the hearts of others, in the face of Ieſus. The day is that light, thus miniſtred from our ſunne by theſe ſtarres, wherein we walke,

who are children of the day, and not of the night. For ſtarres here muſt bee conſidered, more as receiuing light from the ſunne, they diſpenſe it to vs, then for that they ſhine in the night, And here the night ſignifieth that light which naturall men who are not children of the day but of the night, yet haue in humane ſciences & liberall arts (in compariſon to the light of the Goſpell. but a night of darkeneſſe) whereof now by this Trumpet came a great decay, as in ſtory is more then manifeſt. Now as theſe euils are ſaid to worke but on the thirde part in each kind, to ſhew that the firſt degrees came on but in part: ſo as firſt the loue and life of God abode in the moſt part of the Church, as in the ſecond degree, yet the moſt part worſhipped purely: and in the third, held ſtill the Orthodox faith: like as now in the fourth yet continued great meaſure of learning, both in diuine and humane ſciences. Whereas, in the next Trumpet, al falleth to the height of euill, and a totall and common Apoſtaſie is ſet downe. And therefore for preparation to it, a heauie warning is giuen of a triple woe. But this warning is by an Angell flying through the middeſt of heauen, and ſo farre remoued from the perception of earthly men, it being ſo farre and obſcurely deliuered, as few were capable thereof, or aduerted it: ſee Chapter 14. and 18. 1. Diuers learned and godly men, (of whome this Angell is the type) ſaw the miſchiefe comming on through theſe euils more and more Lib. 4. Ep. 34. & Ep 38. preuailing, and gaue warning of it, euen Gregory Biſhop of Rome ſaw ſo much, and made him ſay, Rex ſuperbia prope eſt, & quod dicinefas eſt, Sacerdotum eſt paratus exercitus, and vbi eſt ille Antichriſtus, qui appellationem vindicabit vniuerſalis Epiſcopi, & cui Sacerdotum exercitus paratus eſt ad aſſectandum cum? prope eſt & in foribus. Hee did hit very right, for within little more then three yeeres after him, his owne ſucceſſor Boniface the third tooke to himſelfe the title of Vniuerſalis Epiſcopus, which all the ſucceeding Biſhops retaine: and

ſo by ſufftage of a moſt famous Biſhop of Rome, they are that Antichriſt.
         
         
            CHAP. IX.
            
               FOllow the heauier woes, denounced in the fourth Trumpet, to fall on the earthly ſort, on whome are all theſe iudgements, from which the ſealed ones are exempted. Of theſe three, the firſt is in this fift Trumpet: euen that huge miſchiefe of Antichriſt, to which height of iniquity, the former euils were als many ſteppes. The other two woes, following in the 6. and 7. Trumpets, are the conſequences in God his iuſt indignation, of this great woe: the one, for puniſhment, to prouoke repentance in the 6. Trumpet: which being ineffectuall to conuerſion, vpon obſtinate impenitency, verſe 20. 21. the ſeuenth Trumpet bringeth the third great woe and laſt wrath, to Antichriſts vtter deſtruction.
            2 In this euill, are the origine whence it ariſeth, and the euill it ſelfe, the origine, is firſt and ſecundarie ariſing of the firſt. The firſt is the fall of a great ſtar from heauen to the earth, the type of Paſtors of great marke falling from being heauenly, to becom earthly, from the true ſtate of Saints to the ſtate of the world, and to the loue thereof: from light to darkeneſſe, from the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, to the keyes of the bottomleſſe pit. Now as this fall was not in one inſtant or point of time (nemo repente fit turpiſſimus) but by degrees, ſo is it not to be taken of one man perſonally, but is the generall type of that euill, wherein Paſtors falling, they became ignorant, and miniſters of darke ignorance: out of which aroſe the miſchiefe of Antichriſt

and his poyſonable Armie: the euill is the loue of the earth, where through cometh this change of Keyes, by an Apoſtaſie and falling away of theſe who had beene ſtarres of heauen and miniſters of light, as hauing the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, to bee the miniſters of other Keyes, euen theſe of Gehenna. This is that ſucceſſion, and theſe are the Keyes, the Church of Rome and Biſhoppes thereof ſo much bragge of, as this whole propheſie euinceth clearely. The ſecundary origine of the euill, is darkeneſſe ariſing through this fall and change of Keyes, and that in a ſtrange degree; for this darkenes is not in part, as that of the fourth trumpet, but it eclipſeth all light, actiue and paſſiue, ſunne and aire. Chriſt is our ſunne, whoſe beames lighten our ſpirituall aire, whereby wee both walke in light, and draw in a pure breath for intertainement of our ſpirituall life. This by this darkeneſſe of the bottomleſſe pitte, (which aroſe through that paſtors falling to the loue of earthly things, loſt the key of knowledge, and became Miniſters of darkeneſſe) is wholy eclipſed, ſo as all the face of the viſible Church is darkened, and common life in it corrupted The euill of the third Trumpet, was by fall of a great ſtarre, but that fell in the fountaines and riuers, ſo making them in a part bitter: but here the deſire of riches and loue of the earth maketh all erre from the faith.
            3 Of theſe beginnings ariſeth the miſchiefe, wherein are two things, the abhominable Army of darkeneſſe poiſoning all: and the head of ſo damnable a band, the Army is deſcribed, firſt ſummarily by their quality, and their annoying power, verſe 3. Hereafter more at large, this their annoying power is exponed, and their properties, whereby they are inabled to the harmeful execution thereof, are declared. In all which is a moſt liuely repreſentation, and moſt conuenient type of the Romane Clergy, who are euidently this army of darkeneſſe, whoſe monſtrous ſwarmes nothing but helliſh

ignorance brought in the Church: as earthlineſſe of great Paſtours, brought the ignorance. Their qualitie, firſt is ſhewed, in that they are Locuſts: both, for their ſwarming multitudes, and for their deſtroying and eating vp al green Nahum. 3. thing in earth: as, who not onely deuoure the beſt of things belonging to this life, but alſo deſtroy all ſpirituall life in men. For their grouth and ſucceſſe in both ſee the Story and be amazed.
            4 Their annoying power is ſummarily ſet foorth, in that they ſting as Scorpions. A venemous and bitter kind of Serpent, walking waiwardly, and ſtinging when it would appeare leaſt to doe ſo. This their power (in the larger expoſition thereof) hath this generall note, that it is limited and not abſolute. The firſt point of their limitation is, of ſuch as they are permitted to harme. The next is, in what degree they might doe it. As for the firſt, they are reſtrained wholly from hurting the ſealed ones, of whom Chapter 7. Which reſtraint, is heere pertinentlie recorded, both to ſhew that this euill, is the height of that miſchiefe portended in the 7. Chapter. Againſt which the elect were ſealed: and alſo, to ſhew heere the truth of their preſeruation; and ſo, how it was, that Chriſt, in this totall eclipſe of light by Antichriſt his darkeneſſe, yet preſerued a Church. Wherein yet, be not ſo groſſe as to thinke that one number ſtill of the ſame perſons continued all that time. But it is to ſhew God his continuall courſe in helping his owne, all the time of this miſcheife on the world. Obſerue heere alſo, that by graſſe and trees, men are meaned, as I ſhewed Chapter 7. And, as fitlieſt thus The alluſion is to Ioel 1. & 2. expreſſed, in the euill of locuſts. Now, of theſe, in the firſt trumpet, onely the third part was burnt: heere all feele this plague, except the ſealed ones. The ſecond point, in their limitation, is the degree of hurting. Wherein are two cauſions. Firſt, the quality of the harme permitted them to practiſe: and next, the time limited to their working. The quality of their harme is cleared by a diuers kind, from which they are reſtrained. For it is permitted them to torment

men but not to ſlay. This their tormenting, againe is cleared by a compariſon, that it is ſuch as ariſeth vpon the ſting of a Scorpion, that is ſo painefull, as death is more tollerable, as the effect thereof well ſheweth. Now conſider well, that this torment and plague is on the inhabitants of the earth, and, heere to be taken vp as God his iudgement on the world, whereof the true Church is free. And ſo, this army hath not power to ſlay: as neither, that way, plague they the men of the world, as doe the miniſters of the ſixth trumpet; who, both ſting with poiſoning tailes, and ſlay with heads, as hauing power in both. But, theſe haue their power in their tailes, onely to torment with poiſonable ſting, and not to murther openly. For other waies, as they are conſidered in their dealing againſt the Saints (which is not in this place) their blood is found with them: yea and all the blood ſhed on the earth: albeit not for direct profeſſed power and practiſe of the ſword: Chap. 18. 74. but, as on the Iewes came all the blood from that of Abel the righteous to the blood of Zachary: who, yet Math. 23. 35. profeſſed that it was not lawfull for them to put any man Iohn 18. 31. to death. This is heere put for an euident note of Antichriſt his dealing: of purpoſe, to diſcerne this euill from that of the ſixth ttumpet: and that ſo eleerely, as it is wonder, how, men of learning and iudgement could confound things ſo notably diſtinguiſhed, and which can receiue no other accommodation. Now, that this their tormenting of men, is leſſe tollerable then death. We know, that no vexation is comparable to that of a conſcience, wherein is put the ſenſe of God his terror and eternall wrath, if therewith the true remedy be not applied. For, as Skin for skin, and all that a man hath he will giue for his life: ſo Iob. 2. 4. life and all a man wil giue for his ſoule and the peace▪ thereof, who once hath felt the terrour. For, a troubled ſpirit who can beare? and a good conſcience is a continuall Prou. 18. 14. feaſt. But all the doctrine of the Church of Rome, is ſuch Prou. 15. 15. as putteth in this ſting in the conſcience, whereby the torment is bred, but neuer applieth the true remedy: But

ſuch baſtard cures, as augment the anguiſh. Heereof it is that ſuperſtition is moſt buſie and reſtleſſe. For, Hee multiplieth 
               Pſal. 16. 4. 
               his owne ſorrow which offereth to an other God. Hence aroſe, painefull pilgrimages, deuoting to ſacred wartes, Kings bequeathing their Crownes: husbands their wiues and children: wiues their children. Hence were ſo many erections, and fond donations for ſoule Maſſes: if ſo be after death they might finde that repoſe and comfort, which they neuer felt in their life. Heerefore is this vexation fitly compared to the ſtinging of a Scorpion, moſt painefull of any. How many ſtrange policies and treacherous deuiſes (as of walking ſpirits, and forged miracles) theſe Locuſts haue practiſed, and ſtill doe, to ſubdue to themſelues the conſciences of men and hold them in torment, is more then manifeſt. And by ſuch as they haue ſtung deepely, it is that ordinarily they acchiue all their deſperate Treaſons and murthers of Princes: Acts, forſooth, of ſuch merit as will obtaine heauen to a perſon otherwaies condemned. And what is it; that vpon this preſumption, the tormented ſpirit will not runne to? what a ſtrange practiſe is that (amongſt many moe) of the Ieſuits with their nouices in their chamber of meditations?
            5 Thus is the quality of their harme. The time limited to them ſo to torment the world, is Fiue monethes. In which, for ought I know, the mind of the holy Ghoſt hath beene highly miſtaken of all men. For cleering then, of an The times recorded in reuelation. obſcure matter; In this whole booke, are but ſeuen times recorded. That of tenne daies, Chapter 2. That of halfe an houre, Chap. 8. This of fiue moneths, heere. Thatof a yeere, moneth, day, and houre, in the ſixth Trumpet. That of fourty two moneths, Chapt. 11. and 13. with which, that of 1260. daies. Chapt. 11. and 12. And of a time, times, and halfe a time, Chap. 12. are all one. That of three daies and a halfe, Chap. 11. 9. And that of a 1000. yeeres, Chap. 20. Of theſe, all ſound interpreters, (for how maliciouſly the Romans, to obſcure cleere ſtory, doe expound them, ſhall appeare after) fall to one of two

opinions. Some taking theſe times indefinitely. But, while they bring no reaſon, why ſuch and ſuch, are put of the holy Ghoſt for indefinite times, they rather cut the knot then loſe it. Others, and ſome of the moſt learned, take theſe times for definite, in exact calculation, but that they are not to bee taken in propriety of ſpeech, except the laſt: and that by a Propheticall frame of ſpeech, a day is to be taken for a yeere, and ſo by conſequence, a moneth for a moneth of yeres, and a yere for a yere of yeres. But in my iudgement, there is hereof, neither ground nor example in all Scripture. The 4. of Ezechiel, whereon all this opinion is builded, yeeldeth to it no ground at all. Where God commanding the Prophet, in a typicall action, to expreſſe the long rebellion of the people, being impoſſible to doe it ſo many yeres: that ſome analogy at leaſt, might bee, hee biddeth him lie ſo many daies: and therefore the interpretation is added, that a day was inioyned him for a yere. But that in any part of Scripture, calculation of time, either propheticallyforetold, or hiſtorically recorded, is thus expreſſed, I ſee it not. That place Nom. 14. 34. maketh leſſe for it; God ſhewing but the analogy of his iudgemēt to the peoples rebelliō: whereon, if any thing of this ſort might be built, it ſhould rather ſeem that a yere were for a day then a day for a yere. Now, vpon this weake or rather no ground, to infer, that as a day in Scripture, is found put for a yere; ſo heere by conſequence, a moneth is put for a moneth of yeeres, and a yeere for a yeere of yeeres: without ſo much as a ſhew of example; for me, I thinke it too great licence in interpreting God his Oracles. As for theſe places in Daniel, where yeeres ſeeme to bee, by daies, calculated: they are of the moſt learned, taken in propriety, and the accommodation of ſtory fitly giuen. which maketh me much maruell, that an exceeding learned man, euen ſo, interpreting Daniel: yet in his notes vpon this place, for warrant of the other interpretation, ſhould ſay, apud Danielem paſſum. And for what reaſon

ſhall daies in Daniel be taken for yeeres in other places, more then Chap. 10. 13? that he counteth yeeres by the hebdomades, and onely Chap. 9. it ſtrengtheneth their opinion nothing. For, in the common vſe of Hebrew ſpeech, hebdomades, are no more properly of daies then of yeeres, but alike of both, as the count falleth, either for the ſabbath day or ſabbathicall yere, whether common in the ſeuenth yeere, or great in the Iubily: and, as in the 9. Chapter of Daniel, the matter euidently ſheweth the account, to be of yeeres, ſo Chap. 10. 2. (where doubt might haue troubled the Reader, with an apparent ſtrange thing, if they had beene taken of yeres, as in the former Chap.) hee addeth the interpretation for a cleare diſtinction. If it had bene the purpoſe of the holy Ghoſt, through all the reſt of this Propheſie, to ſet downe in theſe formes of ſpeech, the exact ſupputation of time: I ſee no reaſon why in the laſt, of a thouſand yeres (which only of them all, is to be taken definitely, and for great reaſon, as ſhall beſhewed) hee ſhould haue altered his ordinarie manner of ſtile. This wrong conception of theſe times, hath marred all the accommodation of this Propheſie: making euen notable learned men, and who otherwaies haue had deepe inſight in theſe myſteries, to iumble and confound diſtinct matters; while ſtill, according to this forelaid preiudice of definite calculation, they apply things, but giue no ſatisfaction: and the matter here handled, and the manner of leading, being opened vp, will ſhew cleerely, how by this preiudice, they haue laide, both before themſelues and others, great blockes, to impede a cleare way. This time, then here, of fiue moneths, is to be taken indefinitely, and put here, for a conſolation: to ſhew, that this terrible plague, ſhould not alwaies preuaile ouer the world. But beſides this, we muſt finde out ſome reaſon agreable to the maieſty and wiſdome of the holy Ghoſt, why this time, in this place, and the other, in their places are taken of the ſpirit, more then any other time. As for that of tenne

daies, Chapt. 2. it is eaſie, by common frame of Scripture ſpeech, both for time and number. The parents of Rebecha intreated her abode tenne daies: Iacob his wages were changed tenne times: Wiſdome ſtrengtheneth more then tenne Princes: Ruth to her mother in law, and Elkana, to his wife, were better then tenne ſonnes: tenne Virgins haue tenne lamps: and Chapt. 11. the tenth part of the great City falleth: tenne men take hold of the skirt of a Iew, and many ſuch. So as for this number, or of ſeuen, in matter or time, the ordinary vſe of Scrpture anſwereth. The reaſon of others is more difficulte, and moſt of all, that of this time here put: why it is (ſeeing this euill of the fifth trumpet, is all one with that beaſt which worketh 42. moneths, Chap. 13. All which time accordingly, the heathen trod vnder foot the holy City, and the Prophets propheſie in ſackecloth 1260. daies, Chap. 11. and the Church is ſo long, fed in the wilderneſſe, Chapt. 12.) that here, to the Locuſts ſhould bee attributed fiue moneths: a time, through all this booke, no where elſe recorded. And this is indeed wiſdome, for perceiuing whereof, we muſt vnderſtand, that as all the types, yea and frames of ſpeech in this Propheſie, are from the old Teſtament; the collation whereof, bringeth to both great light: ſo theſe times heere, are put by alluſion to the like times there: not onely to ſhew, that theſe euils ſhould haue an end, as had the others: but alſo, by the ſame time attributed, to take vp the conformity of caſe, in things here propheſied, to thoſe, to which, the ſame time in the old Teſtament is giuen, for more cleare light in both. And to ſtirre vs to aduert this purpoſe of the holy Ghoſt in vſing theſe times, not onely is the ſame time, but alſo the ſame ſpeeches put: to moue vs to the collation of things, and ſo, therein to finde, both great light, and delightfull ſatisfaction. Now then, albeit this time, as the others laſt mentioned, bee of the working of Antichriſt, yet the euill here, hath a farre different conſideration from the ſame euill, where the other

times are thereto attributed. Here it is deliuered to our conſideration as the plague of God vpon the whole world, from which the ſealed ones (the true Church) are free; as the other times are attributed to it, it is put, as the wreſtlings, ſufferings, and troubleſome ſtate of the true Church, vnder, and by this euil are to be conſidered. Therefore to the euill here ſuch a time is giuen, as may leade vs by the like time and like frames of ſpeech ioined therewith, to find out and conſider ſuch a like caſe in the old Teſtament, of a generall plague on the world, which yet the ſealed ones eſcape; that by comparing, wee may finde what a huge wiſdome here in two words is compriſed Now in all the ſtory of old, no ſuch caſe occurreth, but onely the deluge of Noah, in all things ſemblable to this. That was the onely generall plague wherewith euer at one time the whole world was puniſhed: and this darkeneſſe of Antichriſt is a ſpirituall plague, ouergoing once all the Chriſtian world. In that onely they eſcaped whom God ſealed vp, and incloſed in the Arke (the type of his true Church) here none eſcape but the ſealed ones who are on Mount Sion with the Lambe, while all the earth follow the beaſt. That plague ouerwent the earth by opening the fountaines of the great depth, Abyſſi magnae, Tehom Rabbah, & of the windows of heauen. This by fall of a ſtar from heauen, opening the bottomles pit, & ſmoake bullering out therat, ouergoeth all. That by degrees grew, till at length, it ouerwent the higheſt mountaines fiue times three cubits: this by degrees roſe to ouerwhelme ſunne and aire. Theſe waters preuailed ouer the higheſt mountaines fiue times thirty dayes, that is fiue monethes: this euill growing by degrees to a height, ſhall haue a time of preuayling, and obtaining place ouer all. Theſe waters preuailed not ſtill, but after an hundred and fifty dayes, that is, fiue monethes, they beganne peece and peece to decreaſe, til at length the earth was dried, the Arke opened, and the cloſed and ſealed vp ones came forth, and repleniſhed

the earth. This euill after a time of preuailing ouer all, ſhall abate, and by the light of the Sunne of righteouſneſſe, and wind of God his mouth by degrees bee conſumed, as by degrees it did grow, and the true Church ſhall breake forth, the Tabernacle of Teſtimony ſhall bee opened in heauen, and theſe 144000. hid ones ſhall become a number innumerable with palmes in hands. And as Elizabeth the mother of Iohn Baptiſt bearing the reproch of barrennes, hid her ſelfe fiue Monethes, thereafter to appeare with big bellie: ſo in this preuailing euill of Locuſts, and their King Abaddon, 
               Luk. 1. 24. the true Church as barren ſhall lurke fiue monethes (that is, for a time) to breake forth thereafter big with child. Of theſe, who ſhould bee preachers of repentance from Antichriſtian workes, and forerunners of the Lord his laſt comming, as Iohn was of the firſt. Finally, as the waters of Noah was ſuch an euill, as neuer Gen 9 11. Iſai 54. 9. ſhall come againe, and thereof the Rainebow made a Seale: ſo the darkeneſſe of Antichriſt once diſpelled ſhal neuer againe ouergoe all: for hee muſt goe to deſtruction. And for this it is, that agreeably thereto, the great Angell comming to his ouerthrow in the next Chapter hath the Rainebow about his head. Now weigh what plenty of light and depth of wiſdom lye hid in theſe two words, of fiue monethes, which the ſpirit repeateth twice, of purpoſe to waken our negligence, to take it vp. Of the other times wee ſhall ſpeake in the owne place.
            6 This was the generall note of their limitation. Now follow the properties of theſe Locuſts, whereby they are able to vexe: firſt, they are like horſes, not common horſes, but prepared to battell, luſty, f
                  •
               d, ſtrong, and fierce, ouer comming all opponers. Hereto they are ſtrengthned by vſurped ſpirituall authority, expreſſed in Crownes, which are neither vpright in forme nor matter. With this is ioyned hypocriſie; for they look like men, who meaſure their affaires by iudgement, as

full of reaſon and humanity. For ſimulate modeſty and ſimplicity, and for force of alluring inticements, they haue haire like women, with faire and flattering ſpeeches, deceiuing the hearts of the ſimple, and prouoking to ſpirituall fornication. But vnder this, they are cruell deuourers, as hauing teeth of Lyons, deuouring widdowes houſes vnder colour of long prayers, whiles within, they are rauening Wolfes. They are armed againſt all inuaſion, hauing priuiledges and immunities from all ſecular power, ſhaking their tippets on Kings, as being onely ſubiect to their King Abaddon. Now al theſe make their inuaſions terrible to the greateſt, they being therefore like horſes and chariots ruſhing to battell, and Ioel 2. 4. 5. it is well knowne, how the conteſting with them hath often brought Princes to the pinche of their eſtates: and their daily treaſonable bloody attempts and ſuggeſtions againſt the liues of Princes, proue this clearely. All this is effectuate by the ſtings in their railes, that is, their poiſonable doctrine: The ancient and honourable man is the head, and the falſe Prophet teaching lies is the tatle, Iſai 9. 15.
            7 Thus is the Armie. Their head is deſcribed, from his ſtate and his name agreeable thereto, his ſtate is, that he is their King, euen ſetting himſelfe vp againſt the great King, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . 2. Theſſ. 2. the quality of this his Kingdome is ſhewed, in that hee is the Angell of the bottomleſſe pitte, that is, the Diuell his Lieuetenant: for to him the Dragon giueth his throne and great authority, Chap. 13. Hee is the man of ſinne. His name, fit for ſuch a King, is deſtroyer, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , both for deſtroying the faith of others, and for that hee goeth to deſtruction, Chapter 17. Paul calleth him accordingly, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , & hee goeth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Chapter 17. 11. It is wonder, in ſo clear conſent of ſcripture, how any learned could doubt who here is deſcribed, Hee is ſo called both in Hebrew and Greeke, to ſhew that hee ſhall bee no proper

head of Iewes or of Gentiles: but a common deceiuer of both Iew and Gentile profeſſing Chriſtianity, and whom, at length, both Iewes conuerted to the faith, and Gentiles ſhall know, and call the Antichriſt, when the place of his foile ſhall bee called in Hebrew Armageddon: 
               Chap. 16. 16 for euen in this, that hee ſhall bee ſo called in Hebrew, is implyed a propheſie of the conuerſion of the Iewes, as in the ſame ſenſe, Chap. 1. with 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in Greeke, is put, Amen in Hebrew.
            8 This is the firſt great woe, now ſaid to bee gone, & the ſecond to come anone, in reſpect of their deſcription here, not that for euent in time, this woe was fully paſt before the beginning of the next, as is euident by the end of this Chapter, where, after the deſcription of the ſixt Trumpet, the impenitency of men ſtill continuing in Antichriſtian works is ſhewed: ſo as the firſt woe holdeth on all the time of the ſecond, and this ſecond woe had his beginning ſoone after the open beginnings of the firſt! God ſo puniſhing ſinne by ſinne, & according to the growth and induration of men in the firſt impietie, giuing the more free ſcope to the ſecond, till deſperate obſtinacie bringeth on the laſt woe and finall wrath; for as the woe is not ſaid to come till the height thereof, at leaſt in ſuch degree, as wherefore it may iuſtly bee eſteemed the ſoareſt iudgement in the time, albeit in ſome degrees it hath beene working on before: ſo the next woe comming in ſuch height, as the former, in compariſon is not ſo much felt, the firſt is ſaid to bee gone; and that wee may take vp this courſe and reaſon of God his working, the ſixt Trumpet hath this ſingular in it, that vpon the ſounding thereof, commandement is giuen to looſe the foure Angels, &c. and accordingly the Miniſtrie of the fixt Trumpet performeth, onely to ſhew, that the plague therein was in God his iuſt indignation, the puniſhment of Antichriſtian Idolatry; if ſo be, therby men could haue been moued to repent

before effu
                  •
               ion of the laſt wrath: but they perſiſting notwithſtanding in obſtinate impenitency, the great Angell in the next Chapter ſweareth finall ouerthrow. And this is the reaſon of that which this ſixt Trumpet hath in it, ſingular from the former; ſo wiſely is this propheſie penned.
            9 In this ſixt Trumpet then are the euill, and the euent. In the euill, are noted how it is brought on, and the particular deſcription of the miſchiefe. It is brought on by commandement from Chriſt, who is the golden Altar, to the Angell of the ſixt Trumpet; the tenor wherof is to looſe the Miniſters of this woe, for working of it. The reaſon hereof we touched. The Miniſters of the woe, are the heades, and the deſtroying armie. In the heades are noted their number, condition, place, and end of looſing. In number they are foure, as a number competent, yet not for that reſpect which is of the foure, Chapter 7. (for the foure corners of the earth) for this plague goeth not ſo wide, being but againſt the third part of men (a cleare diſtinguiſhing note of Mahometiſme from Antichriſt) but here, they are foure, for all occaſions, as the other were for all places: and therfore foure times are put (an howre, a day, a moneth, a yeere) not to deſigne the ſpace of this woes durance, but to ſhew that theſe were ordained, and in number competenr, to execute God his wrath at all occaſions, ſhort, or long, as God ſhould bee ſtirred to indignation, and ſend them forth. Agreeable hereto the commandement commeth from the foure hornes of the Altar, to ſhew Chriſt his ſufficiencie of power, to raiſe vp inſtruments of his iuſtice according as by the ſinnes of men he is prouoked. For, from this Altar both the prayers of Saints, goe vp before God, and the fire of vengeance is powred downe on the world, Chapter 8. this maketh the alluſion, and conueniency in number of foure Angels, foure hornes, foure times.
            10 The condition of theſe heades is, that they are

bound, whereupon is the commandement of looſing; this ſheweth the ſeuerity of theſe foure Angels of wrath, in that they are bound vp as ragefull beaſts, and giueth certaine expectation of cruell effects, they being looſed. God his patience is here alſo noted, reſtraining his iudgements, till the wickedneſſe of men extort them from him. Theſe foure Angels are the heades of the Mahometane and Turkiſh Armies. Not for ſo many heades in proprietie, as many vainely vexe themſelues to finde out, but for the reaſon aboue touched; who how they were tied vp at Euphrates, that is, reſtrained in the Eaſt parts about Babell and Perſia, partly by their owne inteſtine diſcords & wars, partly by ſome great victories of Chriſtians, from working this horrible deſolation which now vpon this their looſing enſueth, is cleare in the ſtory. Mahomet aroſe ſoone after the open and auowed beginnings of Antichriſt, and ſpred his poyſon, aduancing it ſo with fire and ſword, that in ſhort yeers his Succeſſors ouerranne all Arabia, Egypt, Africa, Spain, and Perſia. This ſwift courſe was after tied vp; (as the commandement of looſing them from their binding neceſſarily implyeth, ſhewing that both before this they were, and from raging tied vp) for a good ſpace, till at length Turkes ioyned with Saracens, and becomming one people, and of one poiſonous religion, vpon huge encreaſe of Antichriſtian impiety, they gotte free ſcope from Euphrates in God his iuſtice, to ſlay the third part of men, from which kind of working the Locuſts were reſtrained▪
            
            11 Thus are the heades, their army is deſcribed from their number, kind, diſpoſition, horrible effects, and power of working, their number is huge, to ſhew their innumerable forces, wherein the Story is cleare. Their kind is that they are horſemen: both becauſe their chiefe forces conſiſt of ſuch, as alſo to ſhew their fiercenes and irreſiſtable inuaſion. Their cruell diſpoſition is expreſſed,

in that their habergeons were of fire, brimſtone, & Iacinth. For when the Scripture deſcribeth horrible executions, it is ordinarily by fire and brimſtome, and aſcending ſmoake, as in the Pſalmes and Prophets often. Now brimſtone inflamed, yeeldeth both a flame and a ſmoake of a Iacinth colour, and accordingly they are here put, to ſhew in theſe a bloudy diſpoſition to worke vtter deſolation, like that of Sodome. For this, their horſes alſo are ſaid to haue heads of Lions, to deſigne open rage and profeſſed cruelty, whereas the Locuſts couered their Lions teeth with faces of men, and haire of women. Fire, ſmoake and brimſtone are ſaid to come out of their mouths, not onely to amplifie this their cruell diſpoſition, as breathing nothing but vtter deſolation; but alſo to ſhew their facility of deſtroying all thinges, as with a breath or word. The third part of men are ſaid to be deſtroyed by them, to ſhew according to the Phraſe aboue in the firſt foure Trumpets, that this plague ſhould not ouergoe al, as did that of the Locuſts, but yet ſhould worke a horrible and great vaſtation, conueniently to their cruell diſpoſition, ſet forth in three things, & this effect is moſt euident: for neuer any conquering people before them wrought ſuch deſolation as they in the parts which they haue ouerrunne; ſo as in the moſt plentifull and beſt peopled parts of the earth, they haue ſcarſe left ſo many villages, as were ſometime famous Republikes. Theſe are their effects. Their power of working is both in their heads & tails, for they haue alſo tails like Serpents, ſtinging: all the power of the Locuſts was in their tailes, at leaſt by them they wrought all, that is, by poiſonable doctrine, therefore they pretended no power of open murthering men of the world: but theſe haue power both in heades and tailes, that is, both by their policy and gouernement they vſe and profeſſe plaine hoſtility and practiſe of the Sword, and alſo by their falſe Prophets they ſting as did the Locuſts, poiſoning alſo with falſe doctrine: ſo manifeſt a note of

diſtinction is put here betwixt theſe woes, as they could not haue beene miſtaken, if forelaid preiudices had not forced the wreſting of cleare things to wrong accommodations.
            12 Thus hath beene the euill, the euent is obſtinate impenitency, and induration of men in Antichriſtian workes, which are here ſo plainely ſet downe, as any hauing eyes may ſee, whoſe impietie hath looſed theſe Angels, and whoſe obſtinacy ſtill maketh them to preuaile; and ſo by iuſt conſequence, albeit to them directlie was not permitted to bee open murtherers of men, yet that with them truly, is found all the bloud ſhed vpon the earth▪ Chap. 18. 24
         
         
            CHAP. X.
            
               AS the ſixth Seale, beſides the own proper effect gaue a preparation to the ſeuenth, by a ſummary view of the whole effect thereof in the ſeuenth Chapter: ſo here the ſixt Trumpet (beſides the proper woe of it in the four deſtroying Angels from Euphrates, and their Armies of deſolation in the end of the laſt Chapter) maketh way now in this and a good part of the next Chapter, to the effect of the ſeuenth Trumpet, and laſt woe: which, impenitency now iuſtly bringeth on. Now all this preparation, euen to the blowing of the ſeuenth Trumpet Chapter 11. 15. albeit it be to cleare the way, yea, and hath ſome no ſmall beginnings of that great woe, which by the ſeuenth Trumpet is fulfilled, yet it is comprehended vnder the ſecond great woe according to their diſtinction by Trumpets: becauſe euen in the height of this ſecond great woe, theſe degrees towards the laſt, were working So wiſely and artificially is

the courſe of this Propheſie led forward, and parts thereof clearely coupled together. This preparation then, for Antichriſt his iuſt and full ouerthrow, vpon obſtinate impenitency againſt the pun
                  •
               ſhment from Euphrates, is by a magnifike deſcription of that great partie who foileth him: and of the meanes of his victory. The party, is Ieſus Chriſt, heere typically ſetforth (as alwaies throughout this Propheſie) not according to the veriry of his perſon, but to expreſſe his operation in this worke. His meanes of victory are, the little booke opened, and the bold and powerfull preaching thereof: and that, for Finiſhing the myſtery, in the full ouerthrow of the enemies, and perfecting the Church in all grace; heere as a prepared Bride for her husband: whereto, hee fitteth 
                  •
               pt inſtruments, who by diuine motion, ſtudying diligently the Scriptures, preach euery where the Goſpell. So, as by the true rule rightly applied, the true Church of God is diſcerned from the falſe: and light growing, Antichriſt his kingdome is in a degree, ſhaken, and beginneth to fall: and in the ſeuenth Trumpet is vtterly and for euer deſtroied.
            2 Wee haue, then in this Chapter, the comming of the great perſonnage performer of this worke, and the end of his comming: For effectuating wherof, prophecy is reſtored. This great perſo
                  •
               nage, is that ſtronger Matth. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 29 one then Satan, who foiled him, and now, after a ſort returneth to ouerthrow the beaſt of his power, the Angell of the bottomleſſe pit, king Apollyon. In this perſonage, are to be obſerued, whence he commeth, the forme of his perſon, and his actions. Hee commeth from heauen, as the aduerſary came out of the bottomleſſe pit, not in propriety of ſpeech, as if he perſonally deſcended: but that he, who through antichriſt his darkeneſſe was not ſeene, now againe ſheweth himſelfe. As, God is ſaid often, in Scripture to depart or hide, and againe to ſhew himſelfe. The glorious and magnifike forme of his perſon is ſhewed in a note of diuine maieſty, that he is cl
                     •
                  athed with a

cloude, Luke 2
                  •
               . At the erecting of the tabernacle, a cloud Exod. 40. 34 1. King. 8. 10. filled it. So alſo, Salomon his Temple, The Lord hath ſaid he will dwell in the cloud. Hee gaue his preſence to Iſrael in the wilderneſſe, in a pillar of a cloud. Hee maketh the Pſal. 104. 3. Acts 1. 9. cloudes his Chariot, and he went vp in a cloude. Secondlie, he hath the Rainebow about his head, as he, whoſe preſence bringeth peace: the raies of his face imprinting the ſeale of peace in the darkeſt ſo
                  •
               le and moſt clowdy conſcience. The ſhining of the Sunne againſt a cloud maketh the Rainbow. So Chriſt, whoſe face ſhineth like the Sun in his ſtrength, Chap. 1, being clothed with a cloud, hath conueniently a Rainebow about his head. His fleſh is the vaile couering his Deity, whereof the manefeſtation therin, maketh our peace. But heere ſpecially, hath hee the Rainebow about his head, as comming now to diſpel the great deluge of Antichriſtian darkeneſſe: which ſhall neuer againe ouerſpread the face of the Church, more then the waters of Noah ſhall the earth: giuing thus a ſure pledge of ſerenity, Chapter 9. Section 5. Thirdly, his feet haue two notes. They are pillers, and they are fire. The firſt, for ſtable firmneſſe and ſolide ſtrength, wherein hee now commeth both to ſtabliſh his Church in peace, and to tread downe all his enemies. The fire, ſheweth with light and purity, diſpelling darkeneſſe and purging all vncleanneſſe, yet fiery affliction conioined, in this conflict with Cha. 11. 3. 7. 8. Chap. 13. 7. & cha. 14. 12. 13. Antichriſt: againſt all which notwithſtanding, his Church ſhould ſtand ſtable as the Pillar of truth. He hath fourthly in his hand, a little booke open. This is the weapon of his victory. It is little, in compariſon to Antichriſt his great booke of humane Traditions, vnwritten Verities, Apocriphe Scriptures, Decretals, Canons, and manifold Legends, all ioined and equalled by them in their practiſe, at leſt, with this booke. It is open for that cleere vnderſtanding of holy Scripture which now Chriſt ſhould bring: whereas, in Antichriſt his darkeneſſe, the ſame was buried in ignorance, which, with them is the mother of deuotion, it being held capitall for common laicke men

to read Scripture in vulgar tongue.
            3 The actions of this great perſonnage, thus furniſhed, are in his geſture and in his voice. His geſture is, that he ſet his right foot on the Sea, and his left foot on the Land: as he who hath power ouer all creatures. Who ſtabliſheth the mountaines by his power, and appeaſeth the noiſe of the Seas, the noiſe of the waues thereof, and Pſal. 89: 9. the tumults of people, Pſal. 65. His right foot is ſet on the Sea, as whoſe rage is moſt terrible, and the left, on the earth, to ſhew that he is ſufficiently furniſhed with all ſtrength, and accordingly vttereth it, as for the party opponer is requiſit. In the 13. Chapter, to expreſſe Antichriſt his eſtate, two beaſts arriſe, the one out of the Sea, the other, out of the Earth. Theſe he commeth to vndoe, and conueniently therefore ſetteth his feet in this manner. So is his geſture. His voice, is a loud cry. Wherein, as the little booke is the weapon of his warfare, ſo the vſe and welding of it, is heere expreſſed; to wit, Preaching. Whereof to ſhew the boldneſſe, his voice is compared to the reoaring of a Lion. And to expreſſe the power, and that, perfect, accompanying the bold Preaching of the Goſpell now reſtored, ſeuen thunders are ſaid to ſpeake. As at the going out of the Goſpel in the firſt ſeale, the firſt beaſt hauing the face of a Lion, Spake like thunder: So, now at reuiuing of the Goſpel to Antichriſt his ouerthrow, it ſhall be accompanied with boldneſſe and perfection of of power. The great Angell comming downe to fight for Sion and the hill thereof, Iſai 31 4. Now, conſider that Chriſt is heere deſcribed according to his vertue working in his ſeruants: whoſe voice, if it be his, is bold and powerfull, If their voice be, as it ought, the eccho of his cry, it will be like thunder. For thunders ſpeake as he roareth Amos 3. 8. and except he roare, no thunder vttereth any voice. His ſheepe know his voice and not the voice of a ſtranger. All Ioh. 10. 4. 5. this is, to ſhew, that the miniſtery of the Goſpell, through the power of Chriſt accompanying it, ſhal conſume Antichriſt to powder. That notable things were vttered by

theſe Thunders, Iohn his readineſſe to write, argueth cleerely. From which hee is ſtaied by commandement, not to write, but to ſeale and cloſe vp what they had ſpoken. Wee muſt be ſober, and contented with what it pleaſeth God to open, as not able at all times to receiue al things. I doubt not, but now in cleere manifeſtation of Antichriſt, theſe thunders haue beene, and are ſtill thundering that openly, which heere for the time was ſealed vp. But, for this time their ſpeeches haue beene, as I thinke, ſo plaine, as Chriſt thought not meete to put in regiſter. For theſe myſteries are (as it becommeth) ſo deliuered, that the wiſe, in time, ſhall vnderſtand them, but the wicked ſhall do wickedly. To them things are ſpoken Dan. 12. by parables, that, hearing they may heare, and not vnderſtand, and, ſeeing they may ſee, and not perceiue. That Matth. 13. 10. theſe ſpeeches were vttered, and yet cloſed vp, was partlie, for Iohn his particular information and ſtrengthning. As to ſuch effect, God in reuelations, ſheweth to his ſeruants of high imploiment, ſometimes, more then in either, Mark. 9. 9. 2. Cor. 12. lawfull or poſſible to vtter. And truly, I am of this opinion, that none can be an able miniſter of the Goſpell, who, for his owne both light and feeling, hath not more then he can publiſh. It is partly alſo, for all readers and hearers of this Propheſie, to exſpect and aduert, in their time theſe thundering ſpeeches: as to the praiſe of God, we now doe cleerely. For, that heere Chriſt commandeth to ſeale them vp, and that, heereafter in this Propheſie (which is but one continuall trance) they are vttered, I neither ſee any reaſon of it, nor any place yeelding any probability that ſo it is.
            4 Thus is the great perſonage inſtructed with his weapon, the word, vnderſtood and preached in all boldneſſe and power. The end of his comming thus inſtructed, is to Finiſh the myſtery of God, and that without longer delay Act. 3. 21. or protraction of time: So, as vpon the ſound of the ſeuenth trumpet, and in the daies thereof, all ſhall bee accompliſhed, whatſoeuer the Prophets had foretold either

of the deſtruction of the enemies or the Church, or of God his plentifull mercy and grace, in her deliuerance, and her goodly, gracefull, and peaceable condition thereupon. For this is the miſtery of God, which in the daies of the ſeuenth Trumpet ſhall bee fulfilled. Which trumpet as it hath begunne to blow long agoe, and (praiſed be our God) we ſee the effect of it in good degrees aduanced: ſo how long it ſhall blow, God onely knoweth. This alwaies is certaine, that Antichriſt his deſtruction, already begunne, ſhall hold on to euerlaſting woe; neither ſhall he recouer ſtrength. As alſo the increaſe of light and grace towards the Church, ſhall continue, till Antichriſt being ouerthrowne, and the Iewes io
                  •
               ning to the faith: ſhe inioie a gracefull and peaceable ſtate heere, as a Bride prepared for her husband. This to be the minde of the Holy Ghoſt, the whole courſe of this propheſie ſheweth euidently. And the many goodly promiſes of the Prophets gathered together in the Church her deſcription, Chap. 21. and 22. proue cleerely that therein is the myſtery of God fulfilled according as hee foretold, By his ſeruants the Prophets. Now, the things in this Chapter, and to the 15. verſe of the next, hauing ſuch congruity of argument with that of the ſeuenth Trumpet and laſt woe (as whereof, they are not onely the preparation, but euen ſuch great beginnings) yet notwithſtanding, they are deliuered vnder the ſixth trumpet, and ſecond great woe. Becauſe, albeit it be true that theſe Trumpets no more then the ſeales or Viol
                  •
                be put for knots and periods of time exactly cutted, but for diſtinguiſhing diuers matters: yet thus farre in them, time muſt be looked to, that they fall out in courſe after other, as they are heere ordered by the ſpirit. For, though the euill of the ſixth Trumpet was euer in time of the fifth: and the euils of both fifth and ſixth Trumpets hold on in ſome degree in the beginning, yea a good ſpace of the ſeuenth,: yet the world, felt firſt, the fifth Trumpet, and woe thereof; whereupon, the ſixth Trumpet and ſecond great woe, inſuing, albeit the firſt woe ceaſed not, yet

when the world felt moſt the ſecond, as in the height of it, beeing then the moſt ſenſible plague, all euils and puniſhments whatſoeuer of whatſoeuer kinde, are ioyned with the greateſt woe in the time. And thus is it, that albeit theſe beginnings of Antichriſt his fall heere, and to the 15. verſe of the next Chapt. agree, in argument with the matter of the ſeuenth trumpet: yet, becauſe theſe beginnings & firſt degrees fell out in the greateſt height of the ſecond woe, and were yet of no ſuch weight or meaſure as the worldly ſort and Antichriſt, feeling a heauier woe vpon them, did ſo much regard: therefore they are put vnder the ſecond woe and ſixth trumpet. But when theſe ſmall beginnings grow on ſo farre as Antichriſt and the worldly ſort following him, become firſt afraid, Chapt. 11. 11. and vpon the ſeene danger of his kingdome already begunne to fall, then falleth to count light of the other woe in reſpect of this: then is the ſeuenth trumpet ſaide to blow and the ſecond woe to bee paſt, the third now comming in place. And this order of deliuery, which the ſpirit vſeth, as it is exceeding artificious and pleaſant, ſo being well aduerted, it bringeth great light and ſatisfaction. Now, becauſe this end, of this great Angel his deſcending, ſeemeth incredible, Antichriſt and his kingdome being ſo ſtrongly ſetled, as the ouerthrow thereof appeared impoſſible: the great Whore preſuming thereupon, to ſit ſtill as a Queene, and 
               Chap. 18. 
               to ſee no mourning: therefore, that the promiſe may bee the mo
                  •
               e ſure, it is confirmed by an oath. Wherein, for inſtruction, are to be obſerued, the ſwearer, his geſture, the forme of oath, and the point ſworne.
            5 As we haue heard the end of this great Angel his deſcent, ſo is ſhewed how this end is effectuate. And this is, by fitting and preparing fit inſtruments thereto: who are ſtirred vp by diuine inſtigation, to take the little booke from him only in whoſe hand it is open, to eat it vp, receiuing in their hearts all God his words, &c. Ezech. 3. 10. This eating hath a double effect in the eaters, of

ſweetneſſe and delight in the mouth, and of bitterneſſe in the belly; that ſo they may be meete for that effect ſet downe in the laſt verſe, where is the interpretation of all this ſigne. Shewing in Iohn, (who here, is the type of theſe whom Chriſt ſhall thus, and to this end, ſtirre vp) that, for raiſing againe the true light of the Goſpell, and by the powerfull and wide preaching thereof, gathering of his Church and defeating darkeneſſe: hee will raiſe firſt in mens harts a loue of knowledge, and of the booke of God, who thereupon, by his motion ſhall ſtudy the ſame moſt diligently, as eating it with appetite: and ſhall finde in ſtudying it, exceeding ſweetneſſe and ſpirituall ioy to their ſoules: and letting it as it were downe in their ſtomachs, and filling their bellies with it, they ſhall bee ſo filled, as not able to containe it, they muſt burſt foorth; though the preaching thereof beget them of the world great trouble, and many teares. For all this frame of ſpeech, ſee Ezech. 2. and 3. and Ierem. 15. and 20. and withall, obſerue herein the diſtinct degrees of a true inward calling, whereof none can be lacking in the true miniſter of Chriſt. Firſt, a loue of God and of the knowledge of his word, begotten in the heart by diuine motion. 2 A heart to pray for light. 3 A diligent and carefull ſtudy of Scripture. 4 A ſweet delight and taſte found therein of ſpirituall ioy to their owne ſoules. Now all theſe any good Chriſtian may haue: but, to make a Paſtor, thou muſt alſo find the laſt, that is, bitterneſſe of belly. The accommodation of this is ſo cleare in ſtory, of theſe, whom God thus firſt ſtirred vppe to the loue of learning, and by whom the true light both of diuine and humane ſciences was reſtored, ſo as Antichriſt was diſcouered and noted for the man of ſinne; that it needeth not here to be inlarged. Reade the ſtory and accommodations of Writers on this place.
         
         
            
            CHAP. XI.
            
               HEere, the effect in ſome degree is ſhewed, of that which typically was ſpoken of Iohn in the laſt verſe of the former Chapt. in that the little booke, being eaten, giueth to the eaters, a faculty to diſcern the true Church from the falſe; by aſſiſtance and inſtigation of the great Angel who giueth it. And this is, by applying the rule and meaſure thereof (ſound and ſtraight as a reede, ſtrong, apt, and maniable as a rod, and as Aaron his rod, which deuoured the rods of the Inchanters) whereby the body of the true Church is found to bee Exod 7. 12. ſmall, as the Temple in compariſon of the Court and City: and hid, as the Temple, wherein none entred but the Prieſts, as a ſmall center in the midſt of a large circumference, and cloſed vp within it. The Miniſters in Deut. 17. 6. & 19. 15. Iohn 8. 17. number few, beeing but two, the ſmalleſt of numbers, and yet ſufficient for witneſſing of a truth. In calling, witneſſes, and of diuine things, being Prophets and ſtanding before God. In condition, afflicted, as doing it in ſackecloth, in much heauineſſe and many teares. In this condition, yet hauing great and diuine power: towards the Temple, diſperſing plentie of grace as oliues, and true light as candleſtickes: and outward, hauing vengeance in readineſſe againſt all diſobedience, as Elias and Moſes, hauing, nor vſing, againſt their enemies, no armour but ſpirituall, and that for the ſpace of a 1260. daies, al the while the Gentils occupy the Court and holy City and tread them vnder foot, that is, all the time, Antichriſt poſſeſſeth the name and title of the viſible Church (defacing and downe treading therein true worſhippe) which therefore is caſt out, and hath not with God, the account of his true Church, now-onely cloſed vp within

the Temple. The frame of ſpeech is from the Iewes Temple, thereby to expreſſe the condition of the Chriſtian Church, vnder and within the compaſſe of Antichriſt, vſurping the title, and glorying in multitude and viſibility: who therefore, after the ſame frame of ſpeech, hath with his falſe Church, the name of Gentiles, obtaining a good ſpace, the whole City & Court of the Temple; euen that beaſt, who worketh 42. moneths, Chapt. 13. All which time, God had his owne Church, albeit ſmall and not ſeene of men, euen within the bowels of the Antichriſtian vſurpation, as the Temple is within the City and Court. Which true Church, hee intertained in the life of God, by a hidde, but powerfull diſpenſation of grace, of a ſecret vnknowne and ſmall number of true Chap. 14. 2. 3. Miniſters. Whoſe ſtate and condition, in courſe of time and Antichriſt his oppoſition, is threefold. Firſt, they propheſie long and powerfully, and albeit in ſackcloth, yet without bloudſhed beeing hid in the Temple. Secondly, the Angel of the bottomeleſſe pit, King Abaddon, ſmelling them out, they are openly murthered, and cruelly and barbarouſlie intreated, euen with applauſe and congratulation of the world, in all parts of the Antichriſt his power (the great City) ſo as they ſeemed In orbe Romano qui ſunt Ciues ſunt Romani. Lex Antonini Pij. Bodin in metho. hiſtoriae. cap. 6. to bee vtterly vndone and extinguiſhed: and the earth, and earthly men thereupon, reioyſed as freed of them, who by the light, reprooued their darke workes, and thus tormented them: not as the Locuſts tormented men, Chap. 9. But as Elias and Micheas did Ahab: Ieremias, the Land; and Amos Iſrael. Thirdly, the ſpirit of life from God, which neuer can be killed, (for the truth can neuer be bound) raiſeth them, that is, others, hauing the ſame ſpirit and power: who ſtand vp on their feet, that is, ſtoutly and vigorouſly ſet themſelues to fight againſt Antichriſt, ſo as hee ſhall then beginne to be affraid, and his former great mirth ſhall be troubled: and that ſo much the more, when hee and his ſectators ſhall ſee (to their great both griefe and feare) theſe few, hid,

afflicted, ſlaine, & mocked ones, (of whom, they thought they had beene rid for euer) by diuine calling, called vp See Chap. 12. Sect. 8. to heauen, that is, ſeparated from the fellowſhip and all communion with Antichriſt and his earthly ſort, to bee, with account & protection acknowledged and ſeene the true Miniſters of God his true Church, which now, from vnder Antichriſt his darkeneſſe (vnder which it lay vailed as the Temple within the Court) ſhall become viſible, in a degree euen to the enemies. Whereupon immediately, enſueth a great commotion and ſtirre: ſo as a part of Antichriſt his kingdome falleth, and the power thereof is much impaired, by ouerthrow of a great number and conuerſion of others. And thus, way is made to the ſeuenth trumpet; wherein, not a part, but all Babel falleth an eternall fall.
            2 Conſider now, how diſtinctly and clearly 
                  •
               heere, Antichriſt his whole dealing in the diuers degrees thereof, and the true Church her caſe all the while, is euen painted out before the eies of any that is not blinde. So great light commeth by the little booke eaten, and rod applied. The firſt of the three conditions was, of the Church before this time of application of the rod, but the meaſuring and finding it out, is of this time. The other two conditions, come now, vpon this applying of the rod, by ſuch as through eating the little booke were inabled thereto: which Antichriſt perceiuing, they are killed and lie dead, &c. And as, for courſe of time and ſtory, this Chapter is orderly put, ſo alſo exceeding pertinently for order of matter. For where, by the reſtoring of propheſie, in the laſt Chapt. it might bee preſumed that no true Church could bee before, ſeeing, that where no propheſie is, the people periſh; and this doubt, might greatly trouble the reſolution of a godly ſoule: for clearing this doubt, and ſhewing how alwaies, euen in the midſt of Antichriſtian darkeneſſe, when no ſuch thing appeared to the eies of men, yet the rodde rightly applyed, made the applyers to ſee, that God alwaies had

a true Church, in which was a diſpenſation of grace, though vnſeene. And this Church breaking out, firſt in few, and outwardly weake perſons, albeit it receiued ſo hard entertainement by Antichriſt, as it ſeemed euen vtterly extinguiſhed in the riſing; yet ſtill it preuailed by euident degrees, till manifeſtly at laſt the Temple was opened in heauen, and the Arke of the Teſtimony ſeene. The accommodation hereof ſheweth it ſelf: and the two laſt caſes are ſo much the more cleare, as they were ſeen, and are of recent memory. To cleare the firſt ſtate and ſecret diſpenſation of grace, and light when it appeared impoſſible, a ſpeech is taken from Zacharie, and hauing alluſion to the Temple of Ieruſalem, as hath all this Allegory. Zach. 4. For as light in the Temple by burning lampes of the Candleſticke, was ordinarily entertained through bringing in oyle, dayly to keepe them burning; ſo the Temple being cloſed, and not onely the City, but euen the Court of the Temple (except through which no paſſage was thereto) being poſſeſſed and trod downe ſo long of the Gentiles; it might appeare impoſſible that any light could hee preſerued in the Temple; thus cloſed and compaſſed. Therefore in this eſtate God compareth the Miniſters of grace to two oliue trees growing vp by the ſides of the Candleſticke within the Temple, and letting drop from their branches oile in the lamps. Oh, how ſweetly the ſpirit expreſſeth that which the fooliſh world can neuer learne, while ſtill they cry, where was your Church? Neither by an Armie, neither by ſtrength, but by my ſpirit, ſaith the Lord.
            
            3 For more clearing of this matter, as before, Chapter 9. in the time of fiue Monethes, the ſtate of the Locuſts and their working was much cleared; ſo here▪ to the whole rage of Antichriſt during which, the Lord had ſtill his owne witneſſes, a time is attributed, that by comparing the places and caſes from which this time is taken, and to which the holy Ghoſt here purpoſely all
                  •••
               th, wee may learue great wiſdome. And to leade vs

hereto, wee haue not onely the like time, but alſo the like ſpeeches: the ſpirit as it were pointing to vs, whither hee will haue vs to goe. The time then attributed to Antichriſt his whole rage, is forty two monethes, all one with the 1260. dayes of the two Witneſſes propheſying (to ſhew that all that time God had them, and continually, therefore is the time counted by dayes) and all one with the time, times, and halfe a time of the woman her abode in the wilderneſſe, Chapter 12; all alike making vp halfe a weeke of yeeres, or three yeeres and a halfe. And thus the ſpirit counting one and the ſame time, by all the ſpaces of time, yeeres, monethes and dayes, to ſhew euidently, that the yeeres are of monethes, and both yeeres and monethes are of dayes, as alſo that the dayes are properly to be taken, it is wonder, how learned men could haue ſo farre miſtaken them. Now in all the Scripture wee ſhall not find a condition of the Church, with any circumſcription of time anſwerable in condition, and points of Antichriſt his dealing, here pointed at, (that is, wherin the true worſhip is ſo defaced, as in place thereof, a falſe worſhippe is erected, and truth trod vnder foot) but the two here alluded to, as in the ſpeeches brought hither from both is more then manifeſt, of treading vnder the holy City, propheſying in ſacke, killing with fire, ſhutting of heauen that it raine not, &c. The one is of the time of Elias his lurking and famine vpon Iſrael three yeeres & a halfe, when 1 King. 17. 1. Luk. 4 25. Iam. 5. 17. 1. Kin. 19. 10. God his worſhippe was ouerthrowne, his Prophets killed, and worſhippe of Baall erected, no true Church appearing to bee left in Iſrael, euen to the Prophet; who yet all the while tormented the aduerſaries, no rain comming but at his word. The other, is that of remouing the dayly ſacrifice by Antiochus Epiphanes, and the abhomination of deſolation, ſet vp in place thereof for a Ioſeph. lib. 1. de bello Iudaic
                     •
                  . Dan. 127. 
               time, times, and halfe a time, Dan. 7. 25. ſo long our Sauiour vnder great affliction and contempt preached in the dayes of his fleſh, euen halfe a weeke, and was 
                  •
               aſt

out of the Synagogue: the Prieſts, Scribes and Phariſees all the while obtaining the name and account of the true Church. To the ſecond condition of theſe witneſſes in this whole rage of Antichriſt, are attributed, three dayes and a halfe, that is halfe a weeke of dayes, as the whole is of yeeres: onely to keepe thus the alluſion to the halfe weeke: but ſo as therein to imply this conſolation, that howſoeuer the whole time of Antichriſt were long, which yet ſhould haue an end, as had theſe miſerable times of Iez
                     •
                  bel and Antiochus: and that all that long time, the true witneſſes ſhould bee in affliction and heauineſſe: yet that time of cruell and open murthering, and barbarous ferity ſhould bee but ſhort, as is halfe a weeke of dayes in compariſon to half a week of yeeres. And this in ſtory is moſt cleare. For as their cruell and open murthering beganne with the reuiuing and new breaking out of the Goſpell, what time Sathan was looſed the ſecond time, Chapter 20. And the beaſt became of his colour, Chapter 17. So, as the truth preuaileth by increaſe of light, they are faine to relent though nothing in malice and rage, (which groweth more and more, they euen blaſpheming and gnawing their tongues for ſorrow) yet from vnbrideled libertie, in murthering the Saints in this degree. To the laſt condition is attributed no circumſcription of time, becauſe it is the beginning of that victory to the Saints, & fall to Babell, which ſhall haue no end of time. For right vnderſtanding of theſe times, ſee more Chapt. 9. Sect. 5. as likewiſe for this, that here is ſaid (The ſecond woe is paſt) ſee, there Sect. 8. Now here is well to bee conſidered, that what in this Chapter is ſhewed of Antichriſt his rage againſt the Church, and her ſuffering by him, is here handled, but by the way, and not of purpoſe, to ſhew that Story (which commeth in the 12. 13. and 14. Chapters) but onely ſo farre as was requiſite for clearing the ſtory of the witneſſes, how the world is plagued

by them: which is here the ſcope of the ſpirit, See vpon Chap. 14 Sect. 10.
            4 Thus was the ſixth Trumpet, and the ſecond great woe, followeth the ſeuenth: to which we ſee how faire a way is made in the ſixth; to make vs vnderſtand, that euen in time of the ſecond woe, and greateſt height thereof by the Mahometanes let looſe againe from their binding; this laſt woe was working in ſuch degrees as haue beene ſhewed; as in like manner in the ſixth ſeale was giuen a view of the miſchiefe of the Trumpets, to learne vs, that euen then, before the ouerthrow, and ſhaking of the Empire, the myſtery of iniquity was working. And in all God ſheweth his power and prouidence, that euen with the ſinne and wickedneſſe of men, hath his iudgements preparing long before, for their due puniſhment in time. Now maruaile not that, here that which is to the Saints, chiefe ioy, is a woe to the World: for our victory is the worldes ruine.
            5 Vpon the blowing of the ſeuenth Trumpet, the effect thereof is, in the reſt of this Chapter, ſummarily denounced, by a gratulatory ſong of praiſe of the Church to God for the ioyfull effect to them, though wofull to the world, which now they preconceiue is to enſue. And this effect ſummarily here denounced, is through the reſt of all the Propheticall narration exponed at large. The ſumme and matter of their fong, which ſtirreth them to thankſgiuing is in this, that God now raigneth. And this raigne is cleared by two great effects, the one is the deſtruction of all enemies, the other is a ſequell hereof, the good eſtate of God his children, the time of whoſe reward now is come. The Iuſtice of God in the deſtruction is ſhewed, in that theſe enemies were angrie, and had in their fury deſtroyed the earth, and murthered the Saints: ſo as now God had iuſt reaſon to be angry in his courſe, and to iudge and reuenge his dead fully on the world, by proſecuting

ſtill his, now begunne wrath and iudgements againſt the aduerſaries, till they be cloſed vp in euerlaſting torment: and redreſſing the eſtate of his Church in continuall deliuerance and encreaſe of grace, till as a Bride fully prepared, ſhee be receiued to glorie; all being here performed now in the dayes of this Trumpet whatſoeuer by the Prophets was foretold, either of the Church her perfection in grace and peaceable ſtate, or of the enemies deſtruction. And this is that finiſhing of the myſterie ſworne, Chapter 10. this is that vengeance promiſed to the ſlaine ſoules, in the 5. Seale, but which they were to attend till the reſt of Saints were ſlaine: and this the Gentiles in their anger hauing performed (hauing trod downe the holy City, euen that beaſt that worketh forty two monethes, making warre with the Saints, and ouercomming them, Chapter 13.) Now the Lord commeth in great indignation to repay the world their cruelty. This double euent thus denounced, is by figne alſo forſhewed, to ſignifie the riſing of the Church in great light and deepe ſight of the moſt hid myſteries, the Tabernacle is open in heauen, and the Arke (which ſtood in the moſt holy place) is openly ſeene. Here is a great degree of knowledge. In the end of the ſixt Trumpet, was a great meaſure, euen that firſt viſible ſeparatiō from Babel, and her earthly ones, when to the witneſſes it was ſaid, Come vp hither: but her cleareneſſe of light is aduanced greatly, and the truth hereof is euident All praiſe to him who hath taken his Kingdome; for ſince the ſeuenth Trumpet began to blow, the Antichriſtian kingdome thinketh light of the ſixt Trumpet, and now this is their heauieſt woe, as wil appeare in the effects of the Vials; but it is our ſong. The ſigne of the other effect, in the deſtruction of the enemies, and God his horrible iudgements to that end, are thunderings, lightnings voices, earthquake, and much haile See vpon Chapter 4. Sect. 10. thus, Babel, whereof, but the tenth part fell, at the firſt eſſayes, in the time of the ſixth Trumpet, now at

the ſound of the ſeuenth, taketh a totall ruine, as did Ioſ. 6. 16. 
               Ierico at the ſeuenth Trumpet, for to that is the alluſion.
         
         
            CHAP. XII.
            
               THe ſeuenth Trumpet ſounding, the effect thereof was ſummarily foreſhewed in a congratulatorie ſong, & ſignes expreſſing the maine points of the euent to enſue, in the end of the laſt Chapter. Now hence through this Booke (to the generall concluſion of al) that is largely and particularly exponed: in the ſtory of two great wonders or ſignes in Heauen. The firſt in the 12. 13. and 14. Chapters: the other thence to the end. The firſt ſigne or wonder hath the ſtory of the enemies, and condition of God his Church oppreſſed by them, & in ſome degrees comming out vnder that bondage. The ſecond hath the ſtory of full victory, in the perfect ouerthrow of the aduerſaries, and the Church her goodly and gracefull ſtate thereupon. The firſt in the 12. 13 and 14. Chapters, is of one time with that ſtory, which in the fixe ſeales and ſixe trumpets of the ſeuenth hath beene ſhewed: but yet is not the ſame. And where it would appeare to haue but one and the ſame matter; yet the purpoſe and reſpect of handling is much different, wherof ſee more vpon Chapter 14. Sect. 10. And here this Narration commeth exceeding fitly, both for time and matter. For time, becauſe, albeit it be of things fallen out before the ſeuenth Trumpet, yet ſo cleare a ſight of them was not got, till vpon the blaſt of it the Tabernacle of teſtimony opened in heauen, afforded to God his children a more plaine ſight of the enemies, their courſe & ſucceſſe of working. For matter, becauſe, that vpon

the ſouuding of the ſeuenth Trumpet, ſo great a ioy of the Church vttered in ſuch a ſong, vpon preception of ſo great a deliuerance to her ſelfe, and deſtruction of her enemies, requireth for cleare vnderſtanding thereof, and how great the worke is, that theſe enemies be knowne, and their dealings: and to endeare the more to the Church her owne; deliuerance, that her troubles and wreſtlings with theſe enemies bee alſo ſeene: that ſo, both the equity of the former iudgements, and ſpecially of this laſt and finall wrath to come on them, may bee cleare. Till now the Story hath beene of wrath vpon the world, from which the ſealed ones were free, the Church her ſufferings nothing, or but ſparingly touched: the Story of the Witneſſes, Chapter 11. being deliuered but as they were a Woe vpon the world; but now in theſe three ſubſequent Chapters, the Story of the Church her ſufferings, and of the parties by whom, (vpon whome, and for which came all the former woes, and now finall wrath is denounced) is moſt pertinently, both for time and matter inſerted. The not aduerting of this purpoſe of the holy Ghoſt hath bredde to many in reading this Booke great obſcurity, while they tooke not vppe the ſweet and plaine way thereof, ſo ledde, as falling in againe, in the end of the ſoureteenth Chapter, to the point where it left in the end of the eleuenth, (for inſerting of this neceſſary Story) the ſummary execution is, their preponed of that which in the end of the eleuenth Chapter, was ſummarily denounced. And ſo in the ſecond great Wonder or Signe ſeene in Heauen, throughout the fifteene, ſixeteene, ſeuenteene, eighteene, nineteene and twenty Chapters, this effect of the ſeuenth Trumpet, as touching the deſtruction of enemies, and Church her victory is largely exponed, and in the twenty one, and twenty two, as touching her gracefull and peaceable ſtate thereupon.
            
               
2 The firſt wonder or ſigne is double, according as therein the enemies inuaders, and partie aſſailed, are expreſſed. The party aſſailed is the woman and her ſeed, firſt and laſt. The aſſailing enemy, is the Dragon, by himſelfe openly, and by his Lieutenant, the beaſt of his power, couertly. Againſt the woman and her firſt ſeede, is ſet the Dragon, directly in this Chapter. Againſt her in her other ſeed, the beaſt of his power, throne and authority, in the next Chapter. This is that warre proclaimed in Paradiſe. Gen. 3. 15. In this Chapter are; firſt, the deſcription of the parties by their habit, and diſpoſition to doe. Secondly, the euent; which maketh way to the next enemy in the next Chapter. The party aſſailed, is the woman, in habit clothed with the Sunne, treading the Moone, crowned with twelue Starres. In diſpoſition of preſent endeuour, big with child, trauelling, pained, and crying through paine. The aſſailing party, for habit, is a great redde Dragon, hauing ſeuen heads crowned, tenne hornes, and a taile. His endeauour to doe, is, he caſteth ſtars from heauen with his taile, and ſtandeth before the woman to deuoure her child with his heads.
            3 The euent hereof is (according to the ordinary forme of Scripture) firſt Summarilie proponed in the 5. and 6. verſes. And next, thenceforth more largely cleered. And this euent is double. The childe is borne and exalted: and the woman flieth. In the ſummarie propoſition of this double euent, the childe his quality, dignity, and exaltation to high eſtate is proponed: and the womans flght, by the place, whither; her condition in it, and time of this her condition, is deſcribed.
            4 Hauing, thus ſummarily in the 5. and 6. verſes, proponed this double euent: he ſheweth after, how it fell out, and by what meanes. And firſt how it came, that the childe ſo narrowly watched, and by ſo ſtrong an enemie, yet, not onely eſcapeth, but is exalted to great honour. This, of the childe commeth by a great battell in heauen.

wherein are the Captaines of either ſide, their Armies, and the euent of the conflict. The Generall Captaine of the one ſide is Michael: his Armie, are his Angels. The Captaine and Army oppoſite, are, the Dragon and his Angels. The euent of their conflict, is, the Dragon is foild, and the degree of the foile is, that he and his Angels are ſo deiected, as they haue no more place in heauen. This is cleared by two contrary effects. The one, in the heauenlie Citizens of ioy: the other, in the Dragon of rage. The ioy of the heauenly Citizens is ſet foorth in their ſong of victory: which victorie, is amplified by the greatneſſe, cruelty, ſubtiltie, maliciouſneſſe, enmity, and peruerſe diligence of the Dragon, who is ouercome: by the nobleneſſe of the victorie, for the price of it: by the Souldiers conſtant ſuffering to attaine it, which endeareth it the more: and laſtly, by the miſerable condition of the earthlie ſort through this his foile. Thus, is declared how the child eſcaped, and was exalted. Next is ſhewed, how the ſecond part of the generall euent, that is, the womans flight, did come. The Dragon his rage for his foile, and miſgiuing endeauour againſt the Childe, ſtirreth him to peiſecute the woman. Thereupon ſhee flieth, being healped thereto by the meanes giuen her of two winges, Of that great Eagle. And her flight, heere, as before in the ſummarie propoſition, is cleered by the place of her retrait, her condition there, and the time thereof. This rage of the Dragon againſt the woman, hath two degrees. The firſt is, hee perſecuteth her, wherethrough ſhee is brought to flie, by the meanes giuen her of the winges. The ſecond degree is, his endeuour, for her ouerthrow in her flight: the floud caſt out againſt her. This double rage is eluded; the firſt, by the wings; the ſecond, by the helpe of the earth, which ſwalloweth the flood. This generall euent of all this miſgiuing endeauour againſt childe and woman, worketh in the Dragon increaſe of rage, whereby he is ſtirred to make warre againſt the reſt of her Seede. Againſt theſe (hauing miſgiuen in his open dealing

againſt her firſt ſeede) he ſtirreth vp that beaſt, whoſe riſing and working to behold, Iohn ſtandeth on the Sea ſhoare.
            5 I haue ioined together, and at length, the reſolution of this Chapter, the miſtaking whereof, in my iudgement, hath marred all the accommodation heere, and much obſcured all the reſt of this Propheſie. The right accommodation ſhall yet bee the more cleare, if wee obſerue after what manner, in this Propheſie, the holy Ghoſt deſcribeth the enemies of the Church, and whence the whole frame of ſpeech, in this Chapter, is taken. Firſt, then, the courſe of the Church her ſufferings, and her enemies, by whom, is framed to the courſe of the old Teſtement: wherein, the firſt great enemie was Phaaro. The ſecond great foe was Babel, and theſe Beaſtes in Daniel. 
               Ezech. 48. & 49. & Dan. 7. & 11. Of which, the laſt extreme enemy, was Gog and Magog, euen the Kings of Syria: and of them, moſt of all, Antiochus Epiphanes. To theſe their enemies, and the old Churches ſufferings by them, that heere in the ſtory of the Chriſtian Church her foes and ſufferings, the Spirit alludeth, it is moſt cleare. To moue vs to compare and finde not onely light heere, but to ſee alſo that theſe former were ſtamps of greater things to come. Now all the ſpeech of this Chapter, is from the ſtate of the Church in Egypt: which, in her infancy there, was as a woman big with childe, and crying through cruell burdens: Pharao that great Dragon, euen that great Leniathan, firſt Pſal. 74. 13. 14. Iſai. 51. 9. Exod 1. 10. 16 Exod. 12. wrought, wiſely with them, as with his taile, and next ſtood cruelly, ready to deuoure all her Male Children. But Michael fought for them, and in the blood of the lambe, they ouercame, and all the firſt borne of Egypt are ſlaine. The Church flieth, as carried vpon Eagles winges, to the wilderneſſe where ſhe is fed with Manna. In her flight, Deut. 32. 11. the Dragon Pharao minded to haue drowned her in the redde Sea, but the earth helped her: for earthlie Pharao and his earthly Army dranke vp that floud. And all this is to make vs vnderſtand, by conformity of caſe, that

here, the firſt great enemie and ſufferings of the Chriſtian Church, in her infancy are ſet forth.
            6 The woman, is the Primitiue Apoſtolike Church, glorious in the cleare light of the ſunne of righteouſneſſe, whom ſhe put on for her wiſdome and iuſtification. Treading all borrowed, ſpotted, changeable, tranſitory and light things vnder foot: glorying onely in the Chap. 21 14. light miniſtred by the twelue Apoſtles, which is her crowne. Shee is big with childe of all peoples, whom ſhe was begetting to God, through obedience of faith in Chriſt. For her great troubles and ſufferings, ſhe is ſaid to Gal. 5. Iſai. 66. 7. Iſai. 54. 1. Mich. 4. 10. be in trauelling and to cry of paine, trauelling in birth of all nations, till Chriſt ſhould be formed in thē. The ſpeech is frō the Prophets, with whō it is ordinarily in this ſenſe.
            7 Now, againſt this woman, according to the old warre proclaimed in Paradiſe, is ſet in apparance, a very vnequall match, but that Michael fighteth the battell. This aduerſary, is Satan. (for ſo the ſpirit interpreteth verſe 9.) Hee is a great Dragon, for great malice, force, and ſubtilty. He is red, for his cruell and bloudy diſpoſition: as who was a murtherer from the beginning Ioh. 8. 44. Hee hath ſeuen heades and tenne hornes (the armes of Rome) becauſe of this the Diuell his fury, againſt the Chap. 17. Primitiue Church, the Emperours of Rome were the inſtruments and executors. And therefore, to ſhew Rome in that ſtate of perſecuting Emperours, the heades are crowned, for an euident diſtinction of Rome then, from Rome thereafter in the beaſt. The heads and hornes are put in both, that we may know what ſtate the ſpirit deſigneth: but by the different note of theſe heades and hornes. To take vp the different time, and condition in time. Againſt the Primitiue Church, the Diuell, albeit working by Rome, is made the direct enemie, becauſe then, Chriſtianity was directly oppugned, and open rage practiſed againſt the name of Chriſt: Heatheniſme, and worſhip of Diuels, plainely maintained. From which open dealing and licentious murthering, Satan being tyed

vp afterwards by power of the Goſpell: hee dealt more couertly by the beaſt of his authority, vnder name and profeſſion of Chriſtianity, and pretence of Chriſt his power, deceiuing men of the world: till, after a thouſand yeeres, the reuiued light of the Goſpell breaking out a freſh, and diſcouering the deceit of the beaſt, hee is ſo chafed, as hee falleth to murthering of Saints. In which reſpect the Dragon is ſaid to be looſed Chap. 20. the ſecond time, Chap 20. and thereby the beaſt falling to open murther, becommeth of his colour, Chapter 17. Of theſe heades and hornes, ſee vpon the 13. and 17. Chapters.
            8 This Dragon then, imployeth head and taile, that is, cruelty and lies: for, hee was a lier and murtherer from the beginning. By his taile, that is, by his alluring deceit, whether effectuall error, or deceitfulneſſe of honours, riches, and worldly luſts, hee inſinuateth himſelfe amongſt theſe, who ſeeme ſhining ſtarres of heauen, and draweth them to fall from light and grace, and to become earthly: ſuch as goe out of the Church (that is heauen) but were not of it. Marke alwaies, that Satan his firſt attempt againſt the Church, is with his taile amongſt the ſtarres. Thus he ſtirreth his taile. With his heads, that is, his power and force, hee ſetteth himſelfe, firſt, againſt the childe, to deuoure him in the bearing. Whereby, the fury and rage of Satan, by the Romane Emperours, to keepe the Church of Chriſt from riſing, is ſignified: notwithſtanding whoſe malice and cruelty, the Iſai. 66. 7. childe, and a man childe (alluding to the ſtory of Aegypt, and alſo, for that, as Chriſt was in perſon, and as the paſchall Lambe, and other expiatory ſacrifices of the flocke; ſo all Chriſtians, in Chriſt Ieſus are conſecrated as males, for perfection of ſtrength and ſpirituall vigor) is borne, that is, the Church is brought foorth to the partaking of the honour, firſt proper to Chriſt, and in him to all his Pſalm. 149. 9. members. To rule all Nations with a rod of iron, Chapt. 2. 27. And not onely thus brought foorth, but, in euident

preſence and power of God ruling in and amongſt them, eſtabliſhed here in earth againſt all Satan his fury, and viſibly ſeparated to God, from the reſt of the world; becomming Kings and Prieſts to God, in Chriſt: ſo as, according to Chriſt his owne prediction, the ſonne of man was ſeene come in his Kingdome with power, by his Church raiſed in the world. The throne, as the iron rod, is firſt and properly Chriſt his right, but it is alſo the honour of the Saints in him, to whom hee giueth a Kingdome, as he hath receiued one of the father: and to whom Iohn 17. 22. Chap. 3. 21. he giueth to ſit in his throne, as he ouercame and ſitteth in his fathers throne. For euen here, we ſit with him in the higheſt places. So the taking vp of the childe, is the erection of the Church amongſt men viſibly: in that ſame ſenſe that the two Witneſſes were bid come vp hither, Chap. 11. And the caſting of the Dragon from heauen, is all one thing with this. For the exalting of the childe, is the deiecting of the Dragon from heauen: and the deiection of the Dragon, is the vptaking of the child. Satan is ſaid to be in heauen, when, ſo by lies and error he hath preuailed in the viſible Church, as no apparant, or very ſmall face thereof is ſeene. Like as the Church, is in the earth (euen where Satan his throne is) when it is ſo compaſſed with error and ignorance, as it appeareth Chap. 2. 13. not, till it be ſaid, come vp hither: that is, till God, by purity of worſhip and open profeſſion thereof, make his true Church viſibly ſeparated from the contagion of the worldy ſort. And euen in this caſe, Satan is deiected from heauen, and ſent amongſt his owne earthly ones. He is ſaid to fight in heauen, when by ſlight and might, he laboreth to keepe downe ſo the true Church, as it can not bee diſcerned from his company: and is deiected thence, when truth openly in the Church is maintained, ſo as he can haue no place for dominion, but amongſt the Mat. 8. 31. children of diſobedience. For beeing caſt out of men, hee goeth madlings in the ſwine of the world, and ſhut out of God his houſe, he furiouſly miſtrāmeth his owne:

putting forth his rage where hee may, ſeeing hee cannot where hee would. Woe to the Inhabitants of the earth. This is it, which maketh, that where euer the Goſpell is purely preached, there immediately by Sathan are raiſed ſtirres and tempeſts. For, while hee brooketh all peaceably, Luke 11. 21. hee is at eaſe: but when that ſtronger commeth, who ſpoileth his houſe, then hee chafeth and becommeth mad in his Inſtruments. This euent Chriſt in theſe ſame words foretelleth; ſo as we need not doubt of the right ſenſe. Now is the iudgement of this world, now ſhall 
               Iohn 12. 31. 
               the Prince of this world bee caſt out. And in another place ſpeaking of the effect of the Goſpell truely preached. I ſaw Sathan fall from the heauen like lightning. 
               Luk. 10. 18.
            
            9 This victory is by Michael and his Angels fighting in heauen, that is, by Chriſt who is Michael our Prince, and the Angels of the Churches, Apoſtles, and faithfull Paſtors fighting by the powerfull preaching of Dan. 10. 21. the Goſpell againſt Sathan & his Miniſters of darkenes, heathen Philoſophers, heretikes and all ſuch: for Chriſtianity, is a warfare againſt Principalities and powers, & againſt beaſts, wherin we muſt all fight the good fight of faith; and ſtriue for that victory which ſtandeth in ſaluation of the elect from God in Chriſt, and in the foile of Sathan, and that by the bloud of the Lambe, apprehended by true faith in the word of Ieſus his Teſtimony, with perſeuerance, and a ready offering of liues for his honour.
            10 Now Sathan ſo deiected in rage, that thus againſt all his endeauors, the Church riſeth, ſetteth himſelfe to cruelly perſecute the ſame. For except in diſtinct conſiderations, the woman and child are all one: but that the holy Ghoſt will thus expreſſe, how Sathan firſt by craft and cruelty laboured to deſtroy the Church in the riſing that it ſhould not ſpread: whereof miſgiuing, and ſhee multiplying wonderfully, hee inforceth ſtill thereupon ragefull perſecution, The firſt and ſecond both are more then cleare in the perſecuting Emperours, and

ſtate of the Church in that time. Now this ſecond endeuour againſt the Church is eluded, and the woman retired from his fury, but yet ſo as ſhee goeth to the wilderneſſe, this is to ſhew, how by the protection & maintenance of Conſtantine the Great, and his Succeſſors becomming Chriſtians, and who according to the Phraſe of the Prophets, are called that great Eagle (as the doubled Ezech. 17. Dan. 7. 4. Article 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and Conſtantine his peculiar ſurname, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , proue clearely) this open and furious perſecution was ſtayed, the ſoules receiuing long white robes, Chapter 6. but yet ſo as the great honour and riches, wherewith as with wings hee vpon good intention endowed the Church as an occaſion to make her flie to the wilderneſſe, all true and ſincere religion, by degrees decaying in the viſible Church. And ſo by Sathan his craft (who now is bound vp a thouſand yeers) the beaſt ſtealeth in and ſitteth in the Temple of God. The true Church in the meane time lurking in the wilderneſſe, as Elias in the time of famine: and no more any face of true worſhippe appearing, then was in Iſraell Chap. 11. Sect. 3. that while; or then when the dayly ſacrifice was remoued, and the abhomination of deſolation erected in place thereof for a time, times, and halfe a time. Now, this flight was not in an inſtant, but by long and yet Dan. 7. 25. & 12. 7. ſenſible degrees. And therefore wee haue an other degree of Sathan his fury againſt the woman, after he ſeeeth her ſo furniſhed with wings, as he (being now chained Chapter 20.) could no more perſecute openly, or come at her. Hee caſteth a great floud out of his mouth after her to drowne her in her flight. This muſt bee a filthie floud which ſpringeth from ſo foule a fountaine. Hereby then is meaned not onely that inundation of barbarous Nations, which in Sathan his intention no doubt were ſet forth to drowne the woman: but alſo all theſe poiſonable hereſies, whereof vpon this reſtraint he ſpued out an Ocean: both which by God his prouidence turned to the deſtruction and puniſhment of the earthly

ſort. For the bloody Romane Empire was ouerturned by theſe Nations; and the wicked of the worlde poiſoned with theſe hereſies. Thus, then Sathan miſgiuing of all his attempts againſt the woman and her firſt ſeed, and finding ſo little ſucceſſe in open dealing, from which alſo hee is now bound vp: hee prepareth a beaſt of ſtrange working to deceiue the world, and to make warre againſt the ſeed of ſucceeding times. Whereof Chapter 13. So as the whole ſumme of this Chapter is this. Sathan (ſeeing the Primitiue Apoſtolike Church by the cleare light of the ſunne of righteouſneſſe miniſtred by the Apoſtles, whereby all borrowed, ſpotted & tranſitory light was trod vnder, like to bring Nations to the obedience of faith; and ſo, to bring forth a church in the world, as hee who had long miſcarried all men, was now by the light of the Goſpell to be deiected from his place) hee vſeth all both craft and violence to impede the ſucceſſe of the Goſpel, and notwithſtanding it is ſo fruitfull through Chriſt his power, and endeauour of faithfull Miniſters, that the ſonne of man commeth in his Kingdome with power, and Sathan is dethroned. This maketh him in ragefull deſpite, not onely to raiſe terrible broiles in the world to the earthes great woe, but to enforce alſo cruell perſecution againſt the Church: againſt which ſhee is armed with that great Eagle his wings, ſo as Sathan is reſtrained from open rage. His next endeauour therefore againſt her, thus protected is by inundation of barbarous nations, and poiſonable hereſie to drowne her: but this the Lord turneth on the world; yet ſo as the Church goeth to the wildernes and lurketh. Where-through the Beaſt in the next Chapter ſtealeth in to occupie City and Court, Chap. 11.
         
         
            
            CHAP. XIII.
            
               THus was the open rage of the Dragon againſt the Woman, & her firſt ſeed: now followeth his couered dealing againſt her ſeed of ſucceeding times, by the Vicar of his power, deſcribed in this Chapter, from his quality, that hee is a beaſt: origine, that hee riſeth out of the ſea, and earth, in diſtinct conſideration: ſhape exceeding monſtrous, hauing ſeuen heades and ten horns, as had the Dragon: but other wayes busked, as hauing his hornes crowned, and on his head, the name of blaſphemy: in body like a Pard, footed like a Beare, and mouthed like a Lion. Beſides this, hee hath for right diſcerning of him, two notes of great marke. The firſt is, his great power and authority, as Vicegerent to Sathan in his power, throne, and authority. The ſecond is, that one of his heads hauing beene deadly wounded was cured againe, where-through, all the world aſtoniſhed at the beaſt of ſo great maieſty and vnmatchable power, worſhip him and the Diuell his aduancer.
            2 Theſe two notes, and effect thereof, thus ſummarily proponed, are from the fift verſe, throughout the chapter exponed more largely, and firſt, this his authority practiſed in two miſchieuous effects, the one of ſpeaking blaſphemies, and the other of doing what hee liſt vncontrolled. This double authority is cleared, firſt by the time thereof, forty two moneths, and next by the practiſe of it: his ſpeaking of blaſphemies againſt God, his Church and members thereof. In his doing are noted, what it was, making warre: againſt whom, the Saints: & with what ſucceſſe, that hee ouercame them. Thirdly,

how largely this power was extended: Ouer euery Tribe, Tongue & Nation. Through al which he obtaineth, that al follow and worſhip him (
                  •
               he elect onely excepted:) a caſe ſo dangerous and fearefull, as a warning is, Epiphonematically, ſet downe to all of attention: and therewith, a conſolation, vpon two reaſons. Firſt, that according to the generall law of God his iuſtice, whereby euery oppreſſour is oppreſſed, and the ſlaier ſlaine, this beaſt ſhould come to deſtruction. Next, that it pleaſed God thus to trie the faith and patience of his Saints.
            3 His ſecond note, of his deadly wound cured againe, how it was, is ſhewed by a new viſion of an other Beaſt, riſing from the earth: in all outward ſemblance, like to the Lambe, and pretending ſimplie his power, but that his ſpeech was like the Dragons. This Beaſt his actions, and end thereof, are firſt ſummarily proponed: in that he did all that the firſt beaſt could doe, before him: and to this end, that all the earth might worſhip the firſt Beaſt in the ſtate of the cured wound. Then is exponed, how he efſectuateth this great point. To wit, by ſignes and wonders which were permitted him to doe, and thereby to deceiue the earth wherein, he ſeemed to match Moſes and Elias in maſter points. That, whereto by all this deceite, hee induceth the earth and men thereof, is to make vp the image of the Beaſt, which had the deadly wound and liued. Which he worketh ſo luckily, that hee giueth ſpirit and ſpeech to the Image: and obtaineth thereto worſhip of Nations vnder paine of death: and ſubiection to receiue the Beaſt his marke in worke or profeſſion, as his proper good, and: and vnder paine of confiſcation of goods, and interdiction of all humane commerce, that all, of all eſtates, rankes, and conditions, ſhould receiue his marke, or beare his name; or, at leaſt, be accounted of his number: ſo, making vp the whole body and frame of his Kingdome. Which in reſpect of the number of his name, comprehending all the ſorts of his followers, will appeare (to any, who is not indued with heauenly wiſdome to

count it) ſo large, ſo faire, ſo perfectly and proportionably builded and ſtabliſhed, as he will vndoubtedly bee ouercome thereby. And yet, who is wiſe to count it, will find it to be but a man his number and none of God his building. And the number to be counted, is 666.
            4 That theſe beaſts are the ſtate of Rome, all ſound Interpreters agree. But in what time, and of what policy, there is great diſagreement. That which hath bred greateſt difficulty in accommodation, is, becauſe that the two Beaſts heere ſet foorth, are taken of all men to bee diuers, or at leaſt, of diuers time and condition: whereas they are both one. And are heere diſtinctly and diuerſly ſet downe by the ſpirit, onely for cleere explication: as in the deduction ſhall be made plaine. The common opinion, that the firſt Beaſt is the heathen ſtate of Rome vnder perſecuting Emperours, and the ſecond, the Popedome, cannot conſiſt with the cleare notes of this firſt Beaſt, proper to Popedome. The firſt note, is the attire of his heads and hornes. Rome, in the perſecuting Emperours (as they were the miniſters of Satan his open wrath) is noted by ſeuen heads and tenne hornes of the Dragon: but ſo, as the heads onely are crowned. The hornes, that is, the Prouinciall gouernments vnder them, and wherein was their ſtrength, hauing no Crownes: becauſe the roiall and ſoueraigne gouernment, was then onely in the heads of the ſtate, ſo, deſigning the Emperours of that time. But this Beaſt heere, hath his hornes Crowned: to ſhew that the proppes of his power are crowned Kings, as Chapter 17. is exponed plainely, that they are Kings which had not as then receiued a Kingdome. Whereby is manifeſt that the tenne hornes, as they are crowned, were not in Iohn his time: neither this beaſt, as it hath crowned hornes. The beaſt indeed, was before, in the fiue heads who were fallen; he was not in the ſtate heere deſcribed: for he was to riſe out of the bottomleſſe pit: and yet, euen then, he was in the ſtate of the ſixth head; that is, the Caeſars: by curing of whoſe deadly wound, in the Pontificalitie erected,

the Popedome afterward became the liuely image: that is, the ſtate of Rome vnder the Popes a liuely image of the ſtate of Rome before. And therefore, in diſtinct conſideration, The Pontificality, is the eight head of the Beaſt, and yet one of the ſeuen. And whereas the former heads were crowned: now the heads ariſe to a higher preſumption (hauing hornes crowned) to attire themſelues with the name of blaſphemy, 2. Theſſ. 2.
            5 The next note, heere proper to the Popedome, is, that the Dragon hath giuen him his power, throne, and authority. The Dragon in his openrage, vſed Emperours but for the Miniſters of his furie: but the Popes are the Vicars of his power, and therefore, are properlie the Sonne of perdition, King Apollyon, and the Angell of the bottomleſſe pit: whoſe comming is in all effectuall working of Satan. For, albeit the Dragon bequeateth not vtterly his Kingdome, yet finding that his open rage had not the deſteined ſucceſſe, hee ſubſtracteth himſelfe in a ſort, and ſubſtituteth this viceroy of his kingdome, the moſt effectuall promoouer of darkeneſſe that euer was. Satan offered to Chriſt this bargen, but was repulſed: heere, he findeth Math. 4. 8. his Merchant, who accepteth of it, and both himſelfe worſhippeth and maketh all the world to worſhippe the Dragon. That the Popes haue Satan his throne in a peculiar manner, is plaine, by their practiſe and by their challenge. Their practiſe, for that it is not onely (as of all the former heads, or other tyrants whatſoeuer, inſtruments of Satan his rage) to ſubdue to themſelues bodies, goods and ſtates of men, to diſpoſe thereof at their pleaſure: but, hee further will impire ouer the conſcience: and all his adminiſtration, as the proper angell of the bottomleſſe pit, is to plunge men in darkeneſſe. Wherein the Dragon, as almoſt in all things, is an Ape of God his dealing. For, as God hath giuen to Chriſt, his throne and authority, all power in heauen and earth, for conquering a kingdome to him: ſo hath the Dragon giuen all his power to his annointed, Antichriſt, the man of ſinne, for ſetting

forward his kingdome of darkeneſſe. Their challendge alſo argueth this. For, albeit great Monarches, for the largeneſſe of their dominion are ſaid to haue the kingdomes of the earth: and the Romans, to magnifie their Empire, would call it, Imperium orbis terrarum: yet, neuer King or Monarch challenged euer any further right, then either by apparent iuſt title hee might claime, or by Armes he had ſubdued. But the Pope challengeth right ouer all, as whereof hee may diſpoſe at his pleaſure. And that yee may cleerely diſcerne the Dragons mouth, he onely of all men ſince the beginning of the world, ſtoutly affirmeth, All the Kingdomes of the world are mine, and I giue them to whom I will.
            
            6 The third note here put, is the time of his working, 42. mouethes. The very time of Antichriſt his obtaining place in the viſible Church, Chap. 11. of the Temple cloſed, and witneſſes preaching in Sackcloath: and of the womans abode in the wilderneſſe, Chap. 12. An infallible argument that heere Antichriſt is deſcribed.
            7 The fourth note is cleareſt of all. For, as the deſcription of the Beaſt, his heades and hornes, ſheweth him to be the Romane ſtate or Kingdome: ſo, heere a ſpeciall note is giuen whereby to diſcerne of what time, policy, ſtate and condition of Rome, this Beaſt is to bee taken: namely, in the ſtate of the wounded head, cured againe. And, becauſe this, beingſhortly touched might be obſcure: therefore to make it plaine, a ſpeciall viſion is giuen of the curer and manner of the cure, whereby this Beaſt in this ſtate, is made vp: ſo as, if it may not be eſteemed abſolutely the fame which it was before the deadly ſtroke; yet at leaſt it is a liuely image thereof. The Curer, is a Beaſt like the Lambe, and ſimply pretending his power in two hornes like to his: but ſpeaking like the Dragon. Heere, two hones like the Lambes, are not put for any anſwerable number of Kings, but to ſhew a humble and ſimple pretence of the Lambe his power; & not out wardly, of that ferity and ſtrength of the Beaſt, like a Pard, footed like a

Beare, and mouthed like a Lion. For, that to the Lambe Chap. 5. we attributed ſeuen hornes and ſeuen eies, was to ſhew his perfection of power and wiſdome. Heere the Lambe is put according to the naturall verity of ſuch a beaſt, ſo to expreſſe liuely the ſimulate hypocriſie and affectation of ſimple humility in this Beaſt ſo masking himſelfe, while yet vnder this pretence, he but animates againe the beaſt with ſeuen heads and tenne hornes, &c. That ſo vnder himſelfe (the eight head in number and order, and one of the ſeuen, that is the ſixth, by cure of the wounded head) the beaſt that was in the fiue heads fallen before Iohn his daies, and in the ſixth head was euen then in his time, but was not in the condition heere meaned, might ariſe in the owne time out of the bottomeleſſe pit: and deceiuing the world by the cup of fornication, may periſh for euer.
            The meanes how hee worketh this cure, are by deceit of ſignes and wonders, 2. Theſſ. 2. The manner of cure is, that by theſe ſignes and wonders, the world is induced to make vppe the image of the Beaſt which had the deadly wound and liued. And this is nothing elſe, but that the Kings and States of the earth, ſhould ſo ſubmit themſelues to the Popes of Rome, by ſignes and force of the cup of fornication bewitching them, and faining of himſelfe to bee the Lambe his Vicar, whereas hee is the Dragons, as the ſtate of Rome, which in ouerthrow of the Caeſars, had receiued a deadly wound, ſhould riſe to the ſame or greater dignity then it had in the Emperors: and the kingdome thereof, reerected in the pontificality, ſhould bee as it were a liuely and ſpeaking image of the beaſt before it was wounded: and all men ſhould worſhip als farre, or more, the Popes, as they had the Emperours: the Beaſt, that is, the kingdome or ſtate of Rome, becomming in the head cured againe, that is, in the Pontificality, als famous and wonderfull as it was before the wound. And in this reſpect, the Pontificality, is both the eight head, in number and order,

of that kingdome or beaſt, and alſo is one of the ſeuen, as in which the ſixth head is reuiued, or rather the kingdome which in the ſixth head got a deadly wound; according as Chap. 17. the Beaſt hath his denomination from the eight head. For cleare vnderſtanding of all this matter, reade that Chapter. The ſixth head was wounded, when by incurſion of Barbars, many greate and famous Prouinces were taken from the Empire. Yet more deepely, when not onely Italie was trode vnder foot, but Rome it ſelfe was ſpoyled and burnt by Athalaricus; after by Athaulphus and their Gothes: miſerably rifled by Genſericus and his Vandales. The wound yet was more deepe, when Odoacer and his Heruls flew Auguſtulus, and ſeiſed vpon Italie fourteene yeres. But then it became deadly, when the Emperour and Senate, diſpairing to keepe Italie and Rome any more, willingly bequeathed them to Thcodoricus: who thereupon, defeating Odoacer, was receiued in Rome as their lawfull Prince. Where he raigned, by himſelfe and his ſucceſſors Oſtrogothes, in peace and flouriſhing ſtate many yeeres.
            This deadly wound, Iuſtinian afterward by the valor of Beliſare and Narſet, laboured to haue cured, but it auailed not, by new inuaſions the wound ſtill remaining deadly. But the Popes, by ſignes and cup of fornication, bewitching euen all theſe Kings, who had riſen by the fall of the Empire, to ſubmit their crownes to them: and that dignity and glory, which Rome had loſt by fall of the Empire, the Popes recouering the ſame to it by the authority of the Apoſtolike ſeat and keies of Peter: then the image of the Beaſt was ſo made vp, as for liuely reſemblance, it ſeemed to haue ſpirit and ſpeech. Euen in a manner to be the ſame; and ſo getteth worſhip and ſlauiſh ſubiection of the world. For the liuelineſſe of this image, reade the donation of Conſtantine, and Steuchus, in defence of it. His words are theſe.
            
               Euerſo Imperio, niſi Deus Pontificatum reſtituiſſet, futurum

erat vt Roma nullo tempore excitata, ac reſtituta, inhabitabilis poſthaec, faediſſima boum porcorumque futura eſſet habitatio. At, in Pontificatu, etfi non illa veteris Imperij magnitudo, ſpecies certe non longe diſſimilis renata eſt, qua gentes omnes ab ortu & occaſu haud ſecus Romanum Pontificem venerantur, quam omnes Nationes olim Imperatoribus obtemperabant. And thereafter, to ſhew the reſemblance. An non amnia quae Romae quondam profana erant, ſacra effect a ſunt? quemadmodum omnia Templa deorum facta ſunt Eocleſiae ſanctorum, ritus item profani coperunt eſſe ritus ſacri: Nonne Pantheon Templum omnium idolorum, effectum eſt Templum ſanctae virgiris? nonne in Ʋaticano, Templum Apollinis vbi condita erant corpora Apoſtolorum, conuerſum eſt in Eccleſiam ipſorum Apoſtolorum vt ſuperius demonſtratum eſt? totque alia.
            
            This made Proſper to ſay:
            
               Sedes Roma Petri quae paſtoralis honoris Libro de ingratis.
               
               Facta caput mundo, quicquid non poſſidet armis,
               Relligione tenet.—
            
            And, Roma per Sacerdotij Principatum amplior facta eſt 
               Lib. 2. devocatione gentium. cap. 6. 
               arce religionis quam ſolio poteſtatis. But this ſeemeth greatly to withſtand our interpretation, that heere, are put not onely two beaſts but alſo hauing diuers origine: the firſt from the ſea, the ſecond from the earth. Whereby ſome learned men, ſeeing that clearely the Pontificality was meaned in both, were brought to thinke the ſame to be in them, differently expreſſed, as it is to be taken vp in diuers times and conditions in time: and ſo, eſteeme the Popedome to bee both the ſeuenth and eight head, Chap. 17. But as in this (in my iudgement) they haue miſtaken, ſo this difference impoſeth no neceſſity to thinke ſo. For the viſion of the ſecond beaſt is onely brought, for more cleare explication of that laſt note of the Beast 
                  •
               ouching the eure of the woūded head.

In the firſt beaſt the Antichriſt is expreſſed, but ſo as we may take vppe of what kingdome and ſtate hee is head, namely of the kingdome of Rome. And therefore, in the beaſt, that kingdome is ſo painted foorth to vs, as to know it rightly, ſhe hath all her heads attributed to her, which ruled in her from her firſt riſing to her laſt fall: yet ſo, as here, the beaſt is to be conſidered, onely in the condition and ſtate of the laſt head, ariſing by cure of the deadly wound. As to the Dragon, all the heads were attributed (to make cleare what ſtate he wrought by) yet ſo as his rage then, is conſidered onely in the ſixth head. He hauing ſeuen but for diſcerning the kingdome; fiue hauing ere then fallen, and two not as yet riſen. The ſecond beaſt is put onely for cleare explication of the condition, nature, quality, and working, of this laſt head, conſidered a part and by it ſelfe: and how this great worke, of quickning that mortally wounded kingdome or beaſt, is wrought by it, ſo as vnder it, the Beaſtreuiueth: and now, (howſoeuer for diſcerning the kingdome, all the heads be mentioned) commeth only to bee conſidered in that ſtate and reſpect: in which (for great diuerſity from the former condition before the wound yea and before the the cure) this head is in a ſort a different beaſt, as hauing this ſingular in ſhape, that it is like the Lambe: in working, that it doth by ſignes and wonders: in condition, that the beaſt vnder it, is rather an image of the former then the ſame, and yet a liuely image: therefore called the eight head and one of the ſeuen. In which reſpect, but ſeuen heads are attributed to the beaſt, albeit in number there be eight. That the firſt riſeth out of the ſea; and the ſecond out of the earth; it is but to note the different manner of riſing; of the laſt head and ſtate vnder it, from the riſing of the Beaſt in all his former conditions and heades. They both, in their diſtinct manner of riſing, haue this common, that they are from below. For, albeit the earth and ſea, in degree of account with other creatures; as the fountaines, ſunne, moone, ſtarres, Chap. 9. and. 16.

according to the effects wrought in them, and that wherof they in theſe degrees are the types, are to bee taken ſo, as agreeth with the courſe of the myſtery, as in theſe places is declared. Yet when Sea and Earth are ſet in oppoſition to heauen, as heer, and Chapter 10. when the Angell deſcending from heauen for ouerthrow of this beaſt, ſetteth his feet on the ſea and earth, whence in diſtinct conſideration the beaſt ariſeth. And Chapter 12. reioyce O heauens, woe to the Inhabitants of ſea and earth: then things ariſing from ſea and earth muſt bee taken as Chriſt ſpeaketh to the Iewes. Yee are from below, I am from aboue. And euen the foure beaſts in Daniel (whoſe Ioh. 8. 23. whole ferity, cruelty, fraud, and deſtroying power is in this one) whom in the beginning of his ſeuenth Chapter hee ſeeth riſe out of the ſea, are ſaid in that ſame chapter verſe 17. to ariſe out of the earth, as all one thing: except that as the earth ſheweth the origine to be earthly, and from below, ſo the ſea ſheweth their riſing to bee of the troubles, toſſings and alterations of the earth: whoſe commotions are compared to the ſtormy ſea, and according to this to ſhew the peaceable and calme eſtate of the Church vpon vtter deſtruction of this Beaſt, Iſai. 57. 20. it is ſaide Chapter 21. that there was no more ſea. Then, this ſecond Beaſt is ſaid to riſe out of the earth, not onely for that it was from below (for ſo is the whole beaſt firſt & laſt) throught the ſtar falling from the heauen, chap. 9 But becauſe this laſt head (howſoeuer the beaſt or kingdome of Rome conſidered abſolutely riſeth out of the ſea) in the particular conſideration thereof by it ſelfe, and apart, aroſe in a farre different manner from all the former; which all aroſe by great commotions and ſenſible alterations: but this laſt head aroſe ſlily, ſubtlely, and almoſt inſenſibly, by ſlow degrees, as things that grow through the earth; and ſo became head of that Kingdome, which vnder it is the beaſt going to deſtruction. See Steuchus againſt Valla. Paulatim imperare incipiebat religio, habenas imperij caper
                     •
                  , ius ſuum acquirere,

nihil ſubitum, nihil tumultuarium. Where the ſecond beaſt is ſaid to worke before the firſt beaſt, it is not to bee taken for impudent or violent vſurpation, but according to the Phraſe of Scripture; as Iohn Baptiſt 
               Luke 1. 17. to goe before Chriſt. And this is onely for cleareneſſe of explication of him and his manner, who maketh the Image: as trauelling with all ſedulous endeauour by lying ſignes to conciliate authority, honour and ſubmiſſion to that ſtate vnder himſelfe, as head thereof. Neither hereupon muſt wee thinke the ſecond beaſt working to bee an other from him, before whom hee worketh, except ſo farre as the ſpirit, ſo will diſtinguiſh betwixt the Kingdome wholly and abſolutely, and this laſt head peculiarly conſidered, in compariſon to the former, and as after a deadly wound hee quickneth ſo that ſtate again as hee procureth to it worſhip of Nations. In one word, the firſt beaſt is the Kingdom of Rome vnder the Pontificality: the ſecond beaſt is the Pontificality, wonderfully quickning the wounded beaſt, to that eſtate: therfore Chapter 17 but one beaſt, euen this firſt, is put and called the eighth head: ſo euidently telling vs that both are one and the ſame, except in conſideration as I haue ſaid. According to this it is, that hereafter the beaſt is diſtinguiſhed from the falſe Prophet, not that they are two, as many fondly imagine: but onely to take vp ſo the State and Kingdome, as the falſe Prophet is heade therof, & ſo the falſe Prophet as he is head of that ſtate. See vpon Chapter 17. Sect. 11. 18. and 19. Sect. 27. Theſe two beaſts, then are to expreſſe one and the ſame ſtate (euen Antichriſt in his Kingdome, and in himſelfe head thereof) both for condition and time. For from the Pope his firſt degree of riſing, hee neuer got any ſuch croſſing, as for which it might bee ſaid of him, that hee ſhould abide a ſhort ſpace, Chapter 17. For euen in the moſt miſerable times of Rome by the Gothes, hee not onely retained his old got account, but was ſtill labouring to aduance the credite of his Chaire: as his ſupercilious

dealings in theſe ſelfe times, with forrain Churches ſufficiently proueth. And whatſoeuer hinderance bee had by Gothik tiranny from riſing to the height hee after attained to, it is too weake a ground to ſay of him, that hee abode a ſhort ſpace: thus to make him both the ſeuenth and eight head, againſt cleare Text, which maketh the ſeuenth to bee ſoone gone, and if ſuch had beene the meaning of the holy Ghoſt, he might much both clearelier and eaſier haue called him the eight and ſeuenth, then the eight and one of the ſeuen: thus clearely implying which of the ſeuen hee meaned: to wit, that whoſe deadly wound, by his ariſing hee cu
                  •
               ed, and made vppe; thus ſo liuely an Image of the beaſt, as hee may iuſtly therefore be counted one and the ſame with it: that is with the ſixth: whome for glory, account, worſhip of Nations, and Monarchike ſtate hee reſembleth liuely, and the Kingdome vnder him, the Kingdome then. The miſtaking of the ſeuenth head maketh all the errour, and in ſuch light of Storie, agreeing fitly with this Propheſie, it is wonder that all ſhould haue erred. This is certaine that Caeſars are the ſixth head that which then was, and before which fiue (Kings, Conſuls, Dictators, Decemuirs, Corn. Ta
                     •
                  it. l. 1 and Tribunes) had fallen. And ſeeing that in the fall of Caeſars that ſtate receiued a deadly wound, the curing whereof maketh the beaſt here, and Chapter 17. the eight and one of the ſeuen; out of all doubt, the head riſing by the wound muſt bee the ſeuenth, as the Pontificality riſing by the cure thereof, is the eight and ſixt in a ſort. The ſeuenth head then of Rome was, Theodoricus, the Oſtrogothe, and his Succeſſors, who were not yet come, and when they came, abode but a ſhort ſpace. For their kingdome endured not aboue 70. yeeres, or thereby from Theodoricus beginning to Teias his fall. The inuaders before him were but riflers, none ſetling there a Dominion. Odoacer, who onely of them all aimed at it, yet was neuer fully and ſolemnly acknowledged. But Theodoricus pleaded for his right, which by

the Emperour his conſent, and decree of Senate, was bequeathed to him, and whom accordingly the Romans receiued for their lawfull Prince, as before I touched. The Emperour Zeno, Theodoricum ſacro texit velamine in Signum rei ab imperio couceſſae ſaith Sabellicus, Enn. 8 2. And as hauing in nothing wronged the Empire, hee raigned peaceably ouer Rome, and all Italy, Sicilie, Sardinia, Illirium, Dalmatia, Narbone and Pannonia many yeeres; all which time he had both peace & friendſhippe with the Emperours of the Eaſt, Zeno, Anaſtaſius and Iuſtinus.
            
            This beaſt then is the great Antichriſt, working forty two monethes, in the holy City and Court of the Temple, and treading down all true worſhippe therein: who is the eighth and laſt head of the Kingdome of Rome, or the Kingdom of Rome vnder the laſt head, and in whom, and with whom it ſhall haue an eternall ruine. His quality, forme and origine is by alluſion to the foure Kingdomes troublers of Iſrael, as I ſhewed Chapter 12. typically expreſſed Dan. 7. by foure beaſts, a Lyon, a Beare, a Leopard, and a beſt with tenne hornes. This beaſt hath a note from each, as in whom all is compacted, what ſoeuer was miſchieuous in them all: to expreſſe the height of impiety, now come to the full, euen the man of ſinne. Men falling from piety and righteouſneſſe are beaſts; and moſt of all Tyrants ſet ouer great States, as hauing moſt liberty, and leaſt reſtraint from wickedneſſe. A man in honour if hee vnderſtand not, is like to the beaſtes that 
               Pſal. 49. 
                     •
                  0. 
               periſh.
            
            8 As for the number of hornes attributed to this ſtate of Rome, both in the Dragon, and now in this beaſt, albeit ſom thing may bee ſaid probably and pretily both for the firſt ſtate, out of Strabo his laſt booke of Geographes. And for this laſt out of Steuchus, making neer this ſame count, as by ſome learned enterpreters hath been noted; yet according as I can take vp the manner of all this Propheſie, I acquieſce in this, that this number

is indefinitely put, by alluſion to Daniel 7. wherein, yet what ſingular difference is betwixt the hornes here of Chap. 17. Sect 22. this beaſt, and of that beaſt in Daniel. See more Chapter 17. They ſhew the great power of this beaſt, and ſo much greater, as theſe hornes are not Kings in ſucceſſion, but all raigning together, as receiuing a Kingdom at one houre with the beaſt.
            
            9 Wee haue yet to cleare one point, of all men widely miſtaken, wherin yet the holy Ghoſt placeth wiſdom. The counting of the number of the beaſt his name The moſt receiued opinion hereof, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , is ſo childiſh an Egypticall toy, as I maruell much how euer any ſolide minde could propound it for a rare point of diuine wiſdome: the other opinions that I haue heard or ſeene, are in my opinion little or nothing more ſolide. The words miſtaken haue led men infinitely aſide, while they ſeeke what different things are the Character, the name & the number; and becauſe it is called the number of the name of the beaſt, and the number of a man, ſeeking to finde it in his name, they ſo to finde it out, giue to him thereupon a man his name, which neither Scripture giueth him, neither hee taketh to himſelfe, and then forſooth, to find out this deepe wiſdome of the holy Ghoſt, they will picke out of the letters of that name, which themſelues haue forged this number 666. But why doe they not labour as much to find in the letters of this name his Character, as his number? ſeeing the Character, is the Character of the name, als well as the number is the number of the name, as is euident Chapter 14. 11. Neither ſayeth the Text here, that the Beaſt his name is a man his name: but the number of his name is a man his number. But thus it is; All that follow Antichriſt haue his name; but in diuers manner. Some haue the Character thereof, that is, the name imprinted, and are his proper good, as hauing his burne-yron and marke, a familiar Phraſe from the manner of men. Some haue his name, yet ſo as they haue not his Marke: who haue not

learned the deepeneſſe of Sathan, neither are Antichriſts ſworne bondmen. And yet, ſome haue but the number of his name: that is, are ſo farre from being his ſworne and marked ſlaues, as they are no otherwiſe his, but in ſo farre as they are counted to bee ſo, and numbred amongſt Chriſtians muſt be called Catholike Romans. his. For he is ſuch a tyrant as will haue all men in one of theſe ſorts: and becauſe within theſe, who haue the number of his name, both the former ſorts are comprehended: the number of his name ſheweth the whole body and frame of his Kingdome. For albeit many haue his name, and moe haue his number, which haue not his Charecter: yet all that haue either Character or name, are of his number. The man then to whom God giueth wiſdome to count his number, that is, the whole frame and building of that Antichriſtian Kingdome: by counting of it ſhall finde it but the number of man, and none of God his building. As God numbred and weighed Baltaſar King of Babell, and found him light. Now Dan. 5. 26. 27 here is wiſdome indeed, which to finde out, the Lord hath left to vs in this propheſie not obſcure traces, as he ordinarily in Scripture doth, of things obſcurely deliuered. The very next words in the beginning of the 14. Chapter being rightly marked, will ridde all the way. In them wee haue the Lambe ſet againſt the Beaſt, his Character againſt his, a name againſt the Beaſt his name, and a number againſt the Beaſt his number. The Character of the Lambe his followers, is the Seale of God: whereof Chapter 7. The name which they haue is the name of the Lambe his father, and the number characterized with this name, is 144000. which number herefore, may wel bee called the number of the name of God, or God his number, as 666. is called of the name of the beaſt, or the Beaſt his number. Now theſe numbers are not ſet down for the exact count of perſons followers of Chriſt or Antichriſt: but are taken of the holy Ghoſt, as fit numbers in conſideration both of their building and figure, to expreſſe the different condition, frame & building of theſe

two ſo oppoſite bodies, that is, the true Church and body of the Lambe, and the falſe Church and body of Antichriſt. This notable difference, alwayes is to bee aduerted, that the Lambe his number, all of them haue his Character, for they are ſealed with his fathers name in their fore-heades: (for here the true Church, and true members thereof are meaned) but in the beaſt his number are many that haue not his name, and much leſſe his Character. Wherefore in the 14. Chapter, and 9. verſe thereof, and euery where hence throughout this Propheſie, eternall fire is denounced onely againſt his worſhippers, and the receiuers of his character. See vpon that place Sect. 8. That the Lambe his number is 144000. and the beaſt his but 666. It is for great purpoſe. For, as it was needful in the number of the true Church (which now in Antichriſt his wide dominion appeared to bee ſmall, or none at all) that to a hundreth forty foure ſhould bee ioyned thouſands, to ſhew a competent number, and of God his building, euen when Antichriſt appeared to brooke all: ſo to the Antichriſt his number, where no doubt is of multitude, all the earth following him, it was not meet that thouſands ſhold haue bin added. That thus wee might the better take vp, how theſe numbers are not ſo much put to expreſſe the difference in number of theſe two bodies (which if thouſands had beene added to 666. would haue beene all we could euer haue ſcanned therof) as to note the difference in condition, frame and building. That is, that the one is the number of God his building and frame: the other, but the number of a man. That is, a building and body, howſoeuer in all outward appearance more belliſant and greater then the firſt, yet but of a man his inuention. For the myſtery is in theſe two numbers 144. and 666. whether of vnities, hundrethes, thouſands or millions. Vpon which, a man looking, who is not furniſhed with wiſdome from aboue to count the numbers; hee will much more admire, and bee taken with the Beaſt his number, as larger

a great deale, and better compacted in all the parts of it, each anſwering and ſo ſitly agreeing together, as it runneth all on ſixe, in vnities, tennes and hundreds: and ariſeth of ſixe, the firſt perfect number, multiplied by tenne, and in ſo farre proportion of parts, as, ſixe is tenne times in ſixty, and ſixtie, tenne times in ſixe hundred. Againſt which to ſet 144. without wiſdome to count, a man ſhall thinke there is no compariſon. Heereby the ſpirit will teach vs, that an vnwiſe man, and not skilfull in diuine wiſdome to count, looking on the bodie, building and frame of Antichriſt his Church, ſhall be ſo taken with the goodly appearance thereof, as he ſhall thinke it to bee the onely true Church: but a wiſe man, able to count the number, ſhall finde it but the number of a man, and none of God his building. And, this is that which Chapter fifteene is called, to ouercome the number of the Beaſt his name. For, who cannot count, will bee ouercome by it. Now the onely way to count it rightly, is, firſt to count the number of God his name, and thereby, examining the other, to finde it neither in building nor frame agreeable. That we might finde out this wiſdome, the ſpirit exactly counted this number 144. Chapter 7. And heere againe in fit place, recordeth it, for taking vp the myſtery. In that 7. Chapter this number expreſſing the body of the true Church in Antichriſt his vſurpation, is ſaid to be of all the Tribes of Iſrael: not in propriety of ſpeech, as their was ſhewed. Next, is declared at length how the number is made vp: namely by twelue thouſand of euery Tribe: which Tribes, are at length, numbred for ſpeciall purpoſe, to hold the number of twelue: which number, albeit in effect, there were thirteene, yet in all records both of old and new Teſtament is keeped. So, as Moſes, that no moe ſhould be counted but 12. left out Simeon, as then, for the murther of the Sichemits, bearing greateſt blot: which Deut. 33. 
               Leuie had lately before purged, by ſanctifyng his ſword to God his honour: for which, in that record, he is highlie commended. In the Chronicles, Dan is omitted, for Deut. 33. 8.
               
his race is not reckoned, in deteſtation of his firſt erecting publike Idolatry. For which reaſon alſo in the 7. Chapter Iudg. 17. & 18 he is left out. Not that in propriety wee haue to thinke that Tribe to be more then others reiected; but to ſhew, that the ſealed ones are noe Idolaters, but all ſpiritual Virgines, Chap 14. 4. Where in Scripture none are omitted, then Ephraim and Manaſſe come, iointly, vnder the name of their Father Ioſeph, as Geneſ. 49. Ezech. 47. Now, 1. Chro. 22. as theſe twelue are the Fathers of Iſrael according to the fleſh: ſo as none were counted Iſraelites but who could reduce his Genealogy to one of theſe twelue: ſo, Chriſt, accordingly chooſed twelue Apoſtles to bee the twelue ſpirituall fathers of his Church (the Iſrael of God) vpon whoſe foundation hee would haue it builded: ſo, as whoſoeuer is not builded on their Doctrine, holding the foundation, and all the building ariſing proportionably thereto, Epheſ. 2. 20. the ſame is not of the new Ieruſalem from heauen, Cha. 21. which hath twelue foundations, & on them the names of the Lambe his twelue Apoſtles: twelue portes, and on them written the names of the twelue Tribes of Iſrael. Which, in all dimenſions, was twelue times twelue thouſand, that is, 144000. furlongs (for ſo the place ought to be read) the Angels conductours twelue, and the wall Chapt. 21. ſection 16. in thickneſſe twelue times twelue, euen 144. cubits. In this number, to eſpie the wiſdome, are to bee conſidered the building, and the figure. The building, is by twelue vpon twelue; to ſhew, that the true Church is builded, ſo, on the true foundation of Apoſtolike doctrine, as it holdeth ſtill the foundation, nothing being built thereon, but agreeable thereto: as this number is no waies multiplied but by twelue vpon twelue, the multiplier and multiplied being but one. The figure of this number is foureſquare, and of equall ſides, and whoſe ſides all conſiſt of twelues. For, as it is onely builded by multiplication of 12. with 12. ſo can it neither bee halfed nor quartered but in twelues: and hath in euery ſquare three twelues. According to the figure of the new Ieruſalem, Chapter 21. hauing in each

ſquare three ports, and on them the names of three Tribes, wherof each hauing twelue thouſand, make vp in length, height, and breadth the new Ieruſalem, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                144000. The Campe of Iſrael, Numb. 2. is agreeable heereto. All to ſhew, that the true Church both in ſtructure and figure holdeth euer the foundation.
            10 Now heereby, let vs count, number and weigh Baltaſar and finde him light. This number 666. for als Dan. 5. faire as it ſheweth, can neuer be builded vpon twelue, by twelue. Yea, which is more, take what multiplier thou wilt, thou ſhalt neuer raiſe it vpon twelue. It cannot bee deuided nor quartered in twelues: and, poſſibly thou ſhalt neuer reduce it to equal ſides. So as it neither riſeth on the foundation, much leſſe keepeth it: neither in frame or figure, is it any way like to the New Ieruſalem. In ſumme, heere is wiſdome, by true rule of Apoſtolike doctrine (the reed giuen Iohn Chap. 11,) to meaſure, count, weigh, and examine, the whole frame, doctrine, building and body of the Antichriſtian Church: and ſo, how faire a ſhew ſoeuer it hath to deceiue fooles, yet, by true wiſdome, to finde it all but the worke of a Man. The very conſcience whereof maketh them flee ſo much this rule of examination. But the holie Ghoſt telleth vs what is wiſdome.
            11 That this number 666. is chooſed rather then any other number, where others may bee found hauing the defect obſerued in it, to repreſent the ſtate and condition of Antichriſt his body: beſides the fear perfection of the number before touched, and euen of the Romans themſelues highly eſteemed (Boniface 8. praefat. in ſextum Decretal.) The ſpeciall purpoſe heere of the holy Ghoſt, is to allude (according to his manner) to the fourth Chapter of Daniel. Where, by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel an Image is erected, which vnder paine of death, hee will haue all peoples, Nations and tongues to fall downe and worſhip. Which Image had of breadth 6. cubits, and of height 60. Thence hither the alluſion is brought from Babel and her King properly, to ſpirituall Babel and

her King: from that Image of the firſt Babel, to this myſticall image of myſticall Babell, which, all vnder paine of being killed, &c. muſt worſhip. Yet to ſhew the greatneſſe and prerogatiue of this image, much exceeding that of Nabuchadnezzars, in bigneſſe, glory, and worſhip of Nations: and ſpecially to keepe the analogy againſt the other number 144. as that of Nabuchadnezzar had ſix and tenne times ſixe to make ſixty: ſo this, hath tenne times 60. to make 666 in all.
         
         
            CHAP. XIIII.
            
               IN the 12. Chapter was the Dragon, and eſtate of the Church in his open rage, againſt her and her firſt ſeed. In the 13 is the Beaſt of his authority, the Antichriſt, and his ſtrange ſucceſſe by hypocriſie. Now, in this Chapter, is the eſtate of the Church and her other ſeed of ſucceeding times: firſt, lurking and hid vnder Antichirſt, to the ſixth verſe: next, breaking out, and wreſtling with him, in m
                  •
               ch ſuffering, to the 14. verſe: and laſtly, in his ouerthow, victorious, to the end.
            2 In the firſt of theſe three caſes, the Church her ſtate is deſcribed. Firſt, from her Head and Captaine, the Lambe: her place, Mount Sion, the true habitation of God, and place where his honour dwelleth, euen the mountaine vnmouable amongſt mountaines: her number, 144000. Whereof, in the end of the laſt Chap their badge and marke, euen their adoption, to haue the Lambe his Father, whereto they are ſealed by the holy ſpirit of promiſe, w
                  •
               th heart beleeuing, and mouth confeſſing, verſ. Rom. 10. 9. 1. Next, the heauenly diſpenſation of grace toward this his fellowſhip, is noted, according to the three degrees of operation, which the word of God hath in the hearts of his own: which are expreſſed by a threefold compariſon.

               The ſound of many waters, the noiſe of great thunders, and ſound of harpes harping, verſe 2. Thirdly, their worſhip returned to God is ſingular: in ſpirituall ioy, knowen and approued of him, and performed in the vnity and fellowſhip of his true Church (through the miniſterie of the word made vnto him a royall Prieſthood) in the midſt whereof, hee alwaies ſitteth King and Lord: which Church, as it remained vnknowen to the world, the time of Antichriſt his abſolute preuailing; ſo their worſhip was perceptible to none but theſe ſecret ſealed ones, whom God of his ſpeciall grace, had bought with his owne bloud, out of the world, verſe 3. to bee a holy and chaſte ſpouſe to himſelfe (for none are ſealed of Dan, Chap. 7.) by true faith, cleauing onely and alwaies to the Lambe, and following none other: keeping the liberty whereto God had made them free, and not ſeruing men: ſingled from the world to be a peculiar people, Gal. 5. 1. holy vnto God and Chriſt Ieſus, verſe 4. euen true Iſraelites like Nathaniel, and in Chriſt and his righteouſneſſe accepted and approued of God, verſe 6. This is the ſtate of the Church, cloſed in the Temple, Iohn 1. 47. Chapter 11. Lurking in the wilderneſſe, Chapt. 12. And heere ſtabliſhed on mount Sion, while all the world follow the Beaſt.
            3 Now, to cleare the threefold compariſon put ver. 2. The voice of the Lord is compared to many waters, for the vnreſiſtable force, and admirable noiſe, breeding wonder: to thunder, for terror and power ſhaking all: to the douce ſound of harpes, for the worke of peace and ioy in the conſcience. By which three, is ſignified, that as the Church, lurking in time of Antichriſt his abſolute preuailing, had the preſence of the Lambe: ſo, howſoeuer vnſeene of the world, ſhe had alſo plentifull diſpenſation of ſpirituall graces from heauen. Which the ſpirit heere expreſſeth by theſe three, according to the three degrees of operation, which the word of God hath in the hearts of men. For, firſt it falleth

to mens eares, as the ſound of many waters, a mighty, great, but a confuſed ſound, and which commonly, bringeth neither terrour nor ioy, but yet a wondering and acknowledgement of a ſtrange force, and more then humane power. This is that effect which many Mar. 1. 22 27. Luke 4. 32. Ioh. 7. 46. felt, hearing Chriſt, when they were aſtonied at his doctrine, as teaching with authority. What manner doctrine is this? neuer man ſpake like this man. This effect falleth euen to the reprobate, which wonder and vaniſh, Habak. 1. 5. Acts 13. 41. and whoſe hearts are conuinced, hearing the word, that it hath more then humane force, euen like the noiſe of many waters. But, as the firſt hearing of the roare of waters is moſt admirable, and the more one is acquainted therewith, the leſſe hee heareth it, as Cicero. in ſomnio Scipionis. theſe at the Catadupes of Nilus: ſo, in whom the word worketh but this firſt effect, his eares waxe duller and duller, as daily experience proueth. The next effect, is the voice of thunder. Which bringeth not only wonder but feare alſo: not only filleth the eares with ſound, and the heart with aſtoniſhment, but moreouer ſhaketh and terrifieth the conſcience. And this ſecond effect may alſo befall a reprobate, as Felix Act. 24. The third effect, is proper to the elect: the ſound of harping; while the word not onely rauiſheth with admiration, and ſtriketh the conſcience with terror; but alſo, laſtly, filleth it with that ſweete peace and ioy, which none feele, but they whoſe hearts thereupon, againe, as well ſounding harpes, are tuned vp to ſing a new ſong vnto God. And, albeit the firſt two degrees may be without the laſt, yet none feele the laſt, who haue not in ſome degree, felt both the firſt two. For the voice of the Lord is mighty, the voice of the Lord is glorious; it breaketh the Cedars, and maketh the wilderneſſe to tremble: But in his Temple only men ſpeake of his glory, Pſalm. 29. This gracious diſpenſation (incredible and vnſeene to the world, which could not therefore learne the ſong of praiſe thereupon) was in the 11. Chap. expreſſed by two witneſſes,

which for diſpenſing grace and light, were two oliue Trees, and two Candleſtickes in the Temple, while it ſeemed impoſſible that any ſuch could bee, Antichriſt brooking City and Court: and for force and power, fire went out at their mouths, and they did ſtrike the earth with all manner of plagues. Now theſe compariſons of the voice of waters, thunder, and harping, as they expreſſe fitly what I haue told ſo, in them is implyed a ſure prognoſtick and argument of the next inſuing eſtate, in the Angels breaking forth and crying. For albeit, this ſound of water, thunder, and harping, the world, in this lurking condition of the Church, perceiued not, yet they could not ſtill remaine vnheard. Who can reſtraine the breach of great waters? what congealed cloude can keepe in thunder? and, exceſſiue ioy, a heart, of any thing, can leaſt hold vp. Forth therefore, this hid Church behoued to come. The bellies made bitter, with eating the little booke, behoued to burſt or breake out: according as we ſee in the three Angels following, who come forth like the ſwelling of Iorden, like ſonnes of thunder (according as Chriſt Chapt. 10. preparing for this outbreake, his roaring voice, was ſeconded with ſeuen thunders) and like the burſting out of a blythe heart, which cannot hold vp a ſurfet of ioy.
            4 This ſecond condition, of the Church breaking forth, hath the velitation or skirmiſh, and a coincident caſe with it. The velitation (I call it ſo, in compariſon to the great battell in the ſeuenth trumpet and ſeuen vials thereof, ſummarily proponed in the end of this Chap. and exponed largely thenceforth) according to the firſt degrees of the light of the Goſpell reuiuing, is ſet downe in three Angels; types of theſe Miniſters whom God ſtirred vp, to bee the firſt open conteſters with Antichriſt to the 12. verſe. The coincident caſe, is in the 12. and 13. verſes.
            5 The firſt ranke of Preachers are expreſſed by an

Angel fleeing thorow the mids of heauen, &c. for open and ſwift courſe, which notwithſtanding, was yet farre remoued aboue the perception of men of the earth, whereof few vnderſtood or imbraced the firſt warnings and light arriſing, it being but yet obſcurely preached: like as few vnderſtood the warning of Antichriſtian darkneſſe comming on, Chap. 8. and in reſpect of that Angel there, it is, that this, is called an other Angel, as who is the next, vſing his forme. See a contrarie diſpenſation to this, which cleareth this ſenſe, Chap. 18. His doctrine is ſet downe firſt in generall, and to whom he preached: and ſecondly, the ſpeciall points thereof. In generall, it is an euerlaſting Goſpell: euen that truth which was from the beginning, and which, when heauen and earth paſſeth away, ſhall abide for euer: the immortall ſeede, Math. 24. 35. 1. Pet. 1. 23. and begetting to immortality. So it is called, againſt the calumnies of nouelty, and in oppoſition to the doctrine of men. Hee preacheth to them who dwell on the earth, euen in Antichriſt his darkeneſſe: aboue whoſe reach, it is leſſe maruell that this firſt light was yet farre remoued; as a fleeing flaſh thorow the mids of heauen. He preacheth to all Nations, Kinreds, Tongues and Peoples, who had worſhipped the Beaſt; and of whom, by reſtored light of the Goſpell, an infinite number was now to be brought out of great tribulation, to ſing, with Palmes in hand, and hauing waſhed their garments in the bloud of the Lambe; Saluation is of our God and of the Lambe; and to be made partakers of the firſt reſurrection, the thouſand yeeres being expired, Chap. 20. Chap. 7. Now the hid ones beginne to breake out, and the ſong vnheard, to bee tuned vp loudlie in the eares of all the earth: therefore, this Angel is ſaid to cry loude. In his ſpeciall doctrine, is the ſubſtance thereof, and his manner of teaching. The ſubſtance is, that all feare, glory, and worſhip, bee giuen to God onely, and that, both for auoiding his iudgements neere to bee executed, and becauſe he is creator of all things. A doctrine exceeding

fite for that time. His manner is to bee marked: in that hee vrgeth onely true worſhippe, not bold yet to challenge directly the Antichriſt, as the ſucceeding Angell doth roundly; but more the third, ſo wiſely and plainely as the Spirit ſheweth the courſe: and the accommodation of Story is euident. Now as this was the firſt degree of the conflict with Antichriſt; ſo accordingly in the ſong of victory, God is praiſed for theſe ſame points, Chapter 15. 3.
            6 The ſecond Angell roundly denounceth the fall of Rome that ſpirituall Babell, Sodome and Egypt, and that becauſe ſhee had not onely beene an Idolatreſſe her ſelfe, but as Ieroboam made Iſrael to ſinne, ſhee is the mother of Whoredomes through the world, making men drinke vp ſuperſtitious worſhippe greedily as wine, and ſo to be beſotted therewith. To the which, God both gaue ouer the world iuſtly in his wrath, that they who would not beleeue the truth, ſhould be taken with deceiueable illuſions, and for which, now againe the world iuſtly feeleth 2 Theſ. 2. 10. 11. the cuppes of the laſt wrath. As hee gaue to Iſrael Kings in his wrath, and tooke them away in his diſpleaſure. Oſe. 13. 11.
            
            7 The third Angell yet more vehemently toucheth neerer. Warning all to leaue the Beaſt his worſhippe and character either in worke or profeſſion, vnder paine of eternall damnation. Wherein, they againſt whome the iudgement is denounced, are exactlie noted, and twiſe ſet downe in the beginning, and in the end of the denunciation, for ſpeciall purpoſe, and the quality, durance and continuance of their iudgement expreſſed. In the quality of iudgement, are two. Firſt, as they dranke greedily the Whores Wine, ſo get they to drinke the pure vnmixed wine of God his wrath: and next, they get it in the cup of his wrath: God ſometimes giueth a bitter cuppe to his owne children: but as ſtrong wine for mitigation, is tempered with water or ſugar: ſo are all God his chaſticements to his owne mixed with mercy: but to the

wicked is powred out mercileſſe iudgement. Next, the Cuppe propined to the Saints, is not the Cup of wrath, but of loue, and medicinall: but the wicked drinke out of the cuppe of wrath. Lord reproue mee not in thy wrath, Pſal. 6.
            8 Now, this iudgement is denounced againſt ſuch as worſhippe the Beaſt, and receiue his Character, &c. And they are twice repeated, as I haue ſaid, wherein is no Tautologie, but diuine wiſdome, for to make vs take vp a great point. In the 13. Chapter, all the Beaſt his followers haue his Character, or his name, or his number: whereof, as I ſhewed there, the difference is ill obſerued. For many haue his name, and are content to be called his, being ſo farre deceiued with his ſhew, as yet they receiue neuer his Character, as his mancipate ſlaues. And yet, moe haue the number of his name, that is, are counted and numbred to bee of his body, who yet in effect neither haue his name nor his Character. This hath deceiued men, that they haue imagined the Character to be ſome other thing then of his name. But as is cleare by this place, his Character is of his name, and they receiue his Character; who ſo haue his name, as they are characterized therewith, and vpon his marke. A ſpeech Liers and murtherers like their father the diuel. from common vſe. Hereof it is, that in Mount Sion all haue the Character, that is, all who are of the true Church elected according to the purpoſe of grace. But as in the viſible Church many haue the name of God, & moe haue the number, that is, are accounted Chriſtians, who yet are not of the number ſealed: ſo in Antichriſt his Church, are many hauing his name, and moe hauing his number, and ſo are tolerated to haue commerce and trade with men, who yet neuer receiued his Character. Therefore it is, that the iudgement is denounced onely againſt thoſe who worſhippe him and receiue his Character: and accordingly the Vials of wrath, Chapter 16. are powred onely vpon theſe. Who are here twiſe repeated, that wee may bee wakened to aduert; how here

the holy Ghoſt teacheth vs, not to iudge ſo hardly of all that follow the Beaſt, as that eternall damnation abideth them; but onely ſuch as haue receiued his Character. For no queſtion, but many haue beene, and are ſtill named his, and counted of his number, who learned Chap. 2. 24. neuer the deepeneſſe of Sathan: as ſimple ſheepe fallen into that ſlocke of his, becauſe they ſaw there the publike Enſigne, and the Lambe his horns in ſemblance; becauſe hee brooked the holy City, and Court of the Temple. Euen like theſe two hundreth, who in ſimplicity of heart followed Abſolom from Ieruſalem, knowing nothing of his treaſon. For we muſt conſider what 2 Sam. 5. 11. ſort of enemy Antichriſt is. That hee is no fortaine inuader, but an inward Traitor. None directly fighting againſt the name and Enſigne of Chriſt, but by pretence of the name and Enſigne deceiuing. And ſitting euen in the Temple of God, as if a hid Traitor, pretending the King his Maſters ſeruice and commiſſion, would ſummon all true Subiects to follow him, while hee were but minding vſurpation: euen good Subiects might bee thus far deceiued as to follow the publike Enſigne, till the treaſon were detected. Further conſider, that the true Church in Antichriſt his greateſt preuailing, was alwaies within his compaſſe, within which, all were euer accounted to bee his owne, but yet were not. As within the compaſſe of the holy City, and Court of the Temple, were the Temple and witneſſes in it, Chapter 11. beſides, as no way could bee to the Temple, but through the City and Court: ſo no way euer was or ſhall bee to become a member of the true Church, but by comming through the viſible Church, wherein Antichriſt fortie two moneths working and obtaining without controlment: all behoued to ioyne to that body where was the Enſigne, and ſeek in through the City and Court to com to the Temple. Now, no maruell, though many in the paſſing through were taken in admiration of the City & Court before they got ſight of the Temple. And the prouidence

of God was wonderfull in this, that in greateſt corruption he reſerued alwayes a ſure way through Antichriſt to the Temple, the Sacrament of Baptiſme in ſubſtance remaining, and the doctrine of the Trinity abiding ſound. So thus all comming through him, had his name or his nūber, of whom yet many neuer receiued his Character, but eſpying the pollution of City and Court, ſtepped into the Temple. Where ſtill, though quietly, God preſerued two Candleſtickes and two Oliues; till at length his impiety came to that height by murthering the Saints, that it was ſaid to them, Come vp hither, and ſo a viſible ſeparation was made, not from the Church, Chap. 11. but from the thiefe and Traitor in the Church, his mouth bewraying it ſelfe to bee the Dragons. And certainely, this holdeth true, (ſo as we neede not ſo much iangle with the Romans thereabout) that the Church hath and euer ſhall bee viſible, becauſe alwayes the common Enſigne is ſeene. But this Enſigne the Traitor craftily tooke vpon him to beare, and thereby deceiued. Here is the fallacy, that by aequiuocation they conclude, if the Church hath alway beene viſible, then are wee the true Church. Here more is added. For albeit the church be alwayes viſible, yet the truth and true profeſſors in it are not alwayes ſo. For the witneſſes were cloſed in the Temple, the woman lurked in the wilderneſſe, and the ſealed ones were, albeit ſinging, yet vnſeene and vnheard vpon Mount Sion. Three diſtinct ſpeeches vſed of the Spirit for great purpoſe. The firſt, to ſhew that howſoeuer the true Church was hid, yet where ſhee was, to witte, within the compaſſe of the viſible where Antichriſt ruled, and where Sathan his throne was. The ſecond, to ſhew that albeit ſhee lurked, yet ſhe was fed, as was Iſrael in the wilderneſſe, and Elias in the dayes of famine. The third, that in that great preuailing of Antichriſt, when all the earth followed the Beaſt, yet ſhe was ſtabliſhed on Mount Sion: ſo as againſt her the gates of hell could not preuaile. The true Church is in

ſome ſort euer vlſible, though not in her ſelfe, yet in her infallible Enſignes, as who ſeeth the Citie and Court, hee ſeeth in a ſort the Temple, becauſe albeit hee ſee it not diſtinctlie, yet ſeeing the City and Court, hee is certaine that the Temple is there. So ſeeing the viſible Church, within whoſe compaſſe, though no eye ſee them: yet God hath his true worſhippers, one ſeeth alſo the true Church. For within the Church are truth and lies, Chriſt and Antichriſt, and either of them now and then obtaine in it, and hold place communiter in toto, but neuer vniuerſaliter in ſingulis. From the Apoſtolike times, as witneſſe Paul and Iohn, Antichriſt was in 2 Theſ. 2. 7. 1 Ioh, 4. 3. the Church, but hee appeared not ſome ages after, In his time hee riſeth and obtaineth all the holy City, and Court of the Temple, erecteth a throne in Pergamus, and domineth as Iezabel in I hyatira. Truth is hid, and true Profeſſors, till the noiſe of many waters, the voyce of thunder, and ſound of well tuned Harpes, breake out of Sion and the Temple, and the woman returne from the wilderneſſe. It is a great Sophiſme to conclude from the Church viſible to the Church abſolutely, or true Church: or againe, from theſe to that: or to reaſon a toto communiter, ad vniuerſum ſingulariter. Albeit Antichriſt was commonlie acknowledged of all, yet neuer vniuerſally of each one. For he neuer ſet his foot in the Temple, nor vpon Mount Sion. The Romans preſſe ſore vpon vs, to ſhew who in former ages haue been of our Religion, and our men but buſie themſelues more then is needfull, the holy Ghoſt hauing ſo plainely foretolde the caſe. And how common doe wee ſee in our daylie experience of particular Churches, that things will by cuſtome or tyranny ſo obtaine, as none are found to reſiſt, while yet in the meane time great numbers not only diſallow, but euen hold themſelues pure there from? Here, who would aske the ſucceeding age, what had beene the eſtate then: hee could find nothing, but that all had erred; becauſe the common Records beare but

what obtained in the time: no Record remaining of theſe, who, though for feare they durſt not conteſt, yet miſliked and mourned for the iniquity. And if perhaps, they did vtter any thing which to the poſterity might haue carried teſtimony of their mind; the ſame being ſmothered by them who violently poſſeſſed and diſpoſed of all: I haue no doubt, but in euery age, euen in the greateſt height of darkeneſſe, diuers haue not onely been enemies thereof, & both children and miniſters of light: but euen haue beene in their time knowne to the godly then. Albeit to enquire the ſucceeding ages of their ſtory, it is ridiculous, and wee but faſhe our ſelues vnneceſſarily to haile therein the cord of contention with the aduerſaries: hauing otherwiſe ſo cleare, and ſolide anſweres furniſhed vs by the holy Ghoſt to cloſe their mouthes. Yea, the Antichriſt his prerogatiue, and his long and peaceable obtaining in the viſible Church, diſmayeth vs ſo little, as thereupon wee build a ſure argument, that there all the time was the true Church. For hee is a proper ſore of the body of the Church. And as ſuch a peſtilent boile or leproſie, which can bee in no other but a man his body, albeit the whole body ſhould bee ſo couered, that nothing could bee ſeene but the boile or leproſie: yet euen thereby the beholder is aſſured that there is a man his body, becauſe that ſoare can befall none other. So, by Antichriſt who is a proper euill, and ſitting no where elſe but in the Church, wee diſcerne and perceiue clearely where the true Church hath beene, and ſtill in great part is. For euen before the laſt fall of Babell, the Lord his people are exhorted to come Chap. 18. 4. out of her. In the viſible Church the truth hath alwaies beene: but ſo a long time, as the Booke of the Law was within the Temple before Ioſias. Now then the obiection 2 King. 22. of the Romans whereby they labour ſo much to ſhake vnſtable ſoules, is more then ridiculous: where was your Church before Luther? what became of all our Fathers? to which we anſwere: Our Church was euen

               where Satans throne was. And of our Fathers wee iudge well, as who, howſoeuer they receiued the Beaſt his name, or at leaſt the number of his name, yet might haue beene free from receiuing his Character: and ſo out of the danger of this ſentence of eternall fire. If they had eies to ſee, and hearts to vnderſtand this Propheſie, they would bee confounded in that wherein they glorie moſt: and aſhamed to obiect to vs that which moſt approueth our cauſe.
            9 Thus was the velitation. The caſe coincident, is terrible perſecution. The weight whereof is cleered by a warning, verſe 12. and a conſolation, verſ. 13. The warning, together with the weight, declare againſt whom this heauy perſecution is intended: to wit, the Saines, and thoſe who keepe the commandements of God, and faith of Ieſus. The weight is ſhewed in this, that their ſhall bee need of Chriſtian patience, as which ſhall be greatly exerciſed: and that the triall ſhall bee ſuch, as, the conſtant keepers of God his commandements and faith of Ieſus, ſhall finde wherein to be prooued. This, the phraſe of ſpeech ſheweth, as that Chap. 13. Heere is wiſdome. Now, this warning implieth cleerely, the party perſecuter to be the Beaſt, to whom was giuen, To make warre with the Saints and to ouercome them, Chap. 13. 7. who thereupon, got the ſame warning there, verſe 10. And, ſeeing that the remnant ſeed of the woman, againſt whom the Dragon was to ſtir vp warte, Chap. 12. 17. are deſcribed by the ſame titles Of keeping the commandements of God, &c. This warning heere giuen, hath alſo this end, to waken vs vp to conſider the ſpeciall time and heate of that warre, their foretold to bee then, when Antichriſt, beeing chaffed with theſe three Angels, made all Europe to feele cruell fires and bloody maſſacres: whereof the memory is yet recent. That ſo, the reſt of them who ſhould be killed for Ieſus, being fulfilled, Chap. 6. 11. finall and full vengeance may come on that bloody ſtate. The weight of this perſecution is yet further amplified by the conſolation giuen againſt

it. Which beſides the ſubſtance thereof, is notable in many circumſtances. Of the deliuery, from heauen: the commandement how to receiue it, in that it ſhould not onely be heard, but alſo written, as worthy of laſting record: Chap. 19. 9. Iſa. 8. & 30. Aabac. 2. 2. Iob. 19. 23. of double aſſeueration: and that by the holy Ghoſt. The ſubſtance of the conſolation is, Bleſſed are the dead that hencefoorth die in the Lord. The reaſons are, They reſt from their labours: and their works follow them. Our daies heere are but a ſhadowe, and in them, euen our ſtrength is but labour and ſorrow: all, wherein a man ſeeketh happineſſe vnder the ſunne, beeing but vanity and vexation of ſpirit, from whence to remoue in the Lord, and enter into our reſt, is a great bleſſedneſſe; in ſo farre as our labour is not in vaine in the Lord, but great is our reward in heauen. Now, howſoeuer all men goe naked out of this world, as naked wee come: and nothing of all our great labour and works goeth with vs. Yet, as euery one ſhall be indged and receiue according to that which hee hath done in the fleſh, good or euill; ſo euery ſoule carieth with it an inſtamped ſenſe of the workes done in the fleſh: ſo as either a ſpeaking and ſelfe accuſing guiltineſſe followeth a man; or then, as by grace he hath beene inabled to make his election ſure by good workes in this life, ſo ſhall the teſtimony of peace in his conſcience follow him. For, There is no condemnation for them which are in Chriſt Ieſus, which walks not after the fleſh but after the 
               Rom. 8. 1. 
               ſpirit.
            
            10 From the 14. ver. is the third part of this Ch. Wherein is the ſummary propoſition of the full ouerthrow of the enemies: which at length, in the ſubſequent Chapters, is explaned. Now heere, the courſe of this Propheſie is The courſe of this Booke. carefully to be marked, for a great light through all. The iudgements of God, firſt, and ſecond vpon the worlde, were in the ſixe Seales and ſixe Trumpets of the ſeuenth. To the 15. verſe of the 11. Chapter, there the ſeuenth Trumpet ſoundeth, and the laſt wrath is denounced. Before the particular declaration whereof, that the iuſtice of

God, therein might the better appeare, it was requiſite, that the Hiſtorie of theſe enemies to be deſtroied, in their dealings againſt the Church, ſhould be cleered: for which it is, that the world feeleth all this wrath. That ſtory therefore was in the 12. 13. and thus farre in this 14. Chapters. Wherein, is no idle repetition of what appeareth before ſet downe. For the conſideration is much diuers: in that, whatſoeuer before the 12. Chapter was ſpoken of the enemies, or their dealing, was to ſhew, how by them, the world and worldly ſort, in God his iuſtice were puniſhed. The caſe of the Church ſparingly touched: ſo farre as might ſhew her to bee free from theſe euils (euen in the midſt of them) which were poured on the world for her hard intertainement. And what in the eleuenth Chapter ſeemeth wholly agreeable for time and condition with that which, hithertils in this Chapter is ſaid of the Church in her two declared ſtates, yet hath a farre diſtinct conſideration from this. In that there, the witneſſes, firſt, in the Temple, next in their warre with the Beaſt, ſlaughter, riſing againe, going vp to heauen, and terrour of their enemies thereupon, with the fall in a part of the Antichriſtian kingdome; are put, as plagues on the world, and men thereof; whom they firſt plagued, next tormented and vexed, after terrified, and in part ouerthrew. For, the Goſpell, to whom it is not the ſauour of life, is the greateſt iudgement that commeth on the world. But from the beginning of the 12. Chapter to this place, the enemies are handled, as by them the Church is exerciſed. Firſt, fighting and preuailing to Satan his deiection and exaltation of the firſt ſeede. Yet ſo, as through Satan his rage, but aided thereto with the two wings of that great Eagle, the true Church at length, fleeth to the wilderneſſe and there lurketh. Wherethrough, the Beaſt comming in place, obtaineth, and deceiueth all, except theſe who on mount Sion inioy the preſence of the Lambe. Who at length, by degrees breake foorth, and albeis in much ſuffering, yet ſtill fight, till at length, by him who ſitteth

on the white cloude, the iudgemeuts of God are made manifeſt. 
               Chap. 15. 4. The ſtory of the eleuenth Chapter and of this, are for time and matter, the ſame: but the conſideration and reſpect of handling much different. Which, is yet, for courſe and order, in ſo diuine an artifice led on, as heere the ſtory falling in againe to the ſame point, from which, for inſerting this narration, it was ſince the eleuenth Chapter, broken off: of that, which from the 15. verſe of 11. the Chapter at the ſound of the ſeuenth Trumpet, was vpon preconceiued ioy denounced; heere, from the foureteenth verſe of this Chapter, to the ende; the execution is ſummarily proponed. Exceeding fitly, ſo falling in, to the large explication of the ſeuenth trumpet in the ſubſequent Chapters.
            11 This ſummary execution is declared by two compariſons. One of the Harueſt: the other of the Vintage. From Ioel 3. In both, are to be conſidered, the Actors, and their actions. The Harueſt hath two actors: and ſo hath the Vintage. The actiōs of both Actors, both in harueſt & vintage are, that the one worketh, furniſhed with conuenient inſtrument, & the other ſtirreth to the work. Which in the Harueſt, is reaping the harueſt of the earth: in the Vintage, the cutting downe of the Grapes, caſting them in the winepreſſe, treading, &c. The arguments whereby the inciters ſtirre the executers, is the readineſſe of both, for reaping and cutting downe. Thus by ſimilitudes familiar in the Prophets for ſuch iudgements, the deſtruction of Iere. 51. 33. the enemies of the Church is expreſſed: who in God his wrath as an vncleane thing, without the Citie, are deſtroied Heb. 13. 11: with ſo huge a ſlaughter, as all the earth is filled farre and deepe with their blood: by Hyperbolike ſpeech expreſſing the greatneſſe of the plague; and, as to the holy City, ſo alſo alluding to the Land of Canaan, which is in length 160. furlongs, as witneſſeth Rabbi Menahen, vpon Geneſis fol. 60. For clearing heereof, the Actors, and their diſtinct actions muſt be diligently aduerted, ſo much the more, as to the obſcuring of all the Propheſie, this place

is widely miſtaken. In them are to bee noted, their properties, their doing, and their order of doing: for courſe of time to be carefully obſerued. In the harueſt, hee that worketh, being accordingly furniſhed with fit inſtrument, by all hi
                  •
                notes, is vndoubtedly, Chriſt the Lord of the harueſt. For, he is one like the ſonne of man, which, in all Chap. 1. 13. this Propheſie, is put but in one other place, and that for Chriſt: he fitteth, as a Iudge: on a white cloude, both for eminency and maieſty; as alſo, by the whiteneſſe, to ſhew the cleareneſſe & pureneſſe of his iudgements, which Now were to be made manifeſt, Chap. 15. 4. The firſt flying Angell foretold that they were neere, now Chriſt is cleerely to ſhew himſelfe: by ſhewing, hence, The ſigne of the ſonne of Man in heauen. The ſpeech is from Iſai 19. 1. Behold the Lord rideth on a ſwift cloude. Hee hath, with a ſharpe ſikle, a crowne: to ſhew him to be the Lord both of Harueſt and Vintage. For he not onely gathereth Matth. 13. 30. Iſa. 63. 3. the Saints, but alſo the Tares in bundles: and treadeth the Winepreſſe of God his wrath: and in both, he conquereth & ouercometh, Chap. 6. The other, comming out of the temple, is the type of Saints & faithfull ones, whoſe habitation is in the Temple, out of which they are now bold to ſtep out and be ſeene: and perceiuing the ripenes of the Harueſt (whereto it was not yet come in the fifth Seale, and therefore, this execution, craued of them then, was delaied) and yet not being able, in that weake eſtate of the Goſpell reuiuing, for ſo great a worke: (therefore it is that this Angell hath no ſikle) they beſeech the Lord of the harueſt to put too his hand, and Haue mercy on Sion. For the time to haue mercy, for euen the ful time is come. The harueſt of the earth is ripe, and the reſt of the Saints ſlaine. Neither is this thus expreſſed, as if euen then, or at any time, Chriſt did not worke by inſtruments: but to ſhew the beginnings; ſuch, as, in reſpect of the greatneſſe of the worke, and little humane aide, it was in a ſort, Chriſt his owne arme which helped him. But in proceſſe of time, by the powerfull progreſſe of the Goſpell, hee getteth to

himſelfe miniſters of executing his wrath, euen out of the Temple, furniſhed with conuenient weapons. And to expreſſe this, in the Vintage, the Actor commeth out of the Temple hauing a ſharpe ſikle: as Chriſt, betime got himſelfe, and daily raiſeth of his owne faithfull ones fit inſtruments inabled and furniſhed with power to execute his iuſt iudgements againſt the enemies: To doe to her as ſhee hath done to vs, and to render her double. For this it is, that this ſecond Actor hath theſe different notes from the firſt. He ſitteth not; he is not crowned; and he commeth out of the Temple. So then, this Angell is the generall type, in this ſummary propoſition, of that ſame, whereof the ſeuen Angels are, in the large explication, Chapter 15. As is moſt cleere by comparing the Angell, ſtirring this to execution, with that one of the foure beaſts, furniſher of the Vials to the ſeuen Angels, Chapter 15. This laſt inciter, hath this common note with the former two Angels, that he commeth out of the Temple: but this he hath ſingular, that he came from the Altar. So then, he is a miniſter of the Altar, by alluſion, ſtill to the Temple and Legal worſhip. Next, he hath power ouer fire: as Chriſt who came to ſend fire in the earth: as the two Witneſſes, Cha. Luk. 12. 49. 11. and Elias: out of whoſe mouthes fire proceeded to deuoure their aduerſaries: and who had power to plague the earth with all manner of plagues, als often as they would, as hauing vengeance in readineſſe againſt all diſobedience. 2. Cor. 10. 16. Now then, as by the Angell out of the Temple armed with the ſikle, are expreſſed heere generally and ſummarily, in this ſummary propoſitiō, all faithfull Chriſtians; of whatſoeuer calling, inſtructed with power from God to execute his wrath againſt the enemies: which executors are more largely expreſſed in the ſeuen Angels, Chapter 15. So this, comming from the Altar, is the type of true paſtours: by whoſe plaine and powerful preaching, the other are informed and ſtirred to conſecrate their hands to the Lord. Euen to ſerue Babel as ſhee hath ſerued vs. As accordingly, Chapter 15. The ſeuen Angels

receiue the vials of wrath from one of the foure beaſts. Of whom Chapt. 4.
         
         
            CHAP. XV.
            
               HEnce, is the ſtory of the laſt wrath, for finall deſtruction of the enemies, to the peace of the Church, that the kingdoms of the world may be Gods Chap. 11. 14. and Chriſts. Vpon obſtinate impenitency againſt ſixe trumpets, Chapt. 9. 21. The fulfilling of this wrath was ſworne to come in the daies of the ſeuenth trumpet, Chap. 10. Vpon ſounding of the ſeuenth trumpet, ſummarily denounced, Chap. 11. And ſummary executing thereof proponed, Chap. 14. in the end. Whereof here, the larger narration, hath the executers, Chap. 15. Their execution in order, Chapt. 16. Cleared more largely, Chapters 17. 18. 19. and 20. Whereupon the gracefull condition of the Bride victorious, is magnifickly ſet downe, Chapt. 21. and 22. This whole matter, is that other great ſigne ſeene in heauen: to diſtinguiſh this part of ſtory, from the preceding in the laſt three Chapt. called alſo a ſigne in heauen. This is that, which Mat. 24. is called, the ſigne of the ſonne of man. For hee and his iudgements, now are made manifeſt. As not inconueniently, the other might be called the ſigne of the Dragon.
            2 In this Chapter, from the beginning to the fifth verſe, is ſet downe the greatneſſe of the erand: thence to the end, the diſpoſing of the inſtruments for execution thereof: the greatneſſe of the matter, is firſt ſummarily proponed in this, that hee ſaw a ſigne, a great, yea, a maruellous ſigne, and, in heauen. That Chap 12. was a great ſigne; but this is both great and wonderfull:

euen the ſigne of the ſonne of man in heauen. This great wonderfulneſſe, is ſhewed in the Miniſters, Angels: their number, ſeuen; their imployment, to bee executors of God his laſt wrath, for finiſhing of the myſterie, Chapt. 10. For his ſpirit would no longer ſtriue with men, verſ. 1. Next in the effect and end of their worke, to the 5. verſe. Which are, the deſtruction of Antichriſt: that the Saints, victorious ouer him, may praiſe God; and by the greatneſſe, equity, and truth, of his iudgements manifeſted, all men may feare, glorifie, and worſhip him, who onely is holy. For expreſſing of this effect and end, the Church and her condition, in, and vpon this execution to follow, (ioyfully vpon ſight of the inſtruments prepared, precōceiuing the certaine euent) is ſet down, in the victory and ſong thereof. In the victory, are the meanes whereby, and the party ouer whom. The meanes, are a glaſſie Seamingled with fire: the pure word of God mingled with the vertue of the holy Ghoſt, Chap. 4. The victory, is ouer the Beaſt, his image, his marke, and number of his name: to ſhew it now, full and perfit. In their ſong, are firſt, the quality, that it is a ſong of praiſe, for a maruellous deliuerance, and ouerthrow of a great enemie: ſuch as Moſes, vpon ſuch a caſe, did ſing at the red Sea, Exod. 14. Secondly, it is in praiſe of the Lambe, through whom they obtaine this victory, and in whom the Father is glorified: and not in praiſe of Moſes, who is the ſeruant of God, Heb. 3. 3. Chapt. 22. 9. and 19. 10. Thirdly, their diſpoſition is noted, in that they haue the harpes of God, giuen by him, for his praiſe: that is, well tuned hearts, filled with ioy and loue, in conſcience of his benefits, and burſting out in thankſgiuing. For hee onely putteth a new ſong in the mouthes of his ſeruants. Laſtly, the tenor of their ſong is in two: the praiſe of God his works and waies; and the ſequell therof. The praiſe of his workes, is, that they are great and maruellous: according whereto, hee hath a competent title, Lord God almighty. The praiſe of his waies, is

that they are iuſt and true: and competently thereupon, he hath the title of King of Saints. In infinite authority and power, yet to hold euer a iuſt and true way, is a great praiſe. Now, the ſequell hereof is, that he onely be feared, gloriſied, and worſhipped of all. And that for two reaſons. Firſt, becauſe he onely is holy, and not the Beaſt, who ſacrilegiouſlie busketh his head with that blaſphemie. Next, his iudgements are now made manifeſt to all: ſo as, who before, worſhipped and wondered after the Beaſt, as hauing none equall, or able to fight with him: now, in his iuſt and manifeſt ouerthrow, may know, and praiſe God only holy. For Chriſt now ſitteth on a white cloude iudging him. Compare this 4. verſe with the 7. of Chap. 14 and ſee what wiſdome.
            3 Before wee enter in the ſecond part, in the diſpoſing of the inſtruments for this great execution: the interpretation giuen of the glaſſie Sea mingled with fire, is to be cleared.
            4 That the glaſſie Sea is the type of the pure word, and pure worſhippe according thereto, ſee vpon the 4. Chap. Heere the alluſion is to that ſtorie, Exod. 13. and 14. When Moſes and Iſrael with him hauing paſt the red Sea, ſtanding on the ſhore thereof, and ſeeing Pharao and his hoſt drowned therein, they praiſe God, ſinging the ſong of Moſes, &c. Of this alluſion, while men marke not narrowlly all the points of conueniencie, the place is diuerſly miſtaken. Some taking this Sea mingled with fire to be but the type of great troubles, thorow which the Church now hath eſcaped; according to the ſpeech Pſalm. 66. Thou haſt brought vs thorow water and fire. But this is not all whereto heere the ſpirit will lead vs. Others, take it for the treaſure of meanes, which God hath euer in readineſſe, as before his throne, to deſtroy his enemies. But this is too generall. For here, a ſpeciall treaſure is meaned of the meanes, whereby, as Antichriſt is ouerthrowen and drowned, ſo God his Church is ſaued. And this is, the treaſure of the pure

word of God, and power of his ſpirit mingled therewith. For, we muſt all, be begotten of the word and of the ſpirit; and be baptized with water and with fire. And by this word and ſpirituall vertue thereof, muſt Antichriſt bee foiled. As in the red Sea, the people of Iſrael were baptized, 1. Cor. 10. wherein Pharao was drowned. And as Iſrael was baptized vnder the cloude, which to them, was a pillar both of a cloud and of fire (of refreſhment and light) but to the Aegyptians a pillar of darkeneſſe. In which reſpect, the red Sea, wherein, and the pillar, vnder which they were baptized, were types of the true word and ſpirit, whereby the true Iſrael of God are begotten to immortality, and the enemies ouerthrowen. So, by alluſion thereto, the Church
                  •
               victorious ouer Antichriſt, and that great City, which ſpiritnally is called Aegypt, is ſaid to ſtand at a glaſſie Sea mingled with fire: that is, in the cleare light of the word mingled with the vertue of the holy Ghoſt; whereby they are victorious, and furniſhed with the harpes of God: but Antichriſt therein is drowned, 2. Theſſ. 2. From this Sea, they labor to diuert vs to ciſternes of their own digging, which are full of bloude. But heere, is our victory and wiſdome, whereby to count the number of the Beaſt his name; and ſo, to ouercome him, his image, his character, name, and number. The Sea of the Fathers in a third part is bloud, Chapt. 8. So as thence, wee may (if wee bee not wiſe to diſcerne) draw death als well as life. The Sea againe of the Church of Rome, in latter ſtate, is all bloudy worſum, Chap. 16. This Sea, hath this different note from that, Chapter 4. that this is mingled with fire. The fire is there alſo, but ſet out in ſeuen burning lampes diſtinct from the Sea: heere the fire is mingled therewith, and that of purpoſe, to leade vs to take vp a great point of wiſdome in the diuerſity of God his diſpenſation in this laſt cleare light of the Goſpell, for Antichriſt his ouerthrow, from that firſt, in the Apoſtolike times, for caſting the Dragon on the earth. At the firſt

going out of the Goſpell, to conciliat thereto the more credit, and to ſhew plainly whence the vertue, accompanying it came, there was then a diſtinct diſpenſation of the ſpirit, in outward & viſible ſignes, as clouen tongues, and fire: extraordinary effects and operations: as gifts of tongues, healings, and working of miracles: and by a ſingular and viſible manner of donation, as, impoſition of hands of the Apoſtles. But, in this laſt reuiuing of the Goſpell, the word ſhould be cleare and pure as at the firſt, and accompanied with the force of the ſpirit: yet the diſpenſation, donation, and operation of the holy Ghoſt ſhould not bee in that manner, but ſhould bee mingled with the word: the ſpirit and vertue thereof, accompanying the preaching of the Goſpell; yet ſo, as no viſible or diſtinct ſymbol thereof ſhould bee as at the firſt, (for now, the preachers are feated by ſwallowing of the little booke, Chapt. 10.) no miraculous operations: finallie, no donation but ſuch as, with the word and by the word preached, the ſpirit ſhould worke in the Saints. So as miracles, in theſe laſt times, are no notes of true preachers. And this diuerſity of diſpenſation is exceeding wiſe, and requiſite for the times. At the firſt the Goſpell was not, onely to bee opened, to the world lying in darkeneſſe, but alſo confirmed, to be from God. Now, it hath that credit with all; but beeing buried in ignorance, was to bee cleared. Neither muſt wee take this ſo, as if at firſt, the preaching of the Goſpell had wanted that accompanying vertue. For euen then it was not in words 
               1. Cor. 4. 20. 
               but in power, and was mingled with fire. No doubt, but Iohn his doctrine and baptiſme, had with it the vertue of the ſpirit in thoſe that beleeued: for faith is the effect of this fire. And out of all queſtion, Apollos had the ſpirit in ſome good meaſure, when hee knew but the baptiſme of Iohn. And theſe Samaritanes, who by the preaching of Philip receiued the Goſpell and were baptized, had the ſpirit before the downe-comming of Peter and Iohn. But at the beginning, were ioyned the viſible ſymboles,

donation, and miraculous effects of the holy Ghoſt, to procure reuerence and credit to the Goſpell, and to ſhew whence commeth all ſpirituall vertue, to faith or conuerſion: and the outward healing of diſeaſes, to lead vs to know the power of the word and ſpirit, in the quickning and life of the inward man, and curing ſpiritual diſeaſes of the Soule. Neither muſt wee imagine that now the ſpirite is ſo tyed to the word, as who euer heareth it, receiueth neceſſarily the ſpirit. For many heare whom it profiteth nothing, becauſe it is not mixed with faith: but Heb. 4. 2. the gift of the holy Ghoſt is now no other way diſpenſed, but by the word preached: wee feeling the force thereof, but neither ſeeing whence it commeth, nor whither Iohn 3. 8. it goeth. So, whatſoeuer ſpirit one pretend without Iſai 59. 21. the word, it is the ſpirit of errour.
            5 Now, how theſe Miniſters of the laſt wrath are feated and prepared to this great execution, is ſhewed from the fifth verſe to the end. And firſt, whence they are, 2. How diſpoſed, 3. Wherewith inſtructed, and by whom. 4. By what power it is, that ſo great a worke is effectuate. They come out of the Temple of the Tabernacle of Teſtimony in heauen, now opened, that is, out of the true Church militant (this is implyed in the word Tabernacle) now made patent and viſible. This firſt note ſheweth, both what they are, and of what time. They are members of the true Militant Church, who by the light of the Goſpell, the Church being reformed and opened, are ſtirred to the worke. For God turneth the hearts of Kings, who earſt gaue their Kingdomes to the Beaſt, and were his hornes; to hate now the Whore, and eate her fleſh, Chapter 17. For her fall ſhall not be by Kings of the Eaſt or Mahometans, but by reformed Chriſtians: whereof wee ſee already good degrees, praiſed be the King of Saints. This note alſo pointeth the time of this execution, to be in the dayes of the ſeuenth Trumpet, according to the Oath, Chapter 10. Vpon the ſounding of which, Chapter 11. followed the opening of the Temple

in heauen, and cleare ſight of the Arke of the Teſtimony, and thereupon lightnings, thundrings, &c. Now here, theſe ſeuen Angels, Miniſters of God his laſt wrath come forth of the Temple opened, and goe to execution. Thus the ſpirit by cleare notes, leadeth vs to couple rightly the courſe of this Propheſie. Which, from the beginning hath ſo plaine a way, as all being comprehended in ſeauen Seales, ſixe thereof bring the firſt ſorrowes,: the ſeuenth opened, yeeldeth ſeuen trumpets, whereof, ſixe bringing the ſecond euils: and theſe working but further induration, Chapter 9. The ſeuenth Trumpet ſounding, yeeldeth theſe ſeuen Angels with ſeuen Cuppes of the laſt wrath. Whoſe ſtorie by the narration, wiſely and exceeding purpoſely in the 12. 13. and 14. Chapters interiected, was till now delayed.
            6 The diſpoſition of theſe Angels is ſhewed in their apparrell, which is linnen, and that both pure and bright, and girded to thē with a golden girdle about the breaſt. White linnen apparrell is the garment of all Saints: who in Chriſt are made Prieſts to God, by putting on and girding to, or applying Ieſus Chriſt to their hearts by the girdle of faith, more pretious then gold to righteouſneſſe and holineſſe. But here in theſe Angels, this common 1 Pet. 1. 7. garment hath a ſpeciall relation to their ſpeciall calling, To ſhew that this execution ſhould bee iuſt & vpright, not only in reſpect of God the iuſt Iudge, whoſe wayes are iuſt and true, but euen in reſpect of the Miniſters alſo, who in the light and aſſurance of faith, ſhould in the zeale of God and of his worſhip bring downe Antichriſt. For bleſſed ſhall hee be called that rewardeth her as ſhe hath ſerued vs. 
               Pſal. 137.
            
            7 They are inſtructed hereto with golden Vials or Cuppes full of wrath, euen the wrath of God that liueth for euer. Golden cuppes were alſo holy veſſels of the Sanctuary to ſhew hereby likewayes this to bee a pure worke like gold, and holy, and acceptable. And the wrath powred out is euerlaſting, as hee whoſe wrath it

is; for according to his name, ſo is his feare: and as is the man, ſo is his ſtrength. Hereto alſo ſerueth the kind of Inſtrument. At the iudgements by the ſixe Seales, ſome cry was alwaies ioined to waken, if it had beene poſſible men to learne. The Trumpets ſounded loud, in ſixe of them God giuing Iezabel time to repent, Chapter 3. and 9. Hereupon obſtinate impenitency, out of golden bowles, wrath without noiſe is tumbled. The ſeueral degrees whereof, in God his patience, Chap. 16. yet more argueth and aggrauateth the obſtinacy of the enemies ſtil more and more endured to endleſſe wrath.
            8 Theſe cuppes are giuen to the Angels by one of the foure Beaſts, that is, by the true Paſtors of the church, Chapter 4. to ſhew, that through the cleare light of the Goſpell preached, Antichriſt being laide open, the hearts of God his faithfull ſeruants ſhall bee filled with holy indignation and zeale to imploy their power to God his honour, in his ouerthrow, ſtirred there to by the preachers of the truth. Reward her as ſhee hath rewarded you, &c. according to the Cup ſhee filled to you, fill her 
               Chap. 18. 6. 
               the double. This was ſummarily touched in the end of the 14. Chapter, when the Angell from the Altar hauing power ouer fire, ſtirred the other to cut downe the grapes of the earth: the which ſame thing is here more largely explaned. That this is ſaid to bee done by one of the foure Beaſts, as it ſheweth them to be the ſtirrers to worke, ſo (according as their diuers faces expreſſed diuerſity of gifts, as for diuers times and caſes is requiſite) to ſignifie the imployment at this time of ſuch as were fitteſt, whether for wiſdome, as Men to ſpie out the Beaſt, or rather (that being already done) for leonine courage, roaring and thundering, Chapter 10. to encourage and terrifie. How it be, what of one of them is done, is done of all.
            9 The power, whereby this great execution is borne out, that it cannot bee ſtayed, is God his glorious and powerfull preſence in his owne true Church opened and

made viſible, before fuming in wrath againſt Antichriſt: ſo, as neither dare theſe Miniſters but execute their charge: The feare and loue of God, and knowledge of his terrour ſtirring them: neither any enemy impede the courſe of God his iudgements till they bee finiſhed. For the Beaſt muſt goe to deſtruction: and the Whores louers ſhall ſtand a backe afraid at her burning, Chapter 18. And what is it elſe, that miraculouſly hath and yet doth beare out againſt Antichriſt his power and malice; Who, if the Lord were not on our ſide, would haue eaten 
               Pſal 124. 
               vs vp, and as mighty flouds haue ouerwhelmed vs in the depth: but the Lord is our helper. Peoples heare it, 
               Exod. 15. 14. 
               and are afraid. Sorrow commeth on the Iuhabitants of Paleſtina. Now this type is not ſo put, as if the Saints this time ſhould be debarred from the preſence of God in his Church. But by alluſion to the 40. of Exodus, 1. Kings, 8. Iſai 6 to ſhew a great and powerfull preſence of God in his Church, newly reerected from vnder Antichriſt his tyranny, where through the execution ſhal haue no let. It is true, that the reſort (albeit very frequent and dayly encreaſing) ſhall not bee ſuch during the plagues and ſmoking wrath of God, as when Euphrates is dried vp, the high places taken away, and Baal deſtroyed. When the twelue Ports of the new Chap. 21 
               Ieruſalem ſhall be caſt open continually to receiue from all quarters both Iewes wakened by a voyce from the Chap. 19. 5. Chap. 16. 12. Zach. 14. 9. Throne, and the Kings of the Eaſt with them comming to worſhippe Iehouah the Lord of hoſtes, who then ſhal be the onely one Lord in the earth, and his name one. To which, the ſixt Cup ſhall in the owne time prepare the way, and which in the ſeuenth ſhall bee fulfilled, and ſo the myſtery finiſhed, in the accompliſhment of all fore
               
                  •
               old Act. 3. 21. by the Prophets, Chapter 10.
         
         
            
            CHAP. XVI.
            
               IN the 15. Chapter was the preparation for the laſt wrath. Here is the particular execution in ſeuen degrees, according to the number of the Miniſters thereof, which degrees in order and manner haue a great reſemblance and relation to the degrees of Antichriſt his riſing in the Trumpets, to ſhew the wiſdome and iuſtice of God, in rendring meaſure for meaſure, and bringing him downe as hee aroſe. The reſemblance hath made many to thinke both to bee of one matter and time. But theſe Vials are all powred on the Beaſt and his marked ones, whoſe height in working began but in the fifth trumpet.
            2 This execution is commanded verſe firſt, from the Temple, as a holy and iuſt worke, with aloud voice, as a matter important, and to bee performed with care: to the Miniſters, who being prepared attend the ſigne. The execution is vpon the earth; that is, the earthly ſort of men, thorow all the plagues, euidently deſigned to be Antichriſt and his adherents, It is executed by ſeuen degrees, to ſhew God his patience in his greateſt wrath: in each degree is the common ſigne, of powring out the Viall, and the enſuing effect firſt or ſecundary.
            3 The firſt Viall is powred on the earth. Where, the earth muſt bee vnderſtood according to the relation it Cap. 13. Sect. 7. hath in collation to the ſubſequent things, and degree which in that reſpect it holdeth: to the ſea, riuers, ſun, throne, Euphrates, the aire. For, as when the earth, or the earth and Sea oppoſed to heauen, then things below are oppoſed to things aboue: earthly or vnſtable things, to things heauenly and permanent: ſo in this place, as alſo in the firſt Trumpet, it muſt bee taken, as the order of ariſing degrees in compariſon requireth, for the firſt and lighteſt degree of iudgement, as the earth is the loweſt

and lourdeſt of elements: as the earth is taken in the firſt verſe, all the Vials are powred on the earth, becauſe all are on the earthly▪ Antichriſtian Kingdome: in this other ſenſe of the earth, the firſt particularly, is powred thereon. The effect thereof is, that the filthineſſe, looſe life, hypocriſie, auarice, pride, ſymony, and other vices of the Clergy, and Church of Antichriſt, breake out to the view of the world (long blinded) as filthy boiles. The alluſion is to the ſixth plague of Egypt, where-thorow the Enchanters were no more able to ſtand before Exod. 9. 11. 
               Moſes, This was the firſt degree of the fall of Rome, when God to make them deteſtable, diſcouered their ſores; ſo as theſe enchanting bewitchers were confounded, and could no longer abide the light. The accommodation of Story is moſt cleare: where by numbers their auarice, pride and hypocriſie is highly exclamed againſt: Few daring yet challenge their doctrine and worſhippe: yet their perſons thus falling firſt in contempt, it made way to the next Cup. Now, as in the firſt Trumpet, contention and ſelfe loue ioyned with cruelty, like fire and haile mixed with bloud, caſt on the earth, made the firſt great degree to Antichriſt his riſing, by burning vp all true loue, life, and holy zeale of religion: ſo, the firſt open degree of his fall, is by the cup of wrath powred on the earth, euen the diſcouery of their hypocriſie and filthineſſe, whereby they were ſeen to bee void of all true Religion.
            4 The ſecond Viall maketh a higher degree, in that not onely the perſons, who worſhipped the Beaſt, and receiued his Gharacter, are for their ſilthineſſe, odious; but now, euen their common doctrine and ordinary worſhippe becommeth vile and corrupted as bloody worſum, deadly to all that drinke thereof, and abhorred of men, who in the cleare glaſſie Sea before the throne perceine the ſtinking rottenneſſe of this Aſphaltites. How after the contempt of the perſons for their abhominable filthineſſe; next, all their, worſhippe and doctrine of pardons,

reliques, indulgences, holy water, croſſings, ſoul-Maſſes, pilgrimages, proceſſions, inuocation of Saintes, baptizing of bels; magicall coniurations, forged miracles, fooliſh Legends of lies, and the reſt of that ſea of rotten bloud beganne to ſtinke in the noſes of men, is more then euident: their whole worſhippe and common ſchoole Diuinity now ſtanding as the Sea of Sodom. Compare this Viall for kind and degree to the ſecond Trumpet.
            5 By the third Viall, their riuers and fountaines of waters are turned into bloud. When by Moſes the floud and al ſtanks & ponds of Egypt were turned into bloud, Exod. 7. (for thereto in this and the former Viall the ſpirit alludeth) the Egyptians digged to themſelues wels to drink of. When in the dayes of Ahab, through parching drought, all other waters failed, hee and Obadiah ſeeke 1 King. 18. 5. to the riuers and fountaines. So the common Sea of Popiſh worſhippe and doctrine becommeth vile: the laſt refuge, for preſeruing the liues of their Beaſts, is their riuers and fountaines, whereby their Sea is inriched, and which by kind ſhould bee more cleare and ſweet. But theſe are alſo made bloud, & that in two reſpects. Their riuers & fountains are their great and learned Doctors, and grounds, whence theſe as riuers carry waters, as frō ſprings, to ſweeten if it were poſſible that rotten ſea. But howſoeuer, in ſome outward degree they apeare to haue ſome more freſhneſſe; yet they are but bloud, and to drinke of them it is deadly. They labour much to excuſe and maske the groſſe rottenneſſe of their ſea, and to ſweeten it with eloquence, aide of Arts and Philoſophy: and yet all is bloud. They buſie themſelues to bring warrands from the Fathers: but almoſt, all from that third part of that ancient ſea, which in the ſecond Trumpet was made bloud: and from theſe fountaines & riuers which in the third Trumpet were for the third part made bitter and mortall. And what cleare & ſweet water might both from Scripture & Fathers be brought

for cure of their Sea, they by falſe gloſſes wreſted interpretations, cuttings, and caruings turne all into bloud. The ſecond reſpect, in which their riuers and fountaines are ſaid to become bloud, that wee ſhould not miſſe to take vp, the Angell executer, praiſeth God his iuſtice therein, and another from the Altar (a ſure teſtimonie from Chriſt himſelfe) confirmeth his ſaying. And this double teſtimony both of the executers and miniſters of the Altar, true Paſtors encouraging to execution, ſo Chap. 14. 10. warranteth the equity of this point, that men need not bee remiſſe or ſtayed with any faint doubts, from executing this iuſt worke. And certainely the Spirit in this double proclamation of God his iuſtice herein, ſeemeth in diuine wiſdome to haue foreſeene and foreſhewed the faintnes of men in this ſo approued an errand. The point is, becauſe their riuers and fountaines, euen their head-Clergie men, entertainers, nouriſhers, and vpholders of all that ſtinking ſea, haue beene bloody murtherers of the Saints and Prophets, and occaſioners of all bloud-ſhed in the earth (the Whore Chapter 17. being drunke with the bloud of Saints, and all the bloud of the earth being found in her, Chapter 18.) Therefore the Lord in Obadiah 16. Iſai 49. 26. & 51. 22. 23. his iuſtice, now giueth them bloud to drinke, euen meaſure for meaſure. And the Cuppe that ſhee filled to vs, ſhee now taſteth in her courſe. Wherein is performed what for conſolation was ſpoken, Chapter 13. If any kill with a ſword, he muſt be killedby a ſword. The performance of this wee haue in ſome meaſure ſeene, and dayly ſee, in ſuch Countries wherein the Lord hath raiſed the light of his Goſpell, while their continuall conſpiracies and tteaſons againſt the ſtates and liues of Princes, compell men (otherwiſe, but prepoſterouflie pittifull, and for all this double denounced warrant of the equity of the worke, but too ſlow) to giue them the due recompence of their bloudy practiſes. But the effect hereof will bee ſtill more and more perceiued. For there

will be no end of their tragicall attempts, till that bloudy ſtate be deſtroyed for euer. Theſe are the Martyrs, the Church of Rome can glorie of. Here a diuiue artifice of the ſpirit is not vnworthy the marking: that as in expreſſing the firſt ſuffetings of the church by the dragon Chapter 12. who giueth his power, throne, & authority to the Beaſt, alluſion was to the condition of the olde Church in Egypt: ſo here in the firſt degrees of finall wrath, alluſion is to the plagues there. Like as in the Chapter 15. vpon preception of the laſt degree, the ſong of Moſes was ſung at the glaſſie ſea.
            6 The fourth Viall is on the ſunne; whereby the beaſt his marked ones are plagued: the cleare light of the Goſpell (ſhewing Chriſt the ſun of righteouſneſſe) now ſo ſhining, as in place of glorifying God by repentance, and acknowledging of their errors and workes of darkeneſſe, they as the Children of darkeneſſe, and hating the light, whereby their workes are reproued, boile in deſpitefull rage, and are burnt vp with enuie and malice, as Iohu 3. 20. Eph. 5. 13. were the Phariſies at Chriſt his cleare doctrine and euident myracles: and that Stephen hauing his face like the Sunne. And they blaſpheme God in blaſpheming his Act. 7. 54. truth, and true Church; ſpeaking euill of the way of righteouſneſſe: their deſperate rage ſtill increaſing as the light groweth, becauſe induration in impenitency is a common effect of all theſe plagues. In that, ſhowſoeuer God hath his owne ſingle ones to pull out of that Kingdom, yet the body is not reclamable, but muſt goe to deſtruction. Compare this with the fourth Trumpet. The light of the Goſpel is a plague and torment to the reprobate world, as the two witneſſes, Chapter 11 were a vexation. Here the firſt effect of this Vial is rage, the ſecond blaſphemy.
            7 The firſt is on the throne of the Beaſt, that is, on his Kingdom, as the next words interpret, and as the whole frame of Scripture ſpeech euinceth. The throne

of Dauid is for his Kingdome. The Throne is eſtabliſhed: for the Kingdome is eſtabliſhed. Satan his throne, Chap. 2. & 13. for his kingdome. The firſt effect heere of is, their kingdome loſeth the glory, luſtre, pompe, and wonted eſtimation, and becommeth contemptible. Whereupon the ſecundarie effect followeth, in them, of deſperate ſorrow, expreſſed by a geſture of men, extremly grieued. Gnawing their tongues: and obdnration in impenitency and blaſphemy, their
                  •
               ores by the light of the ſunne being more and more laid open, and thereby their ſorrow augmented. For their workes, ſee Chapter 9. And withall, conſider what a wiſe and iuſt retribution. As, by falling from heauen to the earth, and from being ſtarres of light to become miniſters of darkeneſſe, they opened the bottomleſſe pit, and let out darkeneſſe, by the ſmoake thereof eclipſing all true light, and ſo erecting the kingdome of darkeneſſe. So heere, by the cleere ariſing light of the ſunne of righteouſneſſe, all the earthly and worldly account of their Kingdome becommeth contemtible, and is darkened. And as, by the doctrine of darkeneſſe, they, like Scorpions, ſtinging men, tormented their conſciences: ſo the light op
                  •
               ned, and diſcouering their treachery, tormenteth them with anguiſh and ſorrow. This effect, both firſt and ſecondary, we ſee already in great part, but ſhall yet ſee more. For, albeit theſe plagues heere, haue their owne degrees for order of working, yet ſtill the former hold on with the ſubſequent, till all together, in the ende, bring finall deſtruction.
            8 The ſixth viall is notable in many circumſtances. It is poured on Euphrates: the effect is, drying the waters thereof. This effect is for a ſpeciall end, that the way of the Kings of the Eaſt may be prepared. Againſt this effect, and apparent ſequell thereof, a great endeauour is ſhewed, and the euent thereof. The endeauour, is of the principals, Dragon, Beaſt, and falſe Prophet, by their inſtruments, (a peſtilent broode, and well reſembling their origine) foule ſpirits, and ſpirits of Diuels: ſo is their qualitie.

Their dealing is, to goe to the Kings of the Earth, ſtrangers from heauen, whom they may perſwade importunely cronting like frogges, night and day in their eares. Their force of perſwaſion is, by working ſignes, thus to ſhew them to bee faſe Prophets, ſeducing. The ende of this their endeauour, is to gather theſe earthly Kings together, in their purpoſe, to vphold their tottering Kingdome, now threatning a fall: and to impede the apparant effect to which this Viall maketh preparation: but which God ſhall turne to an other fine then they purpoſe: euen to be glorified in their iuſt deſtruction, as the euent prooueth. Now, both in reſpect of the great danger to be deceiued and miſled by theſe frogs, and of the great day of God his wrath, to come on them (ſo much the more perrilous, as it ſhould come like a thieſe in the night) warning is giuen to watch, and hold the true faith: whereby, putting on Chriſt, and girding him to vs as with a golden girdle, we be not found naked, and ſo aſhamed, but bleſſed through our garment. The euent of all this their buſie trauell is expreſſed in this, that they gathered them to a place called in Hebrue Armageddon.
            
            9 Now, becauſe for the moſt part, the effect and ſequels of this Viall are yet to come: in ſeeking the accommodation, we muſt walke warily, as the light of holy writ may leade vs. Euphrates, properly, is that great Riuer whereon Babylon, properly ſo called, did ſtand, and wherto, it ſerued for beauty, commodity, and fortification. It was alſo the march bordering Dauid his kingdome on the Eaſt, ſeparating, and in a manner debarring the Eaſterne peoples therefrom. To both theſe conſiderations, in this alluſion, the ſpirit hath reſpect. In the 51. of Ieremy, prophecying the deſtruction of Babylon, hee threatneth that he will dry vp her waters. Thence, hither, to the deſtruction of the myſticall Babylon, the ſpeech is brought. In the next Chapter, the whore Babylon, is ſaid to ſit on many waters. Which are interpreted, Kings, Nations, Peoples, and Tongues. To ſhew, in great dominion and authority,

great dignity and ſtrength. The drying vp then of her waters, is the decay of her authority, dominion, glory, and power, by the ſubſtraction of theſe from her obeience, in whom was her ſtrength and fortification. Euen that ſame, which Chapter 17. is expreſſed by eating her fleſh and making her naked. Thus, fitly for this reſpect, and yet more for the ſecond, the drying of Euphrates is heere mentioned, in a depth of wiſdome: to ſhew, how that Riuer bordering the kingdome of Dauid on the Eaſt, and ſet betwixt the Eaſterne Kings and the bleſſed land, being dried vp, the Kings of the Eaſt, ſhould therethrough haue eaſie acceſſe thereto: the debarring impediment being remoued. The ſenſe is. As Antichriſt his riſing was the occaſion of darknes, and defection from the Goſpell to Mahometiſme in the Eaſt and of the obſtinate abiding of Iewes (who are moſt part in the Eaſt, and whom ſpecially heere the ſpirit pointeth at, as the euent cleareth) in their infidelity: and as the greatneſſe and power of Antichriſt ſtill debarreth both, from embracing the Goſpell, as Euphrates flowing ouer all his bankes, and ſo letting all free paſſage to the Kingdome of Dauid: both Iewes and Mahometans, through the ſuperſtition, idolatry and corruption of the Romiſh Church, abhorring Chriſtianity: ſo now, her waters being with the heat of the ſunne of righteouſneſſe dried vp, an open way ſhall bee prepared for them to receiue the Goſpell. I know, how ſome, from the ſtory of Cyrus and Darius King of the Eaſt, diuerting the courſe of Euphrates, and ſo ſurpriſing Babylon, thinke this alluſion taken, to ſhew how myſticall Babylon ſhall in like manner, be deſtroied by Eaſterne Kings. But the ſpirit of God fetcheth nothiug from Xenophon or Herodotus, but all his alluſions are to holy writ. As this ſpeech is, plainely from Ieremy. And, the Prophets (who in reſpect of Media, by whoſe forces ſpecially Babel was taken, denounce her ruine Ier. 50. 41. from the North) ſhew the weakeneſſe of that coni
                  •
               
               cture. And this Propheſie cleereth euidently that her deſtruction ſhall be by Weſterne Kings euen the hornes of

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
the Beaſt, who hauing long drunke of her cup, and giuen their Kingdomes to the Beaſt, at laſt haue their hearts turned by God, to hate the Whore, eate her fleſh, make her naked, and burne her with fire: and ſo ſhall make way for the Kings of the Eaſt, that is, whole States (that particular perſons be not thought heere to bee deſigned, as were the Sages, who at the natiuity of Chriſt vpon ſight of his ſtar, came from the Eaſt to worſhip him, whil Prieſts and Phariſeis abode in blindneſſe) which, by Babels fall, the cleare ſtarre of Chriſt ſhall bring to bowe vnto him. Whereat Herod and all Ieruſalem ſhall bee troubled. As their endeauour heereupon well ſheweth. Now, heere, a Matth. 2. 3. great wiſdome and delightfull congruity, in the order of God his working, is to be obſerued and admired. By Antichriſt his vſurpation and darkeneſſe, preuailing on the fifth trumpet, as by the ſwelling of Euphrates, the Eaſt was alienated & debarred from the Kingdome of Dauid: God in his iuſtice, loſing thereafter, in the ſixth Trumpet, from Euphrates, theſe Armies of deſolation & poiſoning error. So heere, in the fifth Viall, the kingdome of Antichriſt becomming darke and contemptible, and in this ſixth Viall, all beauty, ſtrength, and fortification being dried vp, the Eaſt ſhall come againe to the Goſpell, and Iewes 
               
                  •
               epent from their obſtinate blindneſſe and induration. God, thus wonderfully, and to the high praiſe of his wiſe grace, bringing a more io
                  •
               full effect from Euphrates in Antichriſt his fall, then hee brought a heauy woe in his riſing. And conſider how wonderfully heereupon the caſe varieth. In the ſixth Trumpet, out of the mouthes of theſe deſtroiers, from Euphrates, came Three things, Fire, Brimſtone, and Smoake: By which three, the third part of men were deſtroied. Here, to diſturbe als ioifull an effect from the Eaſt, 
                  •
               u
                  •
                
               Of the mouthes of the Dragon, Beaſt and falſe Prophet, three foule ſpirits euen ſpirits of Deuils. That is, men led with the ſpirit of Satan, lyers, and murtherers like their Father, and accompanied with the effectuall deceiuableneſſe of his working, authoriſed by Antichriſt

his ſtate, and in ſpeciall by the falſe Prophet head thereof, are ſent abroad, as crouting froggs, to beſtirre themſelues. Who theſe are, the ſtate of our time and practiſe of Ieſuites and Seminary Prieſts, compaſſing Sea and Land, ſpecially buſie about Kings, maketh more then manifeſt. They beginne to ſee their waters drinking in, and Euphrates earſt ſo great a riuer, now running in a narrow channell; and this ſetteth them madlings a worke. Beſides their origine, they haue a ſpeciall note of diſtinction whereby to diſcerne them, that they are workers of miracles; ſo to ſhew them falſe Prophets, to whoſe begetting, authorizing, and ſetting a worke, all the power of the kingdome of darkeneſſe, Dragon, Beaſt, and falſe Prophet, haue iointly bended all their malice, force, and intiſing hypocriſie, as to the laſt puffe of Satan his mouth, and of the Vicar of his throne, for vnderpropping Babilon. But ſhee can not be cured. For the Beaſt goeth to deſtruction. Heere, the Beaſt and falſe Prophet Ier. 51. 9. Chap. 17. 8. are diſtinguiſhed, as the firſt and ſecond Beaſt, Chap. 13. That heere, may bee ſhewed a ioyned endeauour of the head and whole body of the ſtate. See vpon the next Chap. Sect. 11. 18. and vpon the 19. Sect. 27.
            10 The vnlucky euent, of this their endeauour, to themſelues and happy to the Church: ſpecially theſe to whom by this viall the way is prepared, is ſhewed in theſe words, that they gathered them to a place called in Ebrew Armageddon. Wherein, much matter is compriſed and offered to our conſideration: partly in the name of the place, but ſpecially, in that it is ſo called in Hebrew. The place is Armageddon, a word compoſed of Har a Mountaine and Mageddon a plot of ground in the of lot Manaſſe: famous in Scripture, for two notable euents, the one of great ioy, the other as ſorowful. The firſt is in the 5. of Iudges, where a great victory is obtained againſt Iabin and Siſera at the waters of Mageddo: when the Kings fought and were ſwept away. This was ſo noble a victory to the Church, as the Pſalmiſt maketh it

the meaſure of his wiſh againſt the enemies. The other Pſalm. 83. 9. 2 King. 23. 2. Chron. 35 als mournfull, is, when Ioſias by Necho is ſlaine at Mageddo. Whereupon, to the Iewes, inſued moſt bitter mourning. To both theſe euents the ſpirit heere alludeth; yet with this remarkable point of difference, that where the firſt of them was at the waters, the ſecond in the valley of Mageddo. Heere, the place is Armageddon, that is, the mountaine of Mageddon. This difference is purpoſelie put of the ſpirit, to ſhew that the enemies heere, ſhould bee in ſome great indeauour againſt the Church of God, in all the old Teſtament bearing the name of a Mountaine. Not onely for God ſtabliſhing her againſt all aſſailers, and for her eminencie, but alſo, in reſpect of her type in Mount Sion, and land of promiſe, which is a land of Mountaines, and for the Church her abode therein, called of Daniel Hartſebikadoſh. This is Dan. 11. 45. Ezek. 20. 6. 40 Iſai. 25. the Mountaine of Mountaines, wherein, the Lord will deſtroy death: and threſh Moab as ſtraw is threſhed in Madmena: in which the Lord will deſtroy all that riſe againſt her. Heerein then is implied, that this great deſtruction of Antichriſt and his aiders, by perſwaſion of the frogges, ſhall bee in a high enterpriſe againſt the true Church: as God foiled Gog vpon the Mountaines of Iſrael. And the King of the North entring in the pleaſant Land, and planting the Tabernacles of his Palace in the glorious and holy Mountaine. Now, as for this their purpoſe, cauſing their deſtruction, the place is called Har, a Mountaine. So, to expreſſe a double euent of this their enterpriſe, it is called Megiddon, by alluſion to the two ſtories before mentioned. To that in the 5. of Iudges, to ſhew, that the ſame ſhall befall all theſe enemies aſſembled by the frogges, which did befall Iabin and Siſera at the waters of Megeddo. And thereupon, ſuch a like ſong of ioy to the Church, as is that of Deborah and Barak. To the other ſtory of Ioſias ſlaughter, the alluſion is, to ſhew, that vpon this victory, ſhould ariſe ſuch a mourning, and that proper to the Iewes, as they had for the

ſlaughter of Ioſias in the valley of Mageddo; but of a much different kind. Euen that mourning whereof Zachary prophecieth in his 12. Chapter. When by this victory, the way beeing prepared for them to come and ſee him whom they pearced they ſhall bee ſorry for him, as one is ſorry for his firſt borne: and when, in that day, there ſhall bee a great mourning in Ieruſalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Mageddon. When Ezech. 20. 43. & 36. 31. Zach 12. 10. euery family ſhall mourne apart: and when they ſhall iudge themſelues worthy to haue bene deſtroied. God powring on them, to true repentance, the ſpirit of grace and compaſſion. And for this double effect, of the Iewes common ioy with the Church, and proper mourning, the place is called, in Hebrew, Armageddon. To expreſſe Ch 19. Sect. 4. that the Iewes, conuerted to the Goſpell, ſhall celebrate this victory, both with ioy, and alſo with godlie ſorrow cauſing repentance, for their by-gonne induration and pearcing of their Sauiour. In the firſt Chapter, ſpeaking of that ſight of Chriſt, whereby all families ſhould mourne before him, euen they who pearced him thorow; for this ſame purpoſe are put 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               ▪ and Amen for Grecian and Iew, who iointly ſhould ſee him, and mourn vpon ſight of the ſigne of the Sonne of man in heauen, Mat. 24. The ſame which heere is ſhewed in the vials, as vpon Chapt. 15. Sect. 1. was declared. In like manner Chap. 9. to ſhew, how both Iew and Grecian, ſhould at length know and deteſt Antichriſt, he is called in Hebrew Abaddon and in Greeke Apollyon. But in this place, that we may take vp the ſpiritual drift of the holy Ghoſt, in theſe who ſhall come, vpon this victory, from the Eaſt, hee telleth vs that the place ſhall bee called in Hebrew Armageddon. Not, but it ſhall bee 
                  •
               o called alſo in Greeke, that is, the Gentils Chriſtians ſhall alſo celebrate this victorie: but, to ſtirre vs to the vp-taking of a ſpeciall effect heereof in the Iewes, of common ioy with vs, and proper mourning for their owne induration againſt the common Sauiour, ſo the place is called in Hebrew.

The conuerſion of the Iewiſh people, by cleare warrant of Scripture, wee looke for. And that, not onely of certaine perſons, now and then, heere and there: but aſſuredly, that the body of that people ſhall ſolemnedly turne, to the great admiration of the world, and praiſe of God his both wiſdome and mercy. This the Prophets foretell clearely: the Apoſtle Paul moſt plainely; yea the Lord himſelfe, in the prediction of their ouerthrow, Luke 21. limitteth the time of their being trode vnder, till the fulneſſe of the Gentils bee brought in. Which ſelfe words, the Apoſtle vſing, Rom. 11. he exponeth clearely the Lord his meaning. It is a wonderfull prouidence, that the Iewes, fifteene hundreth yeeres, not poſſeſſing one foot of property in the earth, yet are kept a ſeparate people, that in his owne time the Lord may be magnified in his mercy and truth, towards them, to the aſtoniſhment of all the world. That the great deliuerances promiſed them in the Prophets, haue all their performance in Chriſt, it is certaine: but whereof, that the full accompliſhment commeth not til their ſolemne conuerſion, it is euident, by the Prophecies cited and applyed, by the Apoſtle, to that purpoſe. Now, whether they ſhall be brought to inhabite againe their owne Land, albeit I dare not determine: becauſe (it beeing typicall) all, promiſed theranent, may be performed in their coniunction to the Church, which is the true Ieruſalem from heauen: yet certainely, my heart inclineth to thinke ſo. Becauſe their ſolemne conuerſion muſt bring with it, the remoouing of their reproach, and ſo, of neceſſity, a gathering from their diſperſion, to brooke a ſtate in the eies of the world. And the Lord his owne words, limitting their beeing trode vnder foote ſeeme to implie no leſſe: O the deepeneſſe of the riches both of the wiſdome and knowledge of God! The Iewes, miſconceiuing the Prophets, are ſtrengthened in their error of Meſſias yet to come, becauſe they thinke, that before his comming, the Roman Empire muſt be vtterlie deſtroyed; which now ſtandeth

onely in the Pontificality. Whereby, any may well know, how great a way his fall, and of all that ſtate with him, ſhall open vnto them. So much the more as in place of his idolatrous ſuperſtition (whereat they now ſtumble) done away, they ſhall ſee the purity of true worſhip erected.
            11 The ſeuenth and laſt Viall is poured in the Aire. The effect whereof is ſummarilie, in one word denounced, and then typically declared. The denunciation is great: firſt for the authority, as beeing not onely from the Temple, but alſo from the throne in it, euen God his owne voice. And next, for the weight of the matter; that now, all is done. Not as if in that inſtant all things were accompliſhed; but, by pouring out of this Viall the ſigne beeing giuen, to ſhew that in the daies thereof all ſhould be finiſhed according as Chap. 10. was ſowrne. Neither is this to bee taken for the laſt conſummation, as neither is the great day of God almighty in the former Viall, for the laſt day: any time of God his great execution, beeing in Scripture ſpeech ſo called ordinarily. But heere it is ſaid to be done. Becauſe now at laſt, God is by this plague to deſtroy all enemies of his Church, and beautifie her with peace, liberty, and plenty of grace: ſo as all whatſoeuer by the Prophets hath bene foretold and promiſed of either, ſhall now haue the full accompliſhment. The Church beeing freed of all troubles, and hauing but to expect her bridegroome, for whom now ſhee ſhall bee prepared. This Chriſt himſelfe foretold. Lu Le 21. 28. 
               When yee therefore ſee all theſe things come to paſſe, then lift vp your heads. Theſe words then (it is done) are all one with theſe (now all is come to paſſe ſo as yee may lift vp your heads. See this ſame ſpeech in this ſame ſenſe, Chap. 21. They are as I thinke, much deceiued, who interpret the commotions heere ſubioyned, of the laſt conſummation: which ſhall not come thus, but as a theefe in the night, vpon a peaceable, ſecure, and ſleeping world: when all theſe broiles and whole effects of the

ſeuen Vials, called of Chriſt, Matth. 24. the ſigne of the ſonne of man, ſhall haue paſt before.
            12 This great effect, thus ſummarily in one word denounced, is declared by continuall allegorie. When the Aire is cleere and quiet, all, both ſea and land, riuers, fountaines, and heauenly lights, are calme and ſhine cleere. But, the Aire beeing troubled, all heere below is troubled, and for their vſe toward vs, the heauenly lights are alſo darkened: and theſe fearefull effects of thundrings, lightnings, voices, &c. ordinarily do follow. Hereby, the ſpirit will expreſſe an vniuerſall and horrible commotion and alteration of the ſtate of the earth; which in one word hee calleth an earth-quake: yea and that ſo ſtrange and huge, as the like was not ſince men inhabited the ſame. It was a great earth-quake (that is alteration and viciſſitude of things) when vpon opening of the ſixth ſeale, the ſtate of the Roman Empire was ſhaken, and in the ſixth head, receiued a deadly wound. But in the ouerthrow of Antichriſt, the Beaſt going to deſtruction, when the cured head and Beaſt quickned, therein againe, ſhall be ſlaine and deſtroyed: there ſhall be another kind of commotion and alteration of the ſtates of the world. So as, who ſeeme beſt fenced and hedged from all perill, as Ilands; and who ſeeme ſtronglieſt ſtabliſhed in greatneſſe & ſtrength, as Mountaines; ſhall flee away, and bee ſo vndone, as they ſhall bee found no more. And ſo, it is no maruell that this alteration ſhall bee conioyned with terrible plagues and iudgements vpon the wicked, like haile from heauen of a Talent weight: who notwithſtanding, remaine indured againſt God, and blaſpheme ſtill.
            13 The effect of this earth-quake, is declared to bee on the ſtate of Antichriſt and his aiders; vnder the names of the great City diuided in three; the Cities of Nations falling. Wherein, great Babel is now remembred and rewarded. The Nations did tread vnder

foot the holy Citie, Chapt. 11. And heere their Cities fall. In the ſtreets of the great City God his Prophets they murthered, vnburied and mocked three daies and a halfe. Heere, that great City is diuided in three. And ſo, that bewitching Babel, whoſe fall was denounced, Chap. 14. now commeth to ruine. For, by all theſe, that one ſtate is meaned; but that, with her fall, ſhall be conioined the fall of many great kingdomes, and all the face of the earth ſhall be altered. Which, beſides the reaſon of her greatneſſe, is yet the leſſe wonderfull for this, that with her fall ſhall come on, the conuerſion of the Iewes and orient with them, and apparantly by them. The ſubſequent Chapters, wherein this is more amply ſet foorth, maketh the matter cleare. Now what particularly is meaned, by renting of the great Citie in three, till the euent declare it, I dare ſay no more, but that apparently it ſheweth the ouerthrow and diſſipation of all the ſtrength of that State: which conſiſted in the ioyned power, counſell, and working of three. The Dragon, Beaſt, and falſe Prophet, verſe 13. Or if heereby, the holy Ghoſt will giue vs to take vp ſuch an vtter exterminion as is ſhewed Ezech. 5. or 6. 12. Or, if this diuiding in three, hath relation to the order of deſtruction ſet downe in the ſubſequent Chapters, in three degrees: firſt of the Whore, Chap. 17. and 18. next of the Beaſt and falſe Prophet, Chap. 19. and thirdly, of the Dragon, Chapter 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
         
         
            
            CHAP. XVII.
            
               WE haue heard the ſeuen degrees of the laſt wrath, whereof the ſeuenth hath in few wordes, ſo ſtrange an effect ſummarily implyed, as a larger manifeſtation thereof was neceſſary. Which accordingly the Spirit giueth; in the parties deſtroyed: manner, meaſure, and euents of their ouerthrow.
            2 The parties deſtroyed, are the Whore, in this and the next Chapter. The Beaſt and falſe Prophet, Chapter 19. And laſtly for an abſolute victory, the Dragon Chap. 20. Whereupon inſueth the goodly and graceful, ſtate of the Church, Chapter 21. and 22.
            3 To the ſight and perception of the damnation of the great VVhore, Iohn is firſt exhorted and diſpoſed by one of theſe Angels which had the ſeuen Vials, 1. 2 and beginning of the third verſe. Secondly, a viſion is exhibited till neere the end of the 6. verſe. From thence, to the end of this Chapter, the viſion is exponed by the Angell.
            4 In the action of diſpoſing Iohn to the perception of theſe things, are the Inſtrument and his endeauour. The inſtrument is one of theſe ſeuen who had the Vials. To ſhew, that the time when the vials ſhold be a powring out, would bring with it a more cleare knowledge, of Antichriſt, and of the trumperie of this VVhore, great by his power and credite: and ſhould waken vp and diſpoſe men to ſee more euidently theſe things which before were but of few, or then obſcurely known. Thus by degrees light groweth. The Angell his endeauour to this end is two-fold, in that both with voice he ſtirreth

vp, and carrieth Iohn in ſpirit to the wilderneſſe. To let vs ſee, that for perception of ſuch things we are not onely to be wakened vp from our naturall dulneſſe, but muſt in a manner 
                  •
               e ſeparated from our ſelues, and all common conuerſation of the world: which yet ſtandeth not ſo much in the retreat of the body, or retiredneſſe of place, as in right diſpoſition of ſpirit. The Angell ſtirreth Iohn to perception, by an argument from the great ſight hee was to ſhew him, the damnation of the great whore, which according hee performeth, in ſhewing the Whore, this Chapter, and her damnation Chap. 18.
            5 The greatneſſe of this Whore (for further wakening vp of Iohn (and vs in his perſon) is yet amplified by 3. Arguments. Firſt, her great Dominion in theſe wordes, which ſitteth on many waters. So interpreted, verſe 15. therefore fitly is the decay of her eſtate called drying vp of her waters, Chapter 16. 12. Ier. 50. 38. and 51. The ſecond argument is from the perſons, with whom ſhee playeth the harlot. Firſt, for quality great, as being Kings; next for number, many, as indifferently, committing whoredome with all the Inhabitants of the earth: thus being both a great and a common whore. The third argument is, her whoriſh and deceiuable perſwaſion, like that Prouerbes 5. by her allurements, ſubtlety, deceiuing men as with wine, and making them drunken, ſo to dote more & more on her, as men drunken luſt aye the more after wine, till becomming altogether ſenſleſſe all true iudgement be ſtollen from them. This is it which maketh all paines taken with ſuperſtitious Idolatries for their conuerſion to bee vnprofitable: as it is but folly to deale with a drunken man while his wine is on him. This is that Babylon, Chapter 14. againſt which, the heauy wrath there denounced, heere taketh full execution. And for clearing the equity thereof, it is moſt plainly heere opened what ſhee is, and of what time, and ſtate.
            
               
6 To Iohn thus prepared, appeareth the viſion of a woman ſitting on a beaſt, and properties of both. Of the Beaſt his properties wee will ſpeake in the Interpretation of the viſion which the holy Ghoſt himſelfe giueth. The woman is glorious in all worldly pompe, and royall magnificence, whereby ſhee dazeleth the eyes of men; ſhee is a moſt abhominable Harlot, prouoking to deteſtable Idolatry and ſuperſtition, and in place of the healthſome waters of life, propining her owne traditions and deuiſes (for ſtollen waters are ſweet) which in deteſtation thereof, the holy Ghoſt here nameth by an Ier. 51. 7. abhominable name, This ſhee doeth vnder faire pretenſes, deceiuing with a golden Cuppe. Shee is an impudent profeſſed Harlot, and mother harlot of the world; and yet with ſuch deepe ſubtlety couering her practiſes, as none ſhall read that which is openly written on her fore-head, but the lightned by the ſpirit, to finde out the myſtery. For ſhee is like that adulterous woman, Prou. 30. 20. which eateth and wipeth her mouth, and ſayeth ſhee hath done nothing. Finally, ſhee is a cruell murthereſſe of Saints. Shee ſitteth on the Beaſt, as borne vp by him, and hauing all this glory and bewitching power to deceiue, onely through that credite and eſtimation which ſhee hath by the Beaſt her aduancer.
            7 This viſion worketh in Iohn admiration, yet not ſuch as was that Chapter 13. of them who admire and follow the Beaſt, and that hereafter verſe 8. but no the leſſe hauing mixed with it ſome ſuch infirmity as required a wakening of him from a vaniſhing aſtoniſhment, wherein many lie benummed in theſe our dayes, who Cap. 14. Sect. 3 Abac. 1. 5. Act. 13. 31. yet wonder not the firſt wondring. This effect of the viſion occaſioneth the Interpretation. Firſt, of the Beaſt who is ſummarily deſcribed ver. 8. and after more plainly exponed in the interpretation of the heads and horns. His ſummary deſcription is by his ſtable and yet variable condition, which in thoſe who are not written in the booke of life, worketh ſuch admiration as was that,

Chapter 13. This Beaſt then in ſome ſort and reſpect, had beene before that time, wherein Iohn ſeeth him, and in ſome reſpect and condition was euen then, albeit not as it was before, neither as it ſhould be thereafter: and was yet to come in a different reſpect & condition from either. And as it was yet to come (which is the condition and time, wherein, here it is to bee taken and conſidered) it hath two remarkeable notes. One is, that it ſhould ariſe out of the bottomleſſe pitte, which albeit in ſome ſort it may bee ſaid of all wicked powers, yet it is in a ſingular manner proper to Antichriſt, Chapter 9. and 13. the Vicar of the Dragon his kingdome, the Angell of the bottomleſſe pitte, the aduerſary, the man of ſin, and ſonne of perdition. His other note is, that hee goeth to deſtruction: whereof hereafter.
            8 This deſcription, ſo obſcurelie proponed, as in a ridle, the Angell moſt clearely openeth in the interpretation of the heads and hornes: ſo as it is maruell why any ſhould ſeeke after any other ſenſe of the Angels words, then that which himſelfe giueth.
            9 Firſt then the heades are both ſeuen hilles, on which the woman ſitteth, and alſo ſeuen Kings. The firſt is ſo cleare a note of Rome as Grammarians know it, and both are put here iointly, for cleare demonſtration what ſtate hee pointeth at; as alſo to ſhew that the heads of that ſtate (as they are Kings) muſt onely bee taken of ſuch as alwayas held that City, and not of ſuch as are, or were heades in bare title, neither abiding in that City, nor making it great and glorious by their power, ſuch as were the Grecian Emperours after the fall of the weſterne Empire. And much more ridiculouſly ſince, the Kings of Germany, bearing the title of Romane Emperours, while they haue not one foot within Italy: yea, & of all Princes, who now domine within the compaſſe of the olde Romane dition, brooke the ſmalleſt portion thereof, and whatſoeuer either now be or before was the Title of other yet ſeeing the Beaſt

bearing vppe the woman, maketh her glory and grandeure; none can bee eſteemed for heades now, but theſe, by whome ſhee retaineth her credite, luſtre and pompe. Neither are Kings here to bee taken for ſo many perſons, but for ſo many kinds of ſoueraign gouernments, in courſe, ruling that ſtate, according to the knowne frame of Hebrue ſpeech. Now, in exponing theſe ſeuen Kings, hee doth interprete the former darke ſpeech, and leadeth vs euen by the hand, to the Dan. 7. 17. time, and that ſtate and condition of Rome in time, which here properly is the Beaſt bearing the Whore.
            10 The Beaſt had been in a ſort, in the fiue heades who were fallen. It was euen then, in reſpect of the policy at that time ruling: but as the Beaſt here is diſcribed, and ſpecially to bee vnderſtood, that is, as by him Rome becommeth the great whore, hee was yet to come. The fiue fallen were Kings, Conſuls, Dictators, Decemuirs, and Tribunes. Caeſars the ſixt head ruled in Iohn his dayes. A ſeuenth was to come, which notwithſtanding is not the Beaſt, or head making this beaſt, as here it is ſet downe. For that head was ſoone to euaniſh: but the eight head in number, and which in a ſort, is one of the ſeuen, hath here peculiarly the name of this beaſt.
            11 Of this head, three things are noted. Firſt, that hee is the eighth in number and order. Secondly, that yet in a ſort, hee is one of the ſeuen: to ſhew, how notwithſtanding that eight are here counted, it ſtandeth yet true, that the Beaſt had but ſeuen heads. Not that it was one, and the ſame properly; but for viue reſemblance, Chapter 13. As making vp the image of the Beaſt by cure of the deadly wound, and bringing kingdomes & prouinces in als great ſubiection to Rome by the cup of fornication, (thus bearing vp the Whore) as did earſt the former heads by force of Armes: ſo it is both the eight, and in a ſort the ſixt, wherein the Beaſt had got a deadly wound, which this head cureth. For the liuely reſemblance in Monarchie, ſtate, lawes, rites, veſtments,

&c. Read the donation of Conſtantine and Steuchus in defence of it. This eighth head then is the Pontificality by which Rome is extolled and borne vp to be a Queene and Lady of Kingdomes, bewitching the world: and becauſe in the ſummarie ſpeech, he had ſaid that the Beaſt was to come, and ſeeing ſeuen heades had onely beene attributed to the Beaſt, whereof none of the ſixe could be hee (as he is here proponed) leſt hereby we ſhould thinke that of neceſſity the next head after Caeſars, being the ſeuenth, behoued to bee this Beaſt (the Antichriſt:) the Angell in great wiſdome and plainneſſe pulleth vs from that thought, in ſhewing that one was then to come, who yet was not hee; for that ſhould ſoon bee gone: but the eighth and laſt ſhould bee this Beaſt. I ſhewed on the 13. Chapter, that the ſeuenth head was the Kingdome of the Oſtrogothes: to whoſe King Theodoricus, the Emperour of the Eaſt, with aduiſe of Senate, willingly bequeathed Rome and Italy, & ſacro texit velamine, 
               Sabellic. En. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . lib. 2. 
               in Signum reiab imperio conceſſae: and who of the Romans was receiued as their lawfull Prince, and by himſelfe and his Succeſſors raigned ouer it many yeeres: during which, was both peace and friendſhippe betwixt them and the Emperours of Conſtantinople, all the dayes of Zeno, Anaſtaſius, and Iuſtinus. The third note of this eighth head, called peculiarly the Beaſt bearing the Whore, is, that hee goeth to deſtruction. And in this, hee is alſo ſingular from all former heads, who albeit they all did fall, yet the beaſt in ſome ſort remained. For the State and credite of the Kingdome abode in ſome degree in the ſubſequent heades. But this eighth head ſhall draw that whole ſtate with him to vtter and euerlaſting ruine, and this is that which Chapter 19. is meaned, where it is ſaid, that the Beaſt and falſe Prophet are taken, and both caſt in the Lake. Whereupon many fondly imagine, that the Beaſt and falſe Prophet bee two diuers. But this is it which the ſpirit would ſhew vs, that the falſe Prophet who is the head ſhall ſo fall, as

the body of the ſtate and Kingdome ſhall periſh with him. For none ſhall bee able to cure his wound, or reuiue any image of that ſtate againe, as he did the wound of the ſixth head. So then, taken abſolutely, this Beaſt is Antichriſt, that is, the Pontificality raigning ouer Rome, or the Kingdom of Rome vnder the eighth head the Pontificality. When the Beaſt and falſe Prophet are diſtinguiſhed, it is but for explication, to ſhew the ſtate or Kingdome, and who is head of it. And thus I ſhew, that Chapter 13. were the firſt and ſecond Beaſt to bee vnderſtood, as by this place is euident, where the firſt Beaſt is onely mentioned, and peculiarly called the eighth head, who is alſo one of the ſeuen, and not the ſeuenth as moſt part make him: for ſo the ſpirit had more eaſily called him the eighth and ſeuenth, then one of the ſeuen, but that hereby hee would lead vs to know which of the ſeuen hee is ſaid in a ſort to be. How farre Theodoricus and his wiſe daughter after him laboured, See vpon Chap. 13. Sect. 7. that Rome might both recouer and hold her ancient glory and magnificence, albeit hee ſeldome made refidence there: the Stories giue cleare Teſtimony. From the fall of the Gothike Kingdome, the growth, pompe, and eſtimation of that City hath onely been by the Pontificality, bearing it vp, and by ſemblance of the Lambe his hornes, procuring to it worſhippe of Nations. For otherwaies ſaith Steuchus, it had remained foediſſima boum, porcorumque habitatio. So as, ſince that time, to make any other the head or King of Rome, whereby ſhee had growth or honour, it is ridiculous, and againſt all euidence of ſtory. The Grecian Emperours, except an idle title, neither made any abode in that City, neither euer durſt openly attempt any further power therin then it pleaſed the Popes to allow them. And ſuch of them as at times did exerciſe any therein, it was not onely by ſurpriſe vnder falſe ſemblance, & preſence of peace: but their dealing alſo with it was in plaine hoſtility as ſtrangers. So as in effect they were rather ſpoilers and

rifelers then bearers vp of her. The French and Germane Emperours aduanced her, but as hornes of the Beaſt who beareth her vppe. Who, that hee might the better puſh with them at his pleaſure, hath ridiculouſly, fed them with idle titles, as hee doth his other hornes, whom he crowneth and decrowneth as he liſteth. But hee himſelfe is this Beaſt, bearing vp this harlot.
            12 Thus are his heads. The hornes haue many diſtinct and cleere notes to ſhew the Beaſt, who, and of what time he is. Of their number, ſee vpon Chapter 13. Section 8. Firſt then, theſe hornes are crowned Kings: that inferiour Rulers, as Liuetenants, or Preſidents of Prouinces, bee not heere imagined. According to the condition of this Beaſt, vnder the former heads, who themſelues only were crowned and not their hornes. Secondly, their time of being is noted: that they were not as yet riſen, but were to come. Thirdly, they are not ſo many perſons in ſucceſſion of one Kingdome, but ſo many Kingdomes, which all at one time ſhould raigne, euen with the Beaſt, vnder the eight head. The Beaſt, Daniel 7. with tenne hornes, hath no mention of heads: For that there, the hornes haue the conſideration of the heads of that Kingdome, wherein ſucceſſiuely ſhould raigne ſo many Kings. Heere (which ſome Interpreters ſhould haue better obſerued) this Beaſt hath both ſo many heads, and beſides, tenne hornes by all
                  •
               ſion to that: becauſe heere the hornes are not to bee conſidered as heads of the ſtate, ſignified by this Beaſt, or ſoueraigne Kings ruling it. Which, if the ſpirit had minded, he had not attributed thereto heads alſo, more then to that in Daniel. But the ſoueraigne policies being expreſſed by heades, the hornes are put to expreſſe the ſtrength of this Kingdome, in ſo many props of her power: and that ſo cleerely is vttered by the Angell, as it is wonder what ſhould make men to miſſe of his meaning: while he telleth plainely, that they are Kings, Which ſhall receiue a Kingdome at one houre with the Beaſt. Which cannot conſiſt with the making them Kings of that ſame ſtate, which

by the Beaſt is ſignified: ſo confounding heads and hornes which the holy Ghoſt hath diſtinguiſhed ſo clearely. Fourthly, their ſubiection to the Beaſt ſhould bee voluntary, and with vniforme and free conſent: not inforced by Armes, as was the ſeruitude of Nations to the Empire, but by the bewitching power of the cup of fornication, and theſe deceiueable ſignes and wonders, Chapter 13. This is the vnity of the Church of Rome. This note alſo euinceth cleerely, that theſe hornes are kingdomes voluntary ſubiecting themſelues to the pontificality and Roman Kingdome vnder him, and not ſo many ſucceſſiue Kings of any, much leſſe of that kingdome, to which they gaue their Kingdomes. Fiftly, they with the Beaſt, ſhould fight againſt the Lambe. But to their owne confuſion, for two reaſons. One, in the Captaine, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. The other in his Army, who are called choſen and faithfull. Not that he needeth any army orforces to ouercome theſe hornes: but it is to ſhew, that their fighting againſt the Lambe ſhould bee in his members. Who yet ſhould ouercome in the ſtrength of their King, by whom they are effectually called, ſo, as their calling confirmeth to them their election, and that by true faith wrought in them, which is the victory wherewith they ouercome the world: reſting on their Lord, and being 1. Ioh. 5. 4. faithfull to him euen to the death. and this is not repugnant to that which was ſaid, Chapter 13: 7. For that ouercomming of Saints was not abſolute either in degree or time: but onely the ſlaying of their bodies and bearing downe of truth for a ſpace, Chap. 11. & 14. 12. Which, with them notwithſtanding, reuiued againe, not onely to the terrour of their aduerſaries, but alſo to their ouerthrow.
            13 Thus is the Beaſt bearer vp of the woman. Euen the ſame, whereof Chapter 13. but that proceſſe of time, in the progreſſe of iniquity, giueth him, now, two notes ſomewhat different from that. The one, is ſcarlet colour, for increaſe of cruelty, wherein, by this time, hee hath

come to ſuch height, as, for that, he hath now the Dragon his owne colour. Who before this, a ſpace was let looſe, Chap. 20. the thouſand yeeres of his reſtraint being expired: ſo as for bloody rage, now this ſuffragant of his throne, 
                  •
               arſt like a Pard, is all of a bloody colour: and the Whoore is drunke with the blood of Saints. The other note is, that where, firſt, he had but his head busked with the name of blaſphemy, he is now, for growth of impiety and of ſacrilegions vſurpation of diuine honour, full of names of blaſphemy. The head which at firſt was busked therewith, both waxing therein, and defyling alſo all the body. So as, now it is high time to come out of her. The Beaſt was, firſt, like a Pard; a cruell, yet a fraudulent Chap. 13. beaſt, and leſſe horrible to behold: But afterward more violent and raging.
            The Whoore borne vp by this beaſt, is ſhewed here, firſt by her great dominion, touched in the beginning of this Chapter, and heere now interpreted. This dominion ſhee hath through the Beaſt, her bearer. Secondly, her iudgement is heere ſummarily foretold, which at length is handled in the next Chapter. And thirdly, in proper and plaine termes is told who ſhee is. Euen, The City which ruleth ouer the Kings of the Earth So plaine a circumſcription of Rome, as the Aduerſaries are aſhamed to denie it.
            14 In her iudgement, are three things. Firſt, by whom it is. Secondly, what it is. 3. How it commeth on. It is, by the hornes of the Beaſt, who ſhall worke her ouerthrow. What it is, is ſhewed by a naturall order. They ſhall hate her: they ſhall leaue her deſolate, by defection from her, vpon ſight of her impiety and abominations: they ſhall make her naked, pulling from her, her ornaments, rents and clothing: they ſhall eate her fleſh, feeding on her ſpoile as ſhe was facted and growne great with the ſpoile of Nations: laſtly, they ſhall burne her with fire. Now, here, we muſt not imagine that all theſe kings, who haue giuen their Kingdomes to the Beaſt, ſhall at one inſtant reuolt: many ſtill cleauing to him till his laſt

foile, after the Whore is burnt, and ſo made pertakers of his iudgement, Chap. 18. and 19. But the holy Ghoſt will tell vs, that her deſtruction ſhal be by theſe ſame kingdomes and ſtates which haue drunken of her cuppe, and had beene the ſtaies of the Beaſt his kingdome, and ſo, of her magnificence. And, what is done of any of theſe, is ſaid, indefinitely of all. For, her deſtruction muſt bee by Weſterne Princes, that ſo, a way may bee prepared for the Eaſt to embrace the Goſpell. Heereof, in no ſmall degrees, we ſee the execut. on begunne and well farre aduanced, and the laſt degree is comming on quickely. How this ſo ſtrange a caſe falleth; that, who were the hornes of her power, and her darlings committing fornication with her, ſhould now turne to be her haters and deſtroiers, is ſhewed, that it commeth by God his diſpoſition and allruling prouidence: who, as in his iuſtice, hee gaue ouer theſe Kingdomes to the efficacy of error to beleeue lies, for not beleeuing the truth 2. Theſſ. 2. So, in his owne time, when his iudgement therein was fulfilled, for hir iuſt deſtruction who had ſo bewitched the world, hee ſhould turne their hearts to hate her who had ſo long and vildely abuſed them. Conferre heerewith the 16. Chap. of Ezechiel.
            
            15 Laſtly, as I touched before, is told in ſo plaine termes who this Whoore is, that the Romans are forced to confeſſe it. Bellarmine lib. 3. de Pontifice, cap. 13. Ribiera vpon this booke. The Rhemiſhe doctours are ſo ſtraited, that ſeeking ſhifts, they againſt a cleere light bewray an euill conſcience. See their annotations on this place.
            16 So then, by all the courſe of this Propheſie, yea and the Romans owne confeſſion, this is manifeſt that Rome is the Whoore. And ſo, by neceſſary conſequence, the ſeat of Antichriſt his kingdome. Whereby it is that ſhee is the mother of Whootedomes, and Lady of Kingdomes: through herexaltation and being borne vp by the Beaſt. Neither ſhall euer the Ieſuites bee able, confeſſing, once Rome to be this Whoore, but of neceſſitie to grant

alſo that the Beaſt muſt be the kingdome of Rome. Whereof, many of themſelues perceiuing the ineuitable conſequence, fall next, for exepting the Pontificality from this blot, to deſpute of the time. Some making Rome, vnder the perſecuting Emperours, to be the Whoore: as Bellarmine in the place aboue cited. But, ſhe is, ſo, the Whoore, and then, the Whoore, as, and when ſhee is borne vp by this Beaſt, which fooliſhly he diuideth. Others, reiourne this to a future time, when as Antichriſt ariſing, forſooth, Rhemiſts'on this place. ſhall poſſibly expell the Pope out of Rome, and ſit there. So, forgetting the long boaſted priuiledge of Peter his Chaire: and while they ſeeke to eſcape, ſnaring themſelues more; by granting that to be poſſible, vpon the alleaged impoſſibility whereof, they long agoe builde al defence. But the holy Ghoſt, euidently, here ſpoileth them of all ſhift, by cleare demonſtration: Whereby, as Rome is cleared to be the Whore, and the kingdome of Rome to be the Beaſt: ſo are we led, as it were, by the hand, to the time when: and particular ſtate of that kingdome, wherein it is to be taken for the Beaſt, heere, and Chapter 13. deſcribed: and that by three infallible tokens. Firſt, by a full and perfect enumeration of al the heads (that is, ſoueraigne ſorts of Rulers) from the firſt beginning of that ſtate, to the laſt and vtter fall thereof: and therewithall telling vs, that in none of the fiue fallen before Iohn his time, is that ſtate, the Beaſt as he is heere vnderſtood, or, conſequently, Rome, the whoore: neither in the head then ruling, namely Caeſars: neither in the ſeuenth head, which, vpon the deadly wound of the Beaſt in the ſixth head, ſhould ariſe and ſoone euaniſh. But in the eight head, ariſing by cure of the wound, and in that reſpect, one of the ſeuen, which was to come out of the bottomleſſe pit, that kingdome is the beaſt vnder that head, the falſe Prophet. And therefore the Beaſt heere is peculiarly denominate by that head.
            17 The ſecond infallible taken is the ſingular and different manner of working of the Beaſt and Whoore, in

that ſtate and head, wherein, properly, the Beaſt is to bee holden for Antichriſt, from all the former: and ſo properly, competent to the laſt head, as can in no way agree to ame of the other. For the hornes in time of that head, vnder which that kingdome is peculiarly this Beaſt, are crowed Kings, and ſuch as are not ſubdued by violence or force of Armes, but willingly and with one conſent giue their Kingdomes to the Beaſt: being bewitched by the cup of fornication, and deceiued by lying ſignes and wonders vnder pretence of the Lambe his hornes, Chapter 13. So as, then only the kingdome of Rome is to be holden by this beaſt, when it is vnder ſuch a head, as, by whoſe domination, Rome be commeth the Whoore, that is, the bewitcher of the world by ſuperſtitious and idolatrous worſhip, ſignes and myracles, and pretence of Chriſtian power and holineſſe. Not hauing or pretending ſo much, a power to ſlay mens bodies, as, by poiſonable errour, to ſting and forment their conſciences, Chap. 9. and bringing Kingdomes in ſubiection, more by feare of conſcience then force of Armes. Which is properly to be the whoore. For, vnder al the former heads, Rome was rather a murthering furie, then an inticing harlot: drinking more the ſuperſtition of al other Nations thē propining any to them. Neither were any peoples ſubiected to her willingly, but by compulſion and Armes. But then ſhe became the harlot, when vnder pretence of Chriſt his power, and by deceit of the cup of fornication, ſhe made Kings, voluntarily and with one conſent, ſubmit their Crownes to her: ſo making vp the image of the Beaſt.
            18 The third proper note and token is, this Beaſt goeth to deſtruction. For vnder this laſt head that ſtate and Kingdome muſt be vndone for euer: and ſhall not bee as in the fall of the former heads, when in the next ſucceeding, it held place: but this head ſhall ſo fall, as with him he ſhall draw that ſtate to eternall ruine. In which reſpect, it is ſaid, Chapter 19. that the Beaſt and falſe Prophet are both taken and caſt into the fire. Thus, for a moſt cleare

opening of all this Propheſie, the Holy Ghoſt heere in this Chapter, hath ioined the Beaſt, Head and Whoore: and exponed ſo euidently in a huge wiſdome. To make vs ſee, that what Chapter 13. hee ſpake of two beaſts: what, through the booke, hee ſpeaketh diſtinctly of the Beaſt, and the VVhoore, Babylon: of the Beaſt and falſe Prophet: is all, but for cleare explication of Antichriſt. VVhat a King hee is: of what Kingdome: of what time, and manner of working: cleering the Kingdome, by the head: and both Kingdome and head, by the head City of their power: with euident and infallible notes to take vp the right time and condition of all. So as the Romans, mocking our incertainety, (as they thinke) whether the Beaſt, the VVhoore, or the falfe Prophet, bee Antichriſt, bewray but their owne ignorance, or malice, or both. For the Beaſt is Antichriſt: but ſo, and then, as, and when the head is a falſe Prophet: vnder preſence of the Lambe his power making Rome the VVhoore, and bewitcher of the world. In which reſpect, the falſe Prophet is the Beaſt: the eight head and one of the ſeuen. And thus, the Beaſt is onelie Antichriſt, as the Beaſt is the eight head, euen the falſe Prophet. And the falſe Prophet is Antichriſt, but as he is the Beaſt that is head of the kingdome of Rome. And Rome is the VVhore, but as ſhe is borne vp by this Beaſt, the falſe Prophet. How plainely the holy Ghoſt telleth this, take vp in this argument.
            19 That ſoueraigne policy, ruling in and ouer the City, ſituated one ſeuen hils, and, in Iohn his daies, bearing rule ouer Nations: which in number and order is the eighth head or ſoueraigne policie, after the fiue fallen before Iohn, the ſixth then ruling and a ſeuenth to come, but ſoone to euaniſh: which eight head recouereth, to the ſtate hee ruleth, the luff
                  •
               e, eſtimation, and ſubiection of Prouinces, which by a deadly wound, in one of the former heades, it had loſed: thus reerecting, if not the ſame properly, yet a liuely image of

the decaied ſtate: and, for this reſpect, as he is the eight in courſe, ſo is hee in a ſort, one of the ſeuen heads and is peculiatlie the Beaſt: and, which ſoueraigne pollicie and eight head (peculiarly the Beaſt) worketh all, as a Porphet and vnder pretence of Chriſt his power: and thus, induceth the Kings of the earth, voluntary and with free and vnanime conſent, to ſubmit their Crownes vnto him: ſo, procuring to his ſeat ſuch account and credit, as the whole earth drinketh her ſuperſtitious and idolarrous worſhip: wherethrough ſhee becommeth a great and mother harlot. And which eight ſoueragne policy or head, ſhall bee the laſt head of that kingdome, for that, in the fall thereof, that ſtate ſhall be deſtroied for euer. That ſouerainge policy o
                  •
                head, is the Antichriſt.
            20 But the Pontificality is the ſoueraigne policy or head thus, for place, order and number in ſucceſſion, manner and effect of working, heere peculiarly called the Beaſt: and which, as hee is from the bottomleſſe pit, and angell thereof 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , ſo he, and with him, that ſtate goeth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            
               
                  Ergo, &c. Wee ſpeeke not of coniecture: but as it is written, I beleeued and therefore I ſpake. Wee beleeue, and therefore ſpeake,
               
               2. Cor. 4. 13.
            
         
         
            
            CHAP. XVIII.
            
               THe great Whore was deſcribed in the former Chapter. Her iudgement followeth in this: ſhewed by three heauenly voices: in each whereof, the ſame is magnifickly amplyfied, by the certainty, the inſtant performance, greatneſſe. and equity thereof. And peculiarlie, in the laſt, by that, her ruine is irreparable. The firſt voice is to the 4. verſe. The ſecond to the 21. And the third to the end.
            2 In the firſt voice, are the perſon denouncer, and the point denounced. The denouncer, is an Angell, remarkeable for geſture and dignity. His geſture is: that hee commeth downe from heauen. His dignity, in that hee hath great authority; which is cleared by the effect, in that all the earth was lightened with his glorie. At the ſecond degree of the out-breake of the light of the Goſpell, from vnder Antichriſtian darkeneſſe, Chapt. 14. an Angel denounced the ſame which this doth: but that, did flee thorow the midſt of heauen: that is, albeit ſwiftlie, and in the publike view of men, yet the cleare perception, of what he denounced, was farre remoued aboue their reach: the preaching of the Goſpell, not hauing then for cleare euidence, the authority which ſince it hath, and daily more and more ſhall obtaine, through the Angel, no more fleeing farre aboue (as theſe Chap. 14. in the reuerting, and that Chapt. 8 in the laſt degree of decay of light) but now. in plenty of glorious light, as it were comming downe from the heauen, and lightning the earth with a neer and euident ſight of that, which before was reuealed, but farre oft This Angel then, is the type of the cleare light and powerfull

miniſtery of the Goſpell, now in a neere degree, both ſhewing clearely, and working powerfully, Antichriſt his fall. The miniſters of light
                  •
               , are of Chriſt, the true light, called the light of the world: and their miniſterie Mat. 5. 14. 1. Cor. 3. Iſai 52. 7. Rom. 10. 15. is glorious, euen glorified as concerning the exceeding glory. For, how beautifull on the Mountaines, are the feete of them that preach good tidings? &c. The deſcription of this denouncing Angel, implyeth not only the certainty of what hee proclaimeth, as from heauen, and with great authority and euidence: but alſo, the inſtant performance thereof; in that he commeth downe in ſuch aboundance of glorious light, as Babel can ſtand no longer, no more then could Sodome, after the Angel his downe-comming Gen. 18. 21. to ſee i
                  •
                For Babel the glory of Kingdomes, ſhall bee as 
               Iſai 13. 19. 
               the deſtruction of God in Sodome and Gomorrha. Therefore, the point denounced, albeit it bee the ſame in ſubſtance, which Chap 14. was threatned: yet here, it commeth in another degree of cleare manifeſtation, certaine performance, in the perſwaſion of hearers, and neere approaching execution: God now beeing to paſſe by her no more, for ſhee is come in remambrance before him.
            
            3 Of this denounced point, is ſhewed alſo the greatneſſe and equity. The greatneſſe in theſe words, and ſhe is become, &c. So to ſhew a horrible deſolation: ſuch as ſhould not onely make her waſte and ſolitarie, but alſo deteſtable and abominable: as are ghoſtly and Elphriſh places full of Panike terror, and the ordinarie retrait of Iſai. 13. & 34. Ier. 50. Zeph. 2. all theſe things, which both flee humane ſociety, and the ſight whereof, men moſt abhorre. The ſpeech is from common ſenſe, whereby wee eſteeme theſe deſolate and foreleited places to be full of foule ſpirits: which reſort moſt in filthy roomes, as the damoniake of alegion abode Mar. 5. amongſt the graues. Whether their delight bee in ſuch places, or, if God in his iuſtice, ſo confine them, or, if in ſuch places they appeare moſt, to mooue the more terrour.
            
               
4 The equity of this great fall, is for bringing all the earth into the ſin of ſpirituall fornication; ſo making Nahum. 3. it guilty of wrath: and that ſo farre, as the greateſt Kings were beſotted with her. While ſhee by couetouſneſſe, and deceitfull efficacy of errour, ſo maketh merchandize of all men, as the miniſters of her abominations waxed Kings fellowes, ſwimming in all aboundance of wealth and carnall pleaſure. And therefore it is a iuſt thing with God, that ſhee who with falſe ſemblance, drew all the earth after her, ſhould bee now no leſſe abhorred, then is hell the dwelling of Diuels: that ſhe who was the darling of Kings, committing filthineſſe with them, ſhould now bee a receptacle of foule and filthie ſpirits: and ſhee who for frequent reſort and multitude of trade, was not only her ſelfe the Lady of Kingdomes, but alſo, made all her merchants rich, through her ſuperfluous luxury, ſhould nowe, become ſo deſolate and forſaken, as to bee the neſting place of all vncleane and hatefull birds.
            5 The ſecond voice from heauen, amplifieth and cleareth theſe ſame points of certaine and inſtant performance, equity, and greatneſſe of her iudgement: that ſo, in the mouthes of two or three witneſſes, and from Deut. 17. 6 & 19. 15. Ioh. 8. 17. heauen, the matter may be ſtable. And this is by a threefold exhortation to the Saints. 1. To forſake and come out of her, proper to ſuch, as at this time, ſhall yet be within her. So little reaſon hath ſhe at any time to glory in the number of the Beaſt his name. 2. To repay her with iuſt recompence. And. To reioice of her fall. The firſt, are ſtirred, firſt to come out of her, by argument of a manifeſt perill to the remainers, of being infected with the contagion of her ſinne, and conſequently, inuolued with her in the ſame iudgement. For ſociety in ſinne bringeth fellowſhip in wrath. Secondly, they are ſtirred to do it with diligence, both for the greatneſſe of the iudgement, and preſent effuſion of wrath, which can haue no delay, in reſpect her ſinne is come to

the height, ſhee hauing ſo, ſtill heaped ſinne on ſinne, that her iniquity hath mounted to the heauens: ſo as Ier. 51. 9. Ezr. 9. 6. God, who for his patience and long-ſuffering, appeareth often to forget the waies of men, is now to poure out on her ſuch a full cup of wrath, as ſhall well witneſſe him to remember her ſinnes, and to bee a iuſt repayer of iniquitie. Thus, as the exhortation to come out, by a voice from heauen, ſheweth the certainty of a preſent fall, like that of Sodom, when Lot was bid of the Angels to come out of her; and that of Babel properly, when by the Iſai. 48. 28. & 52. 11 Ier. 50. 8 & 51. 6. Prophets, the people of Iſrael were exhorted to come out of her and bee as the hee-goats of the flocke: ſo is both the greatneſſe of her deſtruction heerein implyed, like that of Sodom where was no remnant, and the equity of it is cleare, in the degree of her ſinne. The Angel whoſe voice Chapt. 14. ſucceeded the denouncer, there, of Babels fall, gaue ſharpe warning not to worſhippe the Beaſt, or receiue his character. But, now abſolute deſerting Ier. 50. 40. of Babel is needfull, and euen the name and number, are now dangerous. Wherefore, come out of her, and remember Lot his wife.
            
            6 The ſecond point, whereto the ſecond heauenly voice exhorteth the faithfull, ſpecially the miniſters, of Babels fall, is to doe the worke of the Lord diligently: for negligence therein is accurſed; in all which, the equity, greatneſſe, and certainety, of her fall is ſhewed. For, what is more equall then retribution, and that euery one receiue according to their worke? then, as they haue meaſured, that ſo it bee meaſured to them againe? what more iuſt, then who exalteth her ſelfe, that ſhe bee brought low? and that ſhee who hath wallowed in pleaſures and carnall delights, receiue torment and ſorrow? what more equall, then who preſumptuouſly, glorying in her greatneſſe and ſtrength, ſecurely promiſed to her ſelfe perpetuall ſtability, ſhe finde againe vnexpected deſtruction? Now, how great againe, ſhall the fall of Babel be, if ſhee receiue double for her waies; and that ſo

much the more, as by the hands of theſe, whome ſhee hath highly wronged; therupon ſtirred in iuſt diſdaine againſt her? if ſhee be als farre preſſed downe, as ſhee 2 Theſ. 2. hath exalted her ſelfe, whoſe fall ſhall be like her fall? if ſhe receiue torment and ſorrow according to her pleaſures, what torment and griefe ſhall bee comparable to hers? That this her iudgement is ineuitable, als wel as iuſt and great, is cleare in this, that it is God, euen that great Lord of heauen and earth that condemneth her: and who then ſhall abſolue her? wherein as the ineuitable certainety of her iudgement is euident, ſo is implyed the equity. For, ſhall the Iudge of the world iudge vnrighteouſly? the greatneſſe alſo: for it is a hard thing to fall into the hands of the Lord: before whom all Nations are but as the droppe of a Bucket, or as the duſt of a Trebuſchet.
            
            7 For more clearing of her preſumption, and confident glorifying her ſelfe, it is expreſſed in her owne ſpeeches, and her iudgement accordingly ſet downe: I ſit being a Queene, and am no widdow, neither ſhall I ſee 
               Iſa. 47. 
               mourning. The word Sit is Emphatike. Steuchus againſt Valla, pleading the priuiledge of the Romane ſeate, affirmeth ſtoutly, that all Kings haue by her left vnto them but the vſe and adminiſtration of their Kingdomes: and that the right in property belongeth to her, and ſhee will be holden domina & regina. Thus while they know not what they ſpeake, the tongues and pennes of theſe Paraſites are led to verifie againſt themſelues the truth of this propheſie.
            8 Her iudgements here ſpecified are ſuch, as befall the moſt diſtreſſed in ſtrighteſt ſieges of Townes, when mortalitie, doole and famine, all iointly conſume, as it may perhaps fall that thus ſhee bee ſacked. And theſe iudgements are amplified, as by the meaſure, ſo alſo by their manner of comming on, as which come inexpected in one day. Not that in one inſtant ſhee ſhall fall, which Iſa. 47. 9.
               
were a great relaxation to her griefe: but to ſhew two things. One, that her fall ſhall haue no turning, but from the time it beginne, ſhee ſhall fall ſtill till vtter ruine. The other is, that euen her laſt and ful deſtruction ſhall come farre againſt her expectation, in a day whereof ſhee ſhall not know the morning. For albeit ſhee feele already Iſa. 47. 11. her iudgement begunne, and in good degrees aduanced, ſo as they are gnawing their tongues for ſorrow: yet ſhe is ſtill as Iezabel, who vpon the very point of her laſt fall, painted her face, and looked as a Queene: 1. King. 9. 30. and like Baltazar and Babel properly, who although they were ſtraitely beſieged, yet imagined nothing leſſe Dan. 5. then the ſurpriſe of their City; in ſo farre, as that ſame night of their finall ouerthrow, they had giuen themſelues to all manner of prophane ryot. So Rome amidſt her plague growing on, yet dreameth to her ſelfe a perp
                  •
               uity. But when ſhee ſayeth, Peace, Peace, then ſhall come vpon her ſodaine deſtruction.
            9 That God ſtirreth his children to recompence her according to her worke, and to render her double. Wee muſt not imagine, that either God louſeth the raines to carnall appetite of reuenge, or yet is vniuſt in his iudgements. For, firſt wee muſt conſider, that their doing is warranted by commandement of God; in execution whereof, as hee will haue no man remiſſe, ſo will he that we haue him and his honor ſingle before our eyes: which euen in our perſons as his ſeruants may be interreſſed, & in that reſpect ſhould moue vs with ſuch motions, as in Moſes, Dauid, Elias, Eliſha, and other Saints wee ſee are approued. In which, as all carnall and priuate reſpects are damnable, ſo is negligence in God his worke accurſed. Saul his pitty of Agag was not onely prepoſterous, 1 Sam. 15. 2 King. 20. but prophane, and brought the declaration of his reprobation. Ahab his fooliſh pitty of Benhadad bred him heauineſſe. Next, euery man his calling muſt bee eyed: to the rule whereof, God reſtraineth all our actions

(for extraordinary deedes warranted by extraordinary motions, are not ordinary, or to be drawn into example) the Magiſtrate hath another part then a priuate man. Therefore euery man ought to keepe his Station, and all concurre ſo to the downe-bringing of Babell, as Iſrael had commandement to inuade Iericho, who Ioſua 6. were not onely to attend the Trumpet and Shoute, but to go vp alſo each ſtraight before him from his own ſtation, no where diuerting. Moreouer, there is a diuers conſideration of that ſtate ordained for deſtruction, and of euery particular member in it, of whom particularly wee know not the counſell of God. In the donble acquitall is no iniuſtice for the double meaſure is in relation to the wrong done to the Saints, and not to the merite of their ſinne againſt God which is infinite, and the honour of God and due conſolation of God his Saints, require that ſhee bee recompenſed to the full: for aſſurance whereof, wee muſt not looke to the apparant poſſibility, or impoſſibility of meanes, but to God the righteous Iudge who is a ſtrong Lord.
            
            10 This great iudgement of the Whore is yet amplified by a liuely repreſentation of the mourning of her adherents vpon the ſight of her fall. As by the contrary thereupon the godly are ſtirred to ioy. The lamenters are of three rankes. Kings, Marchants, and Seamen: who all haue theſe things common, Aſtoniſhment, Feare, and Sorrow: ſo much the greater, for the ſodaine and vnexpected fal of the Whore, whoſe greatneſſe, might, riches, and magnificence were ſo conioyned with the pleaſure and delight of Kings, gaine of Merchants, trade and vphold of Sea-men, as the world ſtanding, who euer could haue imagined the fall thereof, and in one howre? Thus the ſodain and ſtrange caſe breedeth aſtoniſhment. The ſmoake of her burning, and terrour of her torment bringeth feare: ſo as how grieued ſoeuer with her fall yet: they ſtand backe, not daring to helpe her. Their

ſorrow ariſeth to each order vpon the ſpeciall conſideration of their ſeuerall intereſts. Kings ſorrow for loſſe of their darling and their pleaſures. For theſe commonly delight in an eaſie worſhippe of mans inuention, and of any can leaſt ſubmit their neckes to the yoake of Chriſt, which might reſtraine licentiouſneſſe. Ahab had hundrethes of Prophets, but he could not abide Micheas, 
               1 King. 22. 8. & 21. 20. & 18. 17. and held Elias for his enemy, and troubler of Iſrael. The two witneſſes, Chapter 11. vexed the earth. Princes moſt part are much giuen alſo to fleſhly liberty, whereof vnder the Popedome they had no reſtraint, ſo being otherwaies, they ſhewed themſelues fauourers of that ſtate. Merchants ſorrow for that through her fall, none buy their wares any more: and they waxed rich onely by the abundance of her pleaſures. To amplifie this occaſion of their griefe, the ſorts of wares are recounted, thereby ſhewing the wonderfull greatnes of her trade, by which her Merchants behoued to bee enriched, as hauing the trade of all nations, and of all manner goods from all parts. All that ſerueth for glorious and princely attire, as gold, ſiluer, pretious ſtones, pearles, fine linnen, ſilke, purple, ſcarlet: or for delightfull and ſumptuous pleniſhing, and fabricke, as Thymwood, veſſels of Iuorie, all veſſels of moſt precious wood, braſſe, yron and marble: or for pampering the perſon, and dainty faire, as Cinamon, odours, ointments, incenſe, wine, oyle, floure, wheat Cattell, ſheepe: or for royall and princely Port, as horſes, chariots, ſeruants. The decay of all which from her, and ſo the matter of her Merchants ſorrow is cloſed vp with a generall, of all that her ſoule luſted after, all fat and all pleaſant thing, vttered in a ſarcaſtik apoſtrophe to her ſelfe, for amplifying her fall, and argument of their ſorrow, ſo much the greater, as ſhee ſhould neuer recouer her loſſes.
            11 Now albeit it bee true, that Rome through her greatneſſe and luxurie, maketh great change to all Merchants,

of theſe ſame wares properly taken, and that her fall ſhall endammage many, who now liue by miniſtring to her delights: yet this is not here chiefly meaned. For neither are the great men of the earth properly Merchants of theſe things: neither can her fall ſtay the ſale of ſuch wares in the reſt of the world. But all this Allegory is by alluſion to the propheſie of Ezechiel againſt Chap. 27. 
               Tyrus. VVhereto as to the moſt noble Merchant City in wares corporall, Rome is compared for ſpiritual marchandize; wherein, as a glorious deceiuing Whore, ſhe tradeth with ſuch gaine amongſt all Nations, that her Merchants haue gotten the riches of the world, by ſelling of Pardons, Indulgences, Reliques, Soule-Maſſes, Buls, Remiſſions. Diſpenſations, Confirmations, and infinite other traſh, wherewith they haue now long time ſo bewitched the fooliſh world, as in each Country they had, and ſomewhere yet haue the halfe of the Kingdom. For their Locuſts ſtinging like Scorpions, with a paine Chap. 9. leſſe tollerable then death, made mad men ſearch with loſſe of all things to redeeme that peace which they neuer ſhewed them. The recent ſtory of the ſtate of Venice, forced to conteſt with theſe Merchantes before they ſhould deuoure all, giueth hereto a cleare Teſtimony. What the Pope gained by Epiſcopall Palles, annates, and extraordinary impoſts, is well knowne. Beſides the dayly great Market of al which things at Rome, and thouſands liuing thereby: for their greater commodity, Iubilies are, to the contumely of Chriſt inſtituted: but that all their Market is much fallen through the drying vp of her waters, already in ſuch meaſure, as they are gnawing their tongues for ſorrow. And that wee may take vp what ſort of wares, and what kind of Merchants are here meaned, the holy Ghoſt in a diuine Artifice, cloſeth all with the Soules of men. And that none thinke according to the frame of Hebrew ſpeech; & the like words put in the cited place of Ezechiel, that hereby bondſlaues ſhould bee meaned, wee haue 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               
put before to expreſſe that, and then the conſtruction is altered, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , ſo giuing cleare note, that ſuch Merchants are here to bee vnderſtoode, as Peter ſpeaketh of 2. Epiſt. 2. and Panl 2. Cor. 2. 17. Succeſſors of Simon Magus.
            
            12 The Seamen mourne, for that by her fall, their trade and life alſo faileth. And firſt, their aſtoniſhment with the reaſon thereof, and next, their deſperate ſorrow are diſtinctly ſet downe. When Merchants haue no ſale or change, then of neceſſity ſhippes lie at a full ſea; for none fraught them more, & the life of Mariners dependeth on the trade of Merchants. By theſe then are meaned the rablement of inferior orders of the Clergy, which albeit not in a like degree with the Merchants, yet liued all on this trade, & were nouriſhed with the magnificence of the Whore. And the holy Ghoſt to ſhew their ſwarming multitudes, as Locuſts of diuers kindes, putteth a heape of words in a heauenly wiſdome. Shipmaſters, Occupiers in Shippes, Mariners, all Seamen. This Allegorie cleareth what Chapter 8. is meaned by the ſea, things liuing therein, and ſhippes. They had indeed a large Sea, and haue occupied both buſily, and with great gaine in it, but now all muſt fall. In all this, this is ſeene, how miſerable and vnhappy is the condition of ſuch as build their maintenance, and moyen of life, on ſuch trade or courſe of liuing, as agreeth not with godlineſſe. For there particular either pleaſure, or commodity maketh them enemies to God, and their owne ſaluation. Kings ſeeke to her for their pleaſures. Prelates, for that by her they are rich, honourable, and made great in the earth Inferiour orders, for that in her ſtanding and magnificence is their life. Thus the loue of the wages of vnrighteouſneſſe blindeth men in God his iuſtice, to preferre lies to truth, and to remain indured enemies againſt God and their owne ſaluation. The Iewes crucified the Lord of glory, for feare leſt all belieuing Iohn 11. 48.
               
in him: the Romans ſhould come, and take their place. Demetrius the Siluer-Smith, for his particular Act. 19. gaine by vngodly Trade, reſiſted the Goſpell, and put all Epheſus on an vproare. Bleſſed is the man which liueth on godly meanes, and loueth not the wages of iniquity.
            13 The third point whereto the ſecond heauenly Ier. 51. 48. voice exhorteth the Saints, is to reioyce for her fall; ſpecially Paſtors and Teachers, who, as they felt moſt of her malice, ſo God giueth them the greater meaſure of conſolation. This is the time denounced, Chapter 11. When the Lord rewardeth his Seruants the Prophets; &c. Now they are deſtroyed, who deſtroyed the earth. Now the Dead are iudged, and the bloud of Saints ſhedde firſt and laſt, Chapter 6. 11. 16. is auenged on them that dwell on the earth, by finall and full vengeance, all being now perfected, who ſhould bee killed for Chriſt. And by this reaſon they are ſtirred to ioy, as accordingly in their ſong, Chapter 19. they acknowledge. Not that God pouſſeth his Children to any corrupt affection, but with pure hearts to reioice for their owne deliuerance, and God his honour, in the ouerthrow of his and their foes, as Dauid. The righteous ſhall reioyce when hee ſeeth the vengeance, he 
               Pſal. 58. 
               ſhall waſh his feet in the bloud of the wicked, and men ſhall ſay, verily, there is fruit for the righteous, doubtles there is a God that raigneth in the earth. Thus the mourning of Saints is turned into ioy, which neuer ſhall bee taken from them, and the reioyſing of the wicked poriſheth, and they mourne for euer.
            14 The laſt heauenly voyce, for clearing and confirmation of an irreparable deſtruction, hath a ſigne conioyned, from the 5. of Ieremy, whence and from his 50. much of all this ſpeech is brought. The ſigne, is a great Milſtone caſt in the Sea, the meaning wherof is ſhewed, firſt in generall termes, that ſo Babell

ſhall be throwne away, and neuer be found any more. Next more at large, in ſingular pointes declared: concluding laſtly in the reaſon, and ſo the equity of her ſo great and irreparable ruine. In the Signe, almoſt each word hath a gradation; in that an Angell, a ſtrong Angell, taketh a ſtone, and a great ſtone, euen a Milſtone, which hee letteth not bairely fall, but caſteth, and with impetuous force, thruſteth in the bottome of the Sea, whence nothing ordinarily is recouered, much leſſe a Milſtone thruſt from ſuch a hand, and with ſuch force. So the Lord caſteth the ſinnes of his Children in the bottome of the ſea, to bee buried for euer with Babel. Thus is ſhewed the irreparable ruine of Rome. M
                     •
                  ch. 7. And the ſame is amplified by pleaſant ſpeeches from Ieremie 25. to ſhew an eternall deſolation: as of her, in whom neuer againe ſhall bee any thing for ſtirring vppe pleaſure, or ſhewing triumph; no, not any thing ſeruing for commodity of life, as craftſmen: no, not for neceſſity of life, as prouiding of neceſſary ſuſtenance. Nothing but deſolate darkeneſſe, with perpetuall, and fearefull ſilence: for, as light is ſowne to the righteous in darkeneſſe; ſo the Candle of the wicked ſhall bee put out. Finally, no meane of propagation, without which no ſtate can endure.
            15 The reaſon of all, is her bewitching of the whole earth with idolatrie, for her owne pride and luxurie, wherin ſhe exalted her ſelfe, and made all her Marchants rich: and herewithall, horrible cruelty, being not only a Whore, but a bloudy Whore; as not onely the murtherer of Saints, but the occaſioner of all bloudſhed in the earth. So, not onely in her ſelfe extreamely ſinfull, but as Ieroboam made Iſrael to ſinne, bringing ſin on the world, and making it ſinnefull. The bloud of Saints is euidently found in her, and this, if no more, maketh her guilty of all the bloud in the earth, in that almoſt, all God his wrath is for the Sanctuary. But beſides

this, what bloudy warre hath been ſince the Beaſt his ſtealing vp out of the Earth, whereof ſhee hath not beene the vpſtirrer; or which, her ſinne hath not brought vpon the world? whoſe bewitching vanity and poiſonable ſting tormenting ſuperſtitious mindes; for neere the ſpace of two hundreth yeeres, made the force and floure of the world to fall by Millions, in the fooliſh Conqueſt of Ieruſalem? whoſe ſinne looſed theſe foure Angels from Euphrates, after they had beene a ſpace in God his patience bound vppe; at length, by Turkiſh fury, and poiſonable Mahometane errour, to make vtterly deſolate the third part of the VVorld? VVhat warre hath been in Europe, which ſhe hath not either raiſed or foſtered? and whoſe emiſſaries as Frogges by ſeditious and treaſonable practiſes and ſuggeſtions, preſently diſturbe the peace of the Earth? therefore iuſt and righteous are thy iudgements, O King of Saints.
         
         
            
            CHAP. XIX.
            
               THus hath beene the deſcription of the Whore and her iudgement. Followeth now thereupon, the ioy of Saints: and that it may bee full, the finall ouerthrow of the other enemies. Of the Beaſt in this Chapt. and Dragon in the next, for an abſolute victory.
            2 This Chapter, hath firſt, the ioy of Saints, in their ſong of praiſe: and next, the foile of the Beaſt. The ſong, for the forme, matter, and euent, is admirable. In the forme, are the ſingers, the ſtrange manner of ſinging, and the courſe or order of their ſong. The ſingers, according to the courſe and degrees of the ſong, are three. Firſt, a great multitude in heauen, Secondly, the 24. Elders and 4. Beaſts. Thirdly, the voice of a great multitude, as the voice of many waters, &c. Stirred thereto by a voice from the throne.
            3 By the firſt, a multitude in heauen, by all the frame of ſpeech thorow this Propheſie, are ſignified the Saints in common. In whom all and generally, the deſtruction of the Whore, worketh this ioy which breaketh foorth in thankſ-giuing. Their manner of ſinging is, with a loude voice, both for their force of affection in them ſelues, and for the aduowed open proclaiming thereof before the world: and that, firſt in a generall and vncouth word, they praiſe God and ſtirre all others thereto: and next, they vtter ſpeciall points of praiſe, with the reaſons, wherein is the matter of the ſong.
            4 The generall word is, Haleluiah, two well known Ebrew words, and of frequent vſe in the Pſalmes: but neuer till now, in all the new Teſtament recorded. And heere are put ſoure times, not for any ſpeciall holineſſe or

myſterie, that in the frame, ſillables, or letters thereof is contained, and for which, it muſt be religiouſly kept vntranſlated, as the Romans, after a fooliſh and cabbaliſticke forme, eſteeme and vſe it and others: but yet, it is not without great purpoſe, and high myſtery, that t
                  •
               e faithfull now, not onely firſt, beginne their ſong, but alſo therein, ſo often in courſe, vſe this word, and in Ebrew. Which purpoſe and myſterie, to take vp clearely, the occaſion of this ſong, and courſe thereof, as orderly it goeth on, beeing compared with what at length wee ſpake vpon the ſixth Viall, Chapt. 16. will euidently lead vs. For, by the iudgement of the Whore, the way is prepared for theſe of the Eaſt; who, vpon the victory here enſuing ouer the Beaſt, ſhall celebrate the ſame, by calling the place in Ebrew Armageddon, and mourning the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Mageddon. And ſhall bee brought with vs Gentiles, to ſing Halleluiah. As the courſe and matter of this ſong ſhew euidently. But wee muſt not eſteeme, that this firſt Halleluiah is ſung by the Ebrews, albeit it bee in Ebrew, to waken vs to aduert the myſtery. For this firſt Halleluiah, the Chriſtians of the Geutiles doe ſing: onely to ſhew the way now prepared, by the iudgement of the Whore, for them to come in, and concelebrate the victorie. Neither thus, ſo much, for any ſuch intention of the ſingers toward that end, as that heereby, the ſpirit will ſhew, that the fall of the Whore, and loud praiſe of God, by Chriſtians, for it, ſhall in a degree, waken vp the Eaſt, and Ebrews principally, and ſhal ſerue for a great ſtep for them to come in to the Church. And yet an other greater ſtep is laide for them, and they more ſtirred, vpon the higher intending of this ſong by a ſecond Halleluiah, for the euerlaſtingneſſe of her ruine. And yet more, by a Halleluiah of the Elders and Beaſts, falling downe and worſhipping him that ſitteth on the throne. Wherein, wee muſt take heede, that wee eſteeme not the multitude in heauen, and the Elders and Beaſts to be otherwaies diuers, then

in diſtinct conſideration, for the more cleare explication of the degrees whereby God wrought on, this great effect. Which, as it ſhall be in a good degree promooued, by that common ioy and praiſe of Chriſtians, ſuch as confuſedly, and ſuddenly, at the firſt ioyfull euent, is raiſed in all hearts: ſo, a greater and more effectuall degree thereof ſhall follow, when the praiſe hereupon, ſhall be ſolemne, in the Church aſſemblies and publike actions thereof: which is meaned by the ſong of the Elders and Beaſts, who are the type of the Church, as for ſolemne and lawfull worſhip, it is ordered, in the Beaſts going before, and elders following them: hauing God his preſence in his gtacious diſpenſation of the ſpirit, word, and faithfull miniſtery thereof: ſuch as (albeit it hath not alwaies appeared to the eies of men of the earth) yet God had at all times as by conference of the 4. and 11. and 14. Chapters herewith, is manifeſt. When this Church thus, for a lawfull miniſtery, ſeruing God in the communion of Saints, is hid from the world, then none heare or learne their ſong but the ſealed Virgins. But at this time, their Halleluiah and publike ſolemne praiſe, ſhall be ſeene and heard widely, euen to the wakening of the Eaſt thereby. For it is now a long time ſince it was ſaid to the reuiued Chap. 11. witneſſes, Come vp hither. The 144000. ſealed ones are ſaide Chapt. 14. to ſing a new ſong before the throne, Elders, and Beaſts: not that the 144000. are one thing, and the Elders and Beaſts another. But, as the 144000. are put to expreſſe the ſtate and condition of the true Church, in Antichriſt his vſurpation; ſo they are ſaid to ſing, before the Throne, Beaſts, and Elders. To ſhew, that albeit the world perceiued it not, euen then God had ſtill a Church, in the midſt whereof he dwelt, and had in it a miniſtery, and was worſhipped lawfully, in the aſſembly and communion of Saints. For this it is, that thorow this whole Propheſie, howſoeuer, to expreſſe the diuers conditions of the Church, ſundry and diuers types are vſed; yet this, of Throne, Beaſts, and Elders, euer holdeth

in all. Thus then, the firſt common and confuſed ioy and praiſe, thereupon, is a double degree, (according as it riſeth vpon the Whores eternall fall) and effectuall, to waken. But, when euen theſe ſame, in ſolemne aſſembly, profeſſedly praiſe God; it both inhanceth the ſeruice done, as done in the Sanctuary; and ſheweth a deeper ſenſe and regard of the benefit, moouing that duty in the hearts of the praiſers: as alſo, the publike, well ordered, and holy excerciſe, in the Congregation, ſtirreth more, them who are without, to reuerence, and conuerſion, then common and priuate cariage, Pſalm. 5. 7. and 1. Cor. 14. 24. 25. Theſe ſame two degrees are, Chap. 11. Where, vpon the ſigne giuen by the Trumpet, and preconceiued ioy of theſe ſame euents to enſue, this ſame praiſe is ſummarily ſung. Now then, this third Halleluiah, of the Elders and Beaſts, falling and worſhipping him that ſitteth on the Throne, is a neerer degree of vp-ſtirring, and ſtep of in-comming, of Ebrewes and Orient, to ſing Halleluiah with vs. But laſtly, the voice from the Throne, euen God his owne powerfull voice, ſhall fully waken them from their deadneſſe, and pull perfitly, the vaile from their hearts, pouring on them the ſpirit of mercy and compaſſion, and taking from them their ſtony hearts, that they may ſee him whom they pearced. And 2. Cor. 3. 16. this is called peculiarly, the voice from the Throne, to note God his powerfull working of their illumination and full conuerſion at this point, whereto their hearts, by the victory of the Chriſtian Church, and praiſe offered to God therefore, were in ſome good degrees, before, prepared and mollified. So as now, all the ſeruants af God, all that feare him, both ſmall and great, ſhall raiſe vp a ſong to God, for multitude, maieſty, and noiſe, admirable: for exceeding great power and motion of ſpirit, full of thundering: for newneſſe of matter, paſſing ioyfull. For raiſing of this great Halleluiah, a ſtrange order of working (as would appeare) is heere ſet downe. For, where it might ſeeme, that according to the ordinary

diſpenſation of all grace, the voice ſhould, from the Throne, haue gone firſt to the Beaſts and Elders, and from them to the multitude: in a heauenly wiſdome, the firſt motion is from the multitude, next, from Beaſts and Elders, and laſtlie, from the Throne: to ſhew this great worke (as I haue ſhewed) at laſt, by God his owne power, fully effectuall. The order is from I ſay, A voice ſoundeth from the City, a voice from the Temple, the voice of the 
               Chap. 66. 6. 
               Lord who recompenſeth his enemies. Then, Sion before ſhe trauelled, brought foorth her children, and before her paine ſhee was deliuered of a man childe. Then, The earth was brought foorth in a day, and a Nation was borne at once. Conferre diligently, and eſpie deepe wiſdome.
            This voice, is to all Gods his ſeruant, to all that feare him both ſmall and great, the time of whoſe reward is now come, when God deſtroieth them who deſtroied the earth, Chapter. 11. Now, Rachel barren while Lea bare children, ſhall breake foorth in the thouſands of Manaſſe, and tenne thouſands of Ephraim. So, by this voice from the Citie, from the Temple, and laſtly, from the Throne; euen from him Who fully recompenſeth his enemies, is raiſed, for multitude of ſingers, for manner and matter of ſong, an Helleluiah of a wonderfull note. While, not onely, a great multitude euen all the ſernants of God, ſmall and great, Iew and Gentile doe ſing it, but alſo their ſong is like the voice of many Waters, and as the noiſe of great thunders; not as theſe Cha. 14. which none heard but the ſealed ones: but Chap. 14. Sect. 3. ſuch as ſhall fill the world with aſtoniſhment, and make the heauens reſound. So ſweetely and mightily ſhall the Harpes of them, whoſe receiuing ſhall bee life from the dead, bee tuned vp, with vs Gentiles, to praiſeour common Sauiour.
            5 Thus, for cleering the myſtery heere implied, hauing ſhewed the forme, in the ſingers vncouth manner, order, and courſe of this whole ſong: Now let vs returne and firſt conſider the matter of all, and then the euent in Iohn.
            
            
               
6 The matter of the ſong in the firſt three Halleluiah, and two degrees of ſingers, is all one. In the laſt Halleluiah & laſt ſingers, when all ſmall & great ſing, it is larger. The ſong of the firſt ſingers hath two parts, and accordingly, to ſhew the riſing of their affection, the word Halleluiah is doubled. The firſt part hath the ſpeciall points of praiſe, and reaſons thereof. The ſpeciall points; are, Saluation, glory, honour, and power, &c. Thus in ioyfull ſong profeſſing, that the onely praiſe of their ſaluation, the onely glory, that is, the eſtimation and high account they haue God in, as onely author of all their good: all the honour, that is, all dutifull worſhip, which according to that eſtimation and account they owe, are due to him onely. Laſtly, they acknowledge his onely power and ſtrength in all their deliuerance, and ouerthrow of their foes. This ſong, is the ſame in argument, with that Chap. 7. Saluation is of our God and of the Lambe. The reaſons of this their praiſe, are firſt, generally giuen, and next, ſpecially accommodare to the preſent matter. The generall is, that his iudgements are true and iuſt, in relation to his promiſes and nature: and accordingly in the ſpeciall caſe heere meaned, the truth of his iudgements is cleere, in that the Whoore is iudged and deſtroied: as he promiſed, not onely to deſtroy her, but alſo all that doe euill to the Sanctuary. The iuſtice and equity, is manifeſt in her ſinne, who was a great Whoore; and therewithal, the corrupter of the whole earth: being, both her ſelfe, extremely ſinnfull, and inducing others to ſinne: next, extremely cruell, as in whom all the blood of the earth was found, and who, ſpecially was drunken with the blood of Saints. Now, God is a requirer of blood, and ſingulary of his holy ones, whoſe death is precious in his eies. This, both truth and iuſtice of God, in this ſpeciall act of the Whoores damnation, is yet more cleered in the ſecond part of their ſong: whereto they are ſtirred, by the conſideration of her euerlaſting fall, ſo as they neuer feare her deceit or cruelty any more. And, this raiſeth their affection to a new Halleluiab,
               
ſo, vpon the more cleare ſenſe of the greatneſſe of the benefit, doubling the praiſe. The fooliſh knoweth it not, and the vnwiſe man vnderſtandeth not, that the wicked flouriſheth as the graſſe, but hee ſhall bee deſtroied for euer.
            
            7 The ſecond order of ſingers affirme the ſame matter, in the word, Amen, and ſing the ſame praiſe in Halleluiah.
            
            8 In the third order, as the ſingers are moe, and the note higher, ſo is the matter of their ſong ſomewhat larger: as which, hath not onely relation to the iudgement of the Whoore, as the former parts of the ſong, but alſo to the ſubſequent ſtory, both of the enemies ouerthrow, and gracefull ſtate of the Bride thereupon: both which are heere ſummarily celebrate, and largely after, through the booke exponed. The firſt, in this, that now the Lord raigneth, for they are deſtroied who vſurped the Kingdome. The other, in that the Bride is prepared. The deſtruction of the vſurpers, is hencefoorth in this and the next Chapter: the Bride prepared, Chapters 21. and 22. Heereupon, all are of other, mutually exhorttd to ioy and gladneſſe, aſwell as to the praiſing of God; for that The Lambe his marriage is come, &c. Wherein, as there is huge matter of Gods praiſe, ſo of exceeding ioy to themſelues in their owne good from him. This marriage, contracted of old, was come in a great degree, when the Bridegrome came into the world, but they who were bidden, refuſed to come, and amongſt thoſe, who were brought in to the wedding, one wanted a wedding garment, and Matth. 22. thereupon, is caſt out into vtter darkeneſſe, euen the lake of fire and Brimeſtone. But now, at this point heere celebrated, the marriage ſhall come in a nobler degree, when God, by a voice from the Throne, ſhall turne their hearts who refuſed, now to come in: that, as their caſting of was the riches of the Gentiles, ſo their receiuing, may bee Rom. 11. much more the life of the world from death, by ſo ſtrange and wonderfull a change as ſhall make, in a manner, a new

heauen and a new earth, in which, they ſhall haue greatly 
               Iſa. 65. 15. 16, Cant 8. 
               to reioice and bee glad. When both ſiſters, aſwell the little ſiſter, which had no breaſts, as the other, are ſpoken 
               Eze. 37. Iohn 10. 16. 
               for and receiued. That the Shepheard may be one, and the ſheepfold one. When in that day, there ſhall bee one Lord ouer all the earth and his name one. This is that number Zach. 14. 9. Iſai 54. 5. innumerable, Ch. 7. of al Tongs, Nations & Languages, with Palmes in their hands & clothed in longwhite roabes, &c. This is that Ieruſalem from heauen wherin the heathen nor any vncleane thing ſhall enter no more: which, now ſhall bee perfectly adorned with ſuch fulneſſe of gracefull & quiet ſtate, al being performed, whatſoeuer the Lord by his ſeruants the Prophets had promiſed, that ſhee hath as a Bride perfectly busked, but to attend the laſt and full act of the marriage, to enter into the marriage chamber, and eternally inioy her ſpouſe. This goodlie ſtate in grace, vpon full ouerthrow of all troubles, deſcribed moſt goodly, Chap. 21. and 22, is the finiſhing of the myſtery of God, Chap. 10. When a Bride is perfectly 
                  •
               usked and trimmed, wanting none of her ornaments, then nothing remaineth, but the ſolemne acts of the mariage, to enioy her Lord. So, the reaſon of the ſpeech, is plaine from common vſe.
            9 This her preparation, that we may vnderſtand it not to be of herſelfe, (for the Lord will anſwer her before ſhee 
               Iſai 65. 
               aske) is ſhewed to bee in her attire. Whereof is noted, whence ſhe hath it, and what it is. Shee hath it by free gift of the Bridegrome. For, what a Bride we are, by nature, ſee Ezechiel 16. and not onely is the garment giuen her, but, which is to be marked, the putting on thereof is giuen her alſo: as, which ſhee can no more put on, by her ſelfe, then ſhee can purchaſe it. What this garment is, in ſhewed, firſt, figuratiuely, and then in proper termes. Figuratiuely, it is fine linen pure and ſhining. This linen hath two properties. It is pure, becauſe Ieſus Chriſt giuen vs, of the father to iuſtification, whom by the gift of faith we put on, is pure, ſpotleſſe, and vndefiled: and maketh

vs pure before God. This is iuſtification of faith properly. The ſecond property is Shining; for as it is ſpotleſſe and pure, ſo hath it a glorious luſtre, to ſhew, that Chriſt is not onely put on to iuſtification, but alſo Philip. 2. 15. to glorie, and that in two reſpects, One, in that hee ſanctifying vs wee ſhine here as lights in the middeſt of a froward generation, ſhewing forth the vertues of him that hath called vs: ſo glorifying God, witneſſing to the 1. Pet. 2. 9. world our iuſtification, and euen ſtrengthning our own ſoules in the certainety of our election: while wee declare our faith perfect by our workes, euen as our works, thereupon ſhine and are approued, becauſe faith worketh together with the worke. For whatſoeuer is without faith is ſinne, and this is that iuſtification whereof Iames Chapter 2. to expreſſe both, the word is plurall, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . The other reſpect of ſhining is, in that as we put on Chriſt to iuſtification and ſanctification, ſo alſo to full glory at length with himſelfe, our corruptible bodies being made conforme to his glorious body. The Iewes firſt, ſeeking to eſtabliſh their owne righteouſnes Rom. 10. which is by the Law, (ſo like Adam and Eua, making garments to themſelues) fell from the righteouſneſſe of Gen. 37. God, but now God turneth their hearts to prepare and trim themſelues with the Bridegroome his gifts (as was Rebeccha with the ornaments brought from her huſband, both giuen her; and put on her) counting all Gen. 24. Philip. 3. things loſſe to bee found in Chriſt; that is, not hauing their owne righteouſneſſe which is by the law, but the righteouſneſſe of God, which is by faith in Ieſus: which, and application thereof, are both the f
                  •
               ee gift of God. And the holy Ghoſt ſo coucheth the words, as no place is left to cauillation. For he ſayeth not our Iuſtifications are the fine linnen, but the fine linnen giuen vs is our iuſtifications.
            10 Thus was the ſong maruellous, for ſtrange forme and matter. Now followeth the ſtrange euent in the Apoſtle; wherein come to be obſerued, the occaſion and

euent it ſelfe. Albeit the whole matter, and manner of the ſong occaſioneth this euent: yet moſt ſpeciallie it followeth, through the Angels ſingular care, and manner of confirming Iohn in the greatneſſe and truth of theſe matters: euen therein implying, that they are ſo wonderfull, as men would hardely belieue that ſuch things could come to paſſe. Hee confirmeth Iohn by commandement, and by affirmation. The quality of the commandement giueth of it ſelfe, to preſume aſſuredly Chap. 14. 13. Iſai 8. & 30. Abak. 22. I
                     •
                  b. 19. 23. both ſome great, and alſo a certainely determined caſe: as which hee commandeth him to write, both for regard of the matter, as alſo for ſure preſeruation, and laſting record therof, as which moſt aſſuredly ſhould fall out. He commandeth to write one ſpeciall point, which yet implyeth all, that they are bleſſed who are called to the Supper of the Lambes marriage. VVhich bleſſednes as it muſt bee reſtrained to the effectuall calling (many being called who are not choſen) ſo here, the Angell will ſtirre Iohn and all Chriſtians in Iohn his perſon, to the conſideration of a ſingular bleſſedneſſe of this time, through the great efficacy of the voyce from the Throne, and obedience wrought thereby in them who firſt refuſed; and no doubt, of the Orient, by and with them. A bleſſedneſſe was commanded to be written, Chapter 14. but that was of ſuffering, wherein they were euen bleſſed. Here the caſe varieth. For now all ſhall ſuffer, who come not to the Lambe his Supper, and ſhall bee made a Supper to the foules of Heauen, verſe 17, Now the teares ſhall bee wiped from the eies of Mourners, and the deſtroyers of Chap. 7. 17. & 21 4. Iſai 25. 8. Chap. 11. 18. Pſal. 2. Chap. 13 10. the earth ſhall bee deſtroyed. The Heathen were angry, now the Lord is angry in his courſe, which if it kindle, Bleſſed are all that come to him. Now they who did ſlay with the ſword, are ſlain by the ſword: and the Captiuers are captiued. For now, God taketh his kingdome Chap. 11. 15. by the euident ouerthrow of his enemies, and exaltation of his Church, hauing his name written, euen on his garment and thigh. So bleſſed in effect are they,

               who come to the ſupper of the Lambe his marriage. The Angell, next confirmeth Iohn by affirmation, that theſe words of God are true. Thus wakening vp Iohn to conſider rare matter, whereof hee ſo earneſtly affirmeth, that the words are true, and for aſſurance of their truth, that they are of God or God his words.
            11 Now, beſides the ſong in it ſelfe wonderfull, this care of the Angell to confirme Iohn, and waken vp his ſpirits by ſo ſingular a commandement, and ſo peremptory an aſſeueration, ſo rauiſheth the heart of the Apoſtle with exceſſiue ioy of ſo good newes, that hee was Chap. 22. 8. (for a notable document of humane infirmity in ſo great an Apoſtle) about to haue worſhipped this Angell. Which attempt how vnlawfull it is in it ſelfe, and how vnpleaſant to the Angell; Firſt, his interdiction well ſheweth in ſuch haſte and conciſe forme of ſpeech, as commonly men vſe, vpon care to preuent ſome inſtant and deteſtable euill. When feare and ſolicitude 
                  •
               uffer not to ſpeake at length, or a full ſentence 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Next, hee ſtrengthneth his interdiction with ſtrong reaſons, one taken from his owne condition, to whom this worſhip was offered, as which was not capable thereof, being but a ſeruant, and not onely his (left ſome prerogatiue might be imagined in the Apoſtle, to ſtay that which of an other mighthaue bin offered) but euen a fellow ſeruant of his brethren, who had the teſtimony of Ieſus: his greateſt honour, and chiefe ſcope of al his ſeruice, being Chriſt and his knowledge, to miniſter the ſame, without which he were nothing, and therefore, albeit of different nature from Iohn, and other Chriſtians, yet in condition, and end of calling but their fellow-ſeruant: they hauing the ſpirit of Propheſie as he had. The other reaſon is from the perſon of him, who onely is to bee worſhipped and ſerued, according to the law alleadged by our Lord againſt Sathan. Now it might probably Math. 4. 10. appeare, that herein, yet ſome further thing were implyed. For this Angell being the type of theſe miniſters,

who ſhall bee the ſhew
                  ••
                
               
                  〈…〉
                pa
                  •
               ſators of this huge mea
                  •
               ure of powerfull lig
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               , for ſo wonderfull effects; and Iohn here ba
                  •••
               g the perſon of common Chriſtians of that time: 
                  〈◊〉
                may ſeeme, that the rare and excellent graces of the Miniſters, who ſhal then bee furniſhed with a golden 
                  〈◊〉
               , would ſo farre Chap. 21. 15. miſcarrie weake Chriſtians, in admi
                  ••
               tion of their gifts and working, as to attribute 
                  〈◊◊〉
                vnto them, if their owne fidelity and holineſſe 
                  〈◊〉
                not l
                  •
               t it. And as this giueth vs to expect yet goodly things; ſo herein is a cloſe warning of humility in the one, and circumſpectneſſe in the other, to giue all glory to God. But hereof I dare determine nothing, fearing ſtill to bee curious in ſo diuine an Argument, wherein I haue chooſed rather to hold vp coniecturall ſuggeſtions, then appeare vnreuerently to handle ſuch myſteries.
            12 Thus wee haue heard the ſong of Saints, firſt vpon the Whore
                  •
                deſtruction, and next more mightily, and of moe intended higher, vpon preception of full victorie ouer the other enemies, and the Church her graceful ſtate thereupon: which ſo rauiſhed the Apoſtle, as hee had almoſt miſcarried. Now, are the other victories ſhewed, and goodly ſtate of the Bride thereupon. And firſt, through the reſt of this Chapter, is the foile of the Beaſ
                  •
               bearer vp of the Whore, and no queſtion, but now highly chafed with her fall.
            13 In the victory ouer the beaſt, are the deſcription of the parties, and the euent of the battell, The party victorious is magnifickly deſcribed; firſt in his perſon, army, weapons of war, and his working by them: and next in his Herauld. His perſon, by great properties, and many agreeable to his many and great names. Firſt, his comming forth declareth him a heauenly perſonage, for hee is from thence. Of great maieſty, comming forth in abundance of light: as to whoſe outmarching, the heauens are caſt wide open. A greater degree of light

then hitherto hath been mentioned, ſo as the ſigne of the ſon of man is clearly ſeen in heauen. Oh that thou woldeſt 
               Math. 24. 30. Iſai 64. 1. 
               breake the heauens, and come downe. His adminiſtration at this time in Antichriſt his full ouerthrow, ſhall bee in exceeding great euidency of light and power.
            14 Hee ſitteth on a white horſe for fidelity and truth: and namely for theſe points of his adminiſtration, wherin his fidelity and truth are now ſpecially to bee ſhewed: in iudging and fighting; for all which reſpects, he rideth, and on a white horſe: according to the ſtate of a Iudge, and triumphing glory of a victorious VVarrious. He is alſo a faithfull and true witneſſe, Chapter 1. And a faithful High Prieſt, Hebr. 3. But here hee is to ſhew his fidelity and truth, in iudging and fighting. Now the time of his redeemed is come, and the time of the dead that they bee 
               Iſai 63. 4. Chap. 11. 18. 
               iudged, and ſuch deſtroyed who deſtroy the earth. In all which hee both iudgeth, and fighteth righteouſly, for he is pure when hee iudgeth, and iuſt when hee ſpeaketh. This Pſal. 51. 4. indgement is not that laſt and generall, but here the ſpeciall, of theſe enemies of his Church is meaned: whom he is now to ouerthrow, ſo as they ſhall neuer bee any more able to trouble Sion, but their ruine ſhall hold on, till at laſt they be for euer adiudged to endleſſe torment. Hee rode on a white horſe from the firſt outgoing of the Goſpell to conquere, Chapter 
                  〈◊〉
               . and to deiect the Dragon from heauen, Chapter 12. when hee and his Armie fought to that effect: but this is the laſt and nobleſt act of his riding for the Dragon and his Vicars vtter deſtruction.
            15 Now to iudge righteouſly, is requiſite not onely a righteous diſpoſition, but alſo a wiſe heart to diſcerne: for often Iudges who are in mind ſet to doe righteouſly, yet ignorantly giue wrong iudgement. But no ſuch thing can befall him, whoſe eyes are as a flame of fire. Pure, piercing, purging, and ſearching hearts and reines, from Pſal 139.
               
whom nothing can bee hid, for euen the darkeneſſe is light before him. And as for iudging, ſo alſo, for fighting 2 Kin. 18. 20. (as Rabſace though prophane, yet pertinently ſayeth in that) Counſell and ſtrength are for the warre. This Captaine then who ſeeth the thoughts of his enemies, before they bee hatched in their hearts, hath no perill to bee deluded or circumuented with ſtratagems: or as often befalleth otherwiſe, expert warriours, through want of intelligence, to ſlippe opportunities. If Eliſha, 
               2 King. 6. by a ray of the light of this Captaines flaming eies, was able to diſcouer, and ſo diſappoint what the King of Aram conſulted in his ſecret Cabinet; what may this Lord doe, who formeth the heart?
            16 With wiſdome hee hath alſo great authority, as hauing on his head many Crownes. Both, for that hee is King of Kings, and alſo for his many victories, ſpecially in this his laſt warre. Which how peculiarly is reſpected, his Crownes are all on his head. For hee ſtandeth not by crowned hornes, as the Beaſt, but all his authority and ſtrength is in himſelfe, and of himſelfe, and hee in this his ſtrength & power, now commeth to take the Crowne from the head of the King of Ammon, to ſet it on Dauid his head. The Beaſt now muſt forgoe his 2 Sa
                     •
                  . 12. Triple Crowne, Chriſt his proper honour wherewith hee hath blaſphemouſly attired his head.
            17 Being thus able to ſee all, and of authority to conquere all: hee hath yet a name written which none knoweth but himſelfe. And this name is ſo much the more maruailous, and hath the more cleare note of his Greatneſſe, that being written, as both a ſure and permanent name, and alſo expoſed to bee read, yet none knoweth it but himſelfe. And what is he not able to doe, who ſeeing, and by matchleſſe authority ouerruling all, yet is ſet aboue the reach of all? his ſtate, counſels and wayes being knowne to himſelfe onely: as whereof no fleſh is capable. So inſearchable are his wayes, and his iudgements paſt finding out according, as in conſideration

of one ſpeciall euent of this his iudging and fighting at this time. Paul exclameth: and the ſealed Booke no creature was able to looke on. Rom. 11. cap. 5
            
            18 That none imagine theſe to be idle Titles, in name onely, hee is alſo a practiſed warriour, and now ſpecially come forth to ſhew, how mighty hee is to ſaue. For this, his garment is dipt in bloud, euen the bloud of his enemies; to note a huge ſlaughter. Hee is now to tread the Wine-preſſe of God his wrath. He hath long looked if any would helpe, but there was none to helpe, none to vphold, 
               Chap. 11. Iſai 63. 
               therefore his owne arme now ſhall helpe him, and his owne wrath ſuſtaine him: the day of vengeance is now in his heart, and the time of his redeemed is come. And accordingly, as he who ſpeaketh iuſtly, and is mighty to ſaue, hee is called the word of God. Not onely for that hee is that word which was in the beginning with God, and was God: but alſo, and here ſpecially, becauſe hee is that true one, who ſpeaketh and performeth, as who, both ſpeaketh iuſtly, and is mighty to ſaue. For this redde garment and name agreeable to it, See Iſai 63. and weigh the place.
            19 Such is the Captaine of the Lord his hoaſt. The inhabitants of the earth following the Beaſt, Chapter 13. Wondered, and in wonder exclamed, Who is like the beaſt? who is able to fight with him? Heere I thinke hee hath his match and more. But theſe earthly ones ſee not the Heauens, and ſo goe on blindfolded to their owne deſtruction. His army is in his owne Liuery. Hee needeth no armie, but his army hath need of him. For he is their glory, their ſtrength, their armour, their victory, and all: In his ſtrength they fight and ouer come. They are all horſed, as, who for dignity are Iudges and warriours, like their Captaine. They are alſo faithfull and true, in, and by him. They are all kinges and prieſtes clothed in pure and ſhining ſilke. This is a bleſſed Captaine, who conformeth all his followers in glory and dignity to himſelfe. Alexander was fooliſh to glorie

in his Argyraſpides: here is a Captaine of high note. In oppoſition to the earthly ones, on the other party, they are called the hoſt of heauen, where there conuerſation Chap. 12. 12. is, euen while they are in the world, but not of the world.
            20 The weapon of this great Captaine, whereby he worketh and fighteth, is the ſword of his mouth. With Chap. 11. 2. Pſalm 2. Chap. 14. 20. it, he ſmiteth the Heathen, enemies of his Church, treaders downe of the holy City: cruſhing them in peeces, with an iron Mace. And hee treadeth the winepreſſe of God almighty. Heere now, the treaders are troden downe. Thus, with mouth and hand, hee fighteth, and Oſea. 6. 5. with feet, downe-trampleth all. How ſo ſtrange effects of bloud-ſhed, and ouerturning the whole ſtate of the earth, are attributed to the ſword of his mouth, is cleare Chapt. 14. 17. 18. where an Angel, armed with a ſickle, commeth out of the Temple, and is ſtirred to cut downe the grapes of the earth, by one comming from the Altar, hauing power ouer fire. And Chapt. 15. where the Chap. 16. 2 Theſ 2. Angels of the laſt wrath, receiue their Vials from one of the foure Beaſts; and come to execution out of the Temple; like as the voice commanding it, is from the Temple. By the breath of this Lord his mouth Antichriſt muſt bee conſumed.
            21 This his fighting, to the foile of all his foes, maketh him yet a name. The King of Kings and Lord of Lords. This he was at all times. And euen from the day Heb. 1. Phil. 2. of his aſcention was alwaies ſeene of his owne, crow
                  
                     •
                  ed with glory and honour. God hauing exalted him aboue all name that is named: ſo as all knees muſt bow, and euery tongue confeſſe him to bee the Lord. Yet hee getteth this name, at this time, in a ſpeciall manner, written on his garment and thigh. So as now, it becommeth manifeſt to the view of all: his power and ſtrength kything clearely in this victory, and wonderfull ſequels of it. This is that ſame, which in the ſong was ſaid, the Lord God almighty hath raigned. And Chapt. 11. The kingdomes

of the world are our Lord his and his Chriſts. This is his ſitting on a white cloude, Chap. 114. euen the manifeſtation of his iudgements, Chapt. 15. 4. Rome in great deriſion, when they crucified him, ſet ouer his heade, in three Languages, This is the King of the Iewes. And the Iewes, counting it ſcorne and high diſgrace, Iohn 19
                     •
                  
                to haue him called their King, intreated the alteration of the words, in that he ſo called himſelf. But now, by the finall and euerlaſting ouerthrow of the Kingdome of Rome, and by conuerſion of the Iewes, to mourne for him whom they pearced, hee ſhall gloriouſly manifeſt himſelfe, and bee acknowledged, not onely King of the Iewes, but alſo King of Kings and Lord of Lords. This name, hee hath written on his garment, as great Kings and high Captaines haue their imperiall garments, whereby they are diſcerned. On his thigh, not ſo much for that ordinarily, the ſword, weapon of the victory, is girded on the thigh: but, for that in Scripture ſpeech, a man his ſtrength is placed commonly in his loſnes and Pſal. 45. thighes, (now it is his owne ſtrength that helpeth him) and therefore, it was a token of ſubiection and ſeruitude, to put the hand vnder the thigh. Which cuſtome, Aben-Ezra witneſſeth to haue continued ſtill amongſt the Indians Gen. 24. & 47. and Ethiopians till his time. And therefore, his name is alſo written on his thigh, becauſe all the world now haue to put their hands vnder it, and ſweare him homage. This Captaine, wreſtling with Iacob, to make him know he was his Lord, and that all his ſtrength was Gen. 32. of him, hee did ſtrike him with a note of infirmity in the thigh.
            22 Thus was the deſcription of the great Captaine of the heauenly hoſt, in himſelfe, his armie, armour, and manner of fighting. Now, followeth his herauld or trumpet. Who is remarkeable for his ſtanding place, and for the tenor of his proclamation. Hee ſtandeth in the Sunne. To note exceeding great light now, of the Goſpell and preaching therof, wherein the preachers ſhould

clearely ſee, and confidently proclaime Antichriſt his ruine. For great meaſure of light, the Apoſtolike Church, in the woman, Chapt. 12. was clothed with the Sunne. Wee ſee to the praiſe of God, and euidence of this Propheſie, light already growen in great degree, as no doubt, but for this ſight and great effect, it ſhall yet grow more: ſo as the light of the Moone ſhall bee 
               Iſa. 30. 26. 
               as the light of the Sunne, and the light of the Sunne ſeuenfold.
            
            23 The tenour of the proclamation, in a figuratiue ſpeech from Ezechiel, ſheweth ſo certaine, and an exceeding great deſtruction of the Beaſt and his aiders: as they, their ſtates, great roomes, rents, and ſubſtance, ſhould bee a prey: and that in ſuch degree of hauocke, as all, giuen to reiffe, or ſeeking after prey, ſhould bee filled. I ſhewed Chapt. 17. what it is to eat the fleſh of the Whore: but heere, is ſuch a ſtrange ranuerſing of the ſtate of the world, as no doubt, falleth by that earth-quake of the ſeuenth Viall. And out of all queſtion, the totall ruine of that ſtate, muſt change the face of the world, in ſo great endeauors of hell and heauen, for it, and againſt it,
            24 Thus is the party victorious. Followeth the aduerſary, and his foile. The aduerſary, to any that ſeeth not him, who iudgeth and fighteth righteouſly, will appeare great. Euen that wonderfull Beaſt, Chapt. 13. bearing vp the Whore, Chapt. 17. and now, in great chafe at her fall, by his frogges, gathering the Kings of the earth Chap. 16. 14. 
               Armageddon. The firſt party was from heauen, and his hoſt heauenly. Heere, the leader, is the Beaſt of the bottomleſſe pit, which was opened for his outcomming, as were the heauens for the others, and Chap. 9. 11. his hoſts are all earthly. For, albeit many of his hornes haue fallen away from him ere now, and ioyned to the hoſt of heauen: yet, hee is euen at this point, through the diligence of his frogges, ſtrengthened with many Kings.
            
               
25 So, are the parties. The euent of the battell, in the Beaſt his foile, is declared in few words: without any mention of a conflict; but, of a proud and obſtinate purpoſe to fight againſt the rider on the white horſe. For they ſhall be blind and obdured to the end: as is cleare by the effects, in them, of the Vials, Chapt. 16. And the word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                hee was intrapped or ſnared. Implyeth in it, as an eaſie victory, for the part of him that rideth the white horſe; ſo a ſudden and vnexpected foile, to the Beaſt and his followers. For he dreameth of perpetuity, as alſo ſtaying vpon him the Whore. I ſit beeing a Queene and am no widdow, and ſhall ſee no mourning, Chap. 18. 7.
            26 Their iudgement is diſtinct, according to the diuers qualitie of the parties. The Head, Beaſt, and falſe Prophet, are caſt in the lake of fire and brimſtone, and that a liue: to ſhew a moſt horrible, and recureleſſe iudgement, by alluſion to that of Sodome; and of Core, Dathan, and Abiram, who went downe aliue in the pit. Euen eternall deſtruction and torment. The followers, Nom. 16. are ſlaine by the ſword of the Lord his mouth, to the loſſe of all their glory, and worldly ſtate, which is made a prey to others. Onely, by this difference, to ſhew, how this great Captaine, iudgeth and fighteth righteouſly, giuing to each according to the degree of their ſinne. For, no doubt, but euen at this point, many ſhall follow the Beaſt, and fall from their eſtates by his fall: whom yet, by deſtruction of their fleſh, the Lord may reclaime from the full degree of his puniſhment; in lightning them to ſee the truth. As, many alſo ſhall drinke with him of the cup of endleſſe wrath.
            27 That the Beaſt and falſe Prophet are heere made two, is only to ſhew, the ruine of the Head and State with him. For, as the falſe Prophet, ruling ouer the State, is the Beaſt; ſo being diſtinctly conſidered from the State, he is the falſe Prophet. As the firſt and ſecond Beaſt are Cha. 13 diſtinguiſhed but for explication. So this is put, to ſhew

in ſuch ſort the fall of the falſe Prophet (the eight heade and one of the ſeuen, the beaſt with hornes like the lambe making the image of the Beaſt by cure of his deadly wound) as ſtate and all ſhall periſh eternally. For, as this Beaſt hath ſome note from all the foure in Daniel; ſo in the deſtruction of this, the ſpirit alludeth to that of theſe. Who all, ſo fell, as yet, in the deſtruction of the laſt, which was burnt with fire, the finall ouerthrow was of thē all; the ſtate of the former, in ſome ſort remaining in the ſucceeding Beaſt: as this Beaſt here falling in the firſt heads, yet ſtill continued in the ſubſequent, till in this laſt head (the Beaſt going to deſtruction) it vtterly periſhed. In Babels fall, by Perſia, and Media; yet in them the Kingdome in a ſort continued. Darius of the Medes taking the Kingdome, Dan. 5. 31. And in their ouerthrow by Alexander, who deſpiſing Macedon ſetled both in their places and to their faſhions: as alſo in his ſucceſſors after his fall, the domination of the former beaſts in ſome ſort abode. But the fourth Beaſt falling, al vtterly periſhed. See and weigh Dan. 7. 11. 12. for there is the alluſion▪ One thing here is worth the marking, that in the falſe Prophets working, which maketh his guiltineſſe, and is heere recorded, both to know the party, and his iuſt puniſhment: his deceit, in making men receiue the Beaſt his character, and to worſhip him, is only mentioned, and no word of his name or number: as neither are they euer ſpoken of in his iudgement, either denounced or ſpoken of. The reaſon ſee vpon Chap. 14. Sect. 8. Now we muſt not imagine here, one certaine place, or one point of time, of all this the Beaſt his endeauor and foile: as neither in the next Chapter, of the Dragons. For their, we ſee how Gog and Magog are, from the foure quarters of the earth, all Satan his inſtruments, of his laſt fury, and in all places. As for the name attributed to the place of foile, Chapt. 16. Armageddon, wee ſhewed the reaſon there. And it is, whereſoeuer the Lambe fighteth and ouercommeth. Albeit out of doubt, their laſt endeauors ſhall be ſtrange, and their fall conioined

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
with ſuch wonderfull broiles, and alterations of the State of the world, as was not ſince men inhabited the earth. And then, the fatteſt karkaſſe ſhal be the fineſt prey. Bleſſed are they who come to the ſupper of the Lambe his marriage. For who come not, are made a ſupper. And who will not feede on the Lambe, are iuſtly made foode to the fowels of heauen.
         
         
            CHAP. XX.
            
               WEe haue heard the iudgement of the Whore, and the Beaſt her aduancer: but for a perfit victory, is requiſite alſo the deſtruction of the Dragon, that great and Maſter enemie: as, of whoſe Kingdome and authority, the Beaſt, who made all the Whores credit, was onely the ſuffragant. That is, in this Chapter, ſet foorth, in two degrees of his captiuity: Chap. 13. whereof, the laſt is abſolute, to eternall deſtruction. Now, as captiuity implyeth euer a fore-going liberty, whereof it is the priuation, ſo heere, a twofold liberty or looſing is to bee taken vp; according to the two degrees of reſtraint. The firſt liberty, it was not needfull, that heere it ſhould be recorded, beeing largely declared in the 12. Chapter. From which liberty, his reſtraint, albeit of that time (as by ſubſtituting the Beaſt of his authority, by deceitfull hypocriſie and efficacie of error, to worke that, from performing whereof, in open rage, hee was then bound vp, might well bee preſumed) yet hath beene reſerued to this place, to giue vs in one view, his whole ſtory. Which, conſiſteth in that rage, Chap. 12. From which, beeing heere, in ſome conſideration, bound vp for a time, he is againe let looſe; and his endeauours thereupon, are here declared: ſo farre from his intended ſucceſſe, as he is taken the ſecond time, and deſtroied for euer.
            
               
2 In his firſt reſtraint, come to bee conſidered, the ſureneſſe, end, and degree thereof. The ſureneſſe, is cleered in the perſon apprehender, and manner of fermance. The apprehender is God 
                  ••
               s miniſter, an Angell: inſtructed with authority, as, comming from heauen: with power to execute, as, hauing the key of the bottomleſſe pit, and a great chaine. All ſpoken after the manner of men. This Angell, falleth not from heauen to earth, as that great ſtarre, Chapter 9. but commeth downe, as he Chapters 10. and 18. And, accordingly, hath the key of the bottomleſſe pit for a farre different end from that: this comming, to incloſe the Prince of darkeneſſe, being himſelfe the miniſter of light: whereas that great ſtarre, falling from the miniſtrie of light, to become the miniſter of darkneſſe, he openeth the botomleſſe pit, to let out darkeneſſe. The Dragon, is heere deſcribed, by theſe ſame names, and property, of ſeducing Nations, which are giuen him in the 12. Chapter, in the firſt degree of this his firſt foile, towards this firſt captiuity: when by Michael his valour, hee was caſt from heauen. Which the holy Ghoſt doth, of purpoſe, to leade vs know that this firſt binding, is from that rage. So wiſely and plainely, the ſpirit teacheth vs to couple together the parts of this propheſie. Now Chriſt is hee properly, who treadeth downe the head of that ſerpent: Gen. 3. Luke 11. 21. 1. Ihon 3 8. Chap. 1. 18. who, onely, is that ſtronger then the ſtrong one, comming in, binding him and ſpoiling his houſe: as who, onely hath come to loſe the workes of Satan, and onely hath the keies of hell and death. But, according as he giueth gifts to men, and worketh by his miniſters of whatſoeuer calling, who, in his light and ſtrength, aduance the Kingdome of light, and bring downe that of darkeneſſe, his miniſters, thus inſtructed by him, and to this ende, are alſo Pſal. 149. 8. binders of the Dragon. Of whom this Angell is the generall type.
            3 The manner of fermance, to ſhew the ſurenes thereof, is after the manner of men, ſet forth, in incloſing, ſhutting,

and ſealing, as was the caues mouth on Daniel, and the Sepulchre of Chriſt.
            4 The end of his reſtraint is, That he ſeduce not the Nations, &c, Which ende, how it is, and how farre to be vnderſtood, the degree of his reſtraint now, and his endeauour, vpon his next looſing will make cleare.
            5 Thus we haue the ſureneſſe, and end of the Dragons reſtraint. Now followeth the degree thereof: cleering the end, as I haue ſaid. The degree is, that this his captiuity is not abſolute, but in a ſpeciall conſideration. This is ſhewed by the time thereof, ſtate of men in that time, and what this ſtate is. The time is not, for euer, as in his next taking, but, for a thouſand yeeres: which being expired, he was to bee loſed againe. The denunciation of which ſad euent, is mitigated with a conſolation, that it ſhould be but for a ſhort ſpace, euen that three daies and a halfe, wherein the witneſſes were killed and lay vnburied, Chapter 11. For thencefoorth, by degrees the Dragon is againe comprehended, till he be made fully faſt in eternall chaines.
            6 The ſtate of men, during this firſt reſtraint, ſheweth it alſo not to be abſolute: in ſo farre, as hee ſhall bee bound but to a few, being ſtill looſe towards the moſt part. This is cleered, by declaration of the ſeuerall condition of both: and firſt, of theſe to whom hee is bound. Wherein, are two: their condition, in this his reſtraint: and, who they are, that haue this condition. Their condion, is expreſſed, firſt, in figuratiue ſpeech, of Thrones and Sitters, hauing iudgement accordingly, giuen them: and next, in proper termes, that they liued and raigned with Chriſt theſe thouſand yeeres. Who they are, that are in this eſtate and condition, is ſhewed in two ſorts: Firſt, The ſoules of them who were beheaded for the word of God, &c. Secondly, They who worſhipped not the Beaſt, &c. The ſtate and condition of the contrarie ſort, is, that during theſe thouſand yeeres, they lay dead and liued not. Now, how great this number is, and how ſmall in compariſon

thereto, is the former, is cleere by the 13 Chapter, where all the earth follow the Beaſt, and receiue his Character, name, or number: except theſe 144000. ſealed ones, Chap. 7. in mount Sion with the Lambe, Chap. 14. And conſequently, in what reſpect, and to whom, the Dragon is ſaid, during this ſpace, to bee bound.
            7 The third point, ſhewing yet further the ſtrict conſideration of Satan his reſtraint, is the explication of this ſtate and condition of both ſorts of men: what this life and raigne of the one is: and, what is the death of the other. To wit, that this life and raigne, are not to bee taken for this naturall life, or any wordly dominion: neither yet, for that euerlaſting and glorious ſtate, which the Saints, in Soule and body, after the laſt indgement, inioy in heauen: this being their ſtate during the thonſand yeeres, and called the firſt reſurrection. As, neither is the death of the other, to be vnderſtood of the naturall death of the body, by ſeperation of the ſoule therefrom: or, of the eternall death of both, in Gehenna: as, wherein the world lying dead a thouſand yeeres, thereafter riſeth from it, to haue part in the firſt reſurrection, and conſequently of bleſſedneſſe. But, this life and raigne in reſpect of the ſoules beheaded, is their honourable commemoration, and riſing from vnder theſe horrible ſlanders & calumnies, whereby, the honour of their ſufferings was, maliciouſly, by Satan eclipſed: euen that ſame thing, which, by long white robes, was ſignified, Chapter 6. In reſpect of theſe who Worſhipped not the Beaſt, &c. This life and raigne, is the firſt reſurrection: whereby men here, by the word and ſpirit, are begotten to the life of God in Chriſt, and freed from the bondage and death of Satan and ſinne: being Epheſ. 5. 14. vindicare in the liberty of the ſonnes of God, and ſo, made Kings and Prieſts to God in Chriſt Ieſus. And the death of the reſt, who riſe not this firſt reſurrection, is that death in ſinne, ignorance, idolatrie and induration, wherein all men lye, naturally, depriued of the life of God: like thoſe 1. Tim. 5. 6. widowes, who being aliue, yet were dead: and like Ephraim,
               
who was dead in Baal. From which death, who O
                     ••
                  . 13. 1. ſo riſeth not, to be pertaker of the firſt reſurrection, ſhall be accurſed foreuer, and ſubiect to the power of the ſecond death, as contrariwaies, who haue part in the laſt reſurrect on, are bleſſed and holy, and ſhall liue and raigne eternally not feeling the ſecond death.
            8 Now, this death of the Reſt of men, albeit in particular conſiderations of the ſingular perſons, in that time who lay dead and raiſe not the firſt reſurrection, it was an entrie to the ſecond death: Yet the ſpirit, heere, ſheweth that in the generall conſideration of the world, it ſhould not alwaies lie in that death. But as theſe 144000. liued and raigned with Chriſt, theſe thouſand yeeres, (while all the earth followed the Beaſt, and were dead in Baal) and were partakers in the firſt reſurrection, vnder ſure hope of the ſecond, to glory: ſo after theſe thouſand yeeres were expired, not theſe onely but an infinite number of all peoples, Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations, with Palmes in Chap. 7. their hands, and long whit robes, made white in the blood of the Lambe, ſhould riſe from their death wherein they lay, and ſing a new ſong. This, is euidently implied in theſe words, The reſt of the dead liued not, till the thouſand yeeres were expired, and this is called the firſt reſurrection, which, is ſpoken, in common, both of the former who liued during the thouſand yeeres, and of the other, who, after the thouſand yeeres, aroſe and liued. So, as theſe words, This is the firſt reſurrection, are relatiue, als well to the life of theſe who liued during the thouſand yeeres, as to them, who ſhould liue after the expiring thereof: for, their life is one, albeit not of one time, as the words, The reſt of the dead liued not till, &c. euince clearely: and accordingly, bleſſedneſſe and immunity from the ſecond death, is the firſt pronounced in common, of both: and thereafter ſeuerally by parts, this their common life and bleſſedneſſe of the firſt reſurrection is exponed. That the firſt ſhould liue and raigne with Chriſt a thouſand yeeres: and the other, notwithſtanding, of the Dragon againe

louſed, and his ſtrange endeauours thereupon, yet ſhould riſe this firſt reſurrection, and liue, and raigne with Chriſt for euer and euer. The place hath been, and is miſtaken highly, euen to the breeding of dangerous hereſies. But thus it is. The holy Ghoſt hauing ſet forth the ſtate of the Church, as ſhee riſeth the firſt reſurrection, and liueth the life of God, from the time of Sathan his firſt reſtraint, and that in two degrees of riſers: firſt theſe, who during the yeeres of his Captiuity, liued & raigned, when as by the Beaſt his preuailing it might haue ſeemed, that there had beene none at all: Next, theſe, who after the thouſand yeeres, notwithſtanding his looſing and rage, yet roſe from their death in ſuperſtition and blindneſſe; and hauing ſaid of both in common, this is the firſt reſurrection. He then proclameth their bleſſedneſſe accordingly, in this their ſpirituall life, and raigne here, and that diſtinctly according to the two times. Of the firſt ſort, that they ſhall be Prieſts of God, & raigne with Chriſt a thouſand yeeres. And of the ſecond ſort, that after the thouſand yeeres were expired they ſhould riſe to the life of God, and raigne for euermore. Now, if this ſecond member had been thus ſuccinctly put, anſwering ſo to the other, it had exempted al doubt. But becauſe in ſtead of this ſummarie reddition, the holy Ghoſt much more gracefully ſubioyneth the narration, how, as during Sathan his firſt reſtraint, a good number liued the life of God, refuſing the Beaſt his marke, and ſo were bleſſed in the aſſurance of victory ouer the ſecond death: ſo, after his louſing notwithſtanding thereof, and all his endeauours thereupon, the reſt of the dead ſhall riſe the firſt reſurrection, and the Church ſhould ſtill waxe and encreaſe in light & grace: Sathan in his higheſt endeauours againſt her, ſhould be againe made faſt for euer, and ſhe enioy an eternal peace. Then to haue the full ſenſe of the ſecond member, and a cleare reddition, wee muſt reade from the beginning of the ſeuenth verſe, to the end of the 5. of the 22. Chapter.

Neither muſt wee here imagine, that the firſt are ſaid ſo to liue a thouſand yeeres, as though the life of God had periſhed from them thereafter, or that this life and raigne is of one and the ſame perſons, ſtill liuing all this while, (which were a lourdly groſſe apprehenſion) as neither muſt wee thinke, that becauſe the ſecond are ſaid to raigne for euermore, that thereby is firſt and properly meaned their ſtate in glory after the laſt reſurrection. But thus the ſpirit will ſhew, how firſt and laſt God entertained a Church, and ſpirituall life therein. To the firſt, are attributed a thouſand yeeres, in reſpect that the Dragon being ſo long tyed from diſturbing their ſpirituall life and raigne by open rage, is againe let louſe. To the ſecond, a raigne for euermore, becauſe the Dragon fighting againſt it, is taken and captiued for euer, to ſhew ſuch a deſtruction of oppoſers, as the Church her peace ſhould neuer againe bee diſturbed by any new louſing of Sathan from his ſecond impriſonment: but ſhee ſhall enioy quiet ſtate here in plentifull diſpenſation of grace, till ſhee bee at length tranſlated to euerlaſting glory: according to that which of her in this reſpect was ſaid, Chapter 7. they ſhall hunger no more, &c. To take the thouſand yeeres, verſe 6. to beginne at the expiring of the firſt thouſand, verſe 4. and 5. which ſecond thouſand yeeres, the reſt of the dead ariſing, ſhall liue and raigne: and to take the firſt reſurrection here ſo in relation to a ſecond, as by the firſt ſhould be meaned the riſing of Gentiles from vnder Antichriſtian darkeneſſe: and the conuerſion of Iewes to be in relation thereto, the ſecond: Albeit it be the indgement of one deepely ſeene in theſe myſteries, and deſeruing well of the Church for his learned Commentaries on this Booke; yet it ſeemeth to me a groundles coniecture, which hath made him to miſtake alſo as I think the end of this Chapter. For, beſides that to take the thouſand yeeres, verſe 6. for a ſecond thouſand, after that verſe 4. and 5. and yet to make the thouſand yeeres ſpoken,

verſe 7. to be relatiue to the firſt, and not to theſe immediately preceeding, it maketh an obſcure, and implicate conſtruction, (which in our interpretation goeth plaine and ſoundly) what ſhould induce to thinke a ſecond thouſand yeeres to be meaned verſe 6. ſeeing no caſe is put at the end thereof to fall out, why the ſpirite ſhould ſo exactly haue limited them, as we ſee in the firſt the looſing againe of the Dragon? The thouſand yeers, life and raigne then in the 6. verſe, is the ſame which was ſpoken, verſe 4. and there reſumed very pertinently, to ſhew, in ſubioyning the other ſort of riſers and liuers, God his whole diſpenſation, from the firſt binding of the Dragon, towards his Church, firſt and laſt, and diſtinctly in both.
            9 Now, from what point of time to beginne, and at what point, conſequently to cloſe the count of theſe thouſand yeeres, the end heere mentioned, and degrees of the Dragon his reſtraint, doe clearely lead vs. Wee muſt not thinke, that Sathan in an inſtant was eyther tyed vp from his rage, or againe, in a preciſe point of time let looſe. But both fell out by degrees. From the firſt out going of the Goſpell, hee beganne in ſome degree to bee bound, as hee complaineth of Chriſt, that hee had come to torment him before the time. And as Math. 8. 29. the Goſpell preuailed, hee was ſtill the more made faſt. But ſeeing the end here ſpecified of his binding, and the condition of the Church heere deſcribed vpon his reſtraint, Make euident, that this his Captiuity is not abſolute, but in ſome ſpeciall conſideration: and the degrees here mentioned ſhew, that then his vptying is to bee counted, when in that conſideration he is perfectly made faſt, as taken, ſhut vp, locked on & ſealed; we haue to take vp that point of time, when according to this end he was fully faſtned. I ſhewed before on the 12. Chapter, that the Dragon his proper rage is taken for open and cruell perſecuting of Chriſtians: from which he

was then fully tyed vp, when by Conſtantine his conuerſion to the faith, open perſecution ceaſed, and Chriſtianity was by lawes eſtabliſhed, the Church became glorious in the eyes of all men; the ſoules of Martyres got long white robes, and ſeates were ſet vp, and the Saints 
               Chap. 6. 11. 
               did ſit on them, &c, hauing iudgement giuen them. For, both the commemoration of Martyrs was honourable, and the eſtate of the Church flouriſhing in peaceable and goodly condition, and glorious account. And albeit in the meane time, Sathan was working by his Lieutenant the Beaſt, whom vpon this his reſtraint from open rage, hee ſent forth, then in the firſt ſenſible degrees to deceiue by falſe ſemblance, and who from this point of time mightily preuailed (though at firſt by ſlow & ſcarſe perceptible degrees, as riſing out of the earth) in bringing Nations to make vp the image of the Beaſt, which at the end of theſe thouſand yeeres came to the top of Chap. 13. impiety: yet they liued and raigned all the while, who Chap. 14. Sect 8. receiued not his Character. The end then here mentioned of the Dragons reſtraint, that hee ſhould not ſeduce, &c. muſt not bee taken abſolutely (for hee was neuer buſier ſeducing, nor with greater ſucceſſe, then during theſe thouſand yeeres) but ſeducing here muſt be vnderſtood, according as wee ſee hee worketh vpon his louſing againe: when hee falleth to that ſame kinde of ſeduction, from which firſt hee was bound vp, that is, to ſeduce Nations to compaſſe the Tents of Saints, and the beloued City. Euen to ſet them againe vpon violent and furious perſecution, by ſword and fire, as he was a murtherer from the beginning, and as in that, men moſt bewray themſelues to bee the children of their father the Diuell. From this rage hee was bound vp, when by the two wings of that great Eagle, the woman eſcaped to her Ioh. 8. 44. place from the preſence of the Dragon: he beeing chained from comming at her, now extolled with wings. And the degrees here ſet downe, of binding, incloſing, ſhutting

vpon and ſealing, ſhew euidently that the count is to be taken vp from the full and perfect point of his Captiuity. For from that time hee had no louſe chain for open rage. In Iulian he was not ſo much louſed, as biting the chain. Who beſides his ſhort abode, neuer durſt fall directly to murthering of Chriſtians, the perſecutions of Conſtantius and 
                  Ʋalens were partiall heates vnder profeſſion, euen that bloud that was mingled with haile and fire, Chapter 8.
            10 Now, as wee haue the point of time of his perfect fermance, which is the 300. yeere of Chriſt, or therby: ſo this leadeth vs to the point of his looſing, the 1300. yeere, or thereby, and the conueniency of ſtory is cleare; for although as by degrees hee was faſtned, ſo by degres hee was looſed againe; yet wee ſhall find as at the firſt point, the full degree of his binding; ſo at this time, him fully looſed. In the Pontificality of Gregory the ſeuenth, he had a long chaine, which yet was further raxed in that of Vrban the ſecond, and his Succeſſors, kindlers of that tragicall and ſuperſtitious warre, for recouery of Ieruſalem. But, for the end here ſpoken of open cruelty againſt Saints, hee was fully louſed in the Pontificality of Boniface the eighth and his ſucceſſors; from whoſe times haue beene bloudy perſecutions and cruell rage. Then the woman beganne to returne from the wildernes, the witneſſes to ſteppe out Chap. 11. of the Temple, the little booke eaten, to giue hearts and eyes, to apply the reede, and ſo to diſcerne the Temple from the Court: then the firſt of theſe three Angels, Chapter 14. beganne to breake out through the midſt of Heauen, and the other two in courſe followed: ſo as then they were bleſſed who died in the Lord, and then was the patience of Saints. The Beaſt his mouth then being perceiued, and ſo the ſemblance of the Lambs horns no more able to beare him out, the Dragon behooued come againe in roome to maintaine his owne throne, & to repreſſe by rage what by hypocriſie could not be kept

downe. Then the two witneſſes lay ſlaine in the ſtreetes of the great City, all Nations being ſeduced to ſlay them, and reioyce ouer them. Then the Beaſt which Chap. 11. was carſt ſpotted like a Pard, becommeth of the Dragons colour; and the Whore born vp by him, is drunke Chap. 17. with the bloud of Saints: from that time what cruell murther of Chriſtians was vnder the odious names of Waldenſes, Albingenſes, Fraterculi, Beghardi, &c. And ſince, what fiers, what bloud ſheds, what monſtrous complots for extirpation of the truth haue beene practiſed, is too well known.
            11 In this rage, though for a time the Dragon deborded, yet praiſed bee God, by ſucceſſe of the Goſpell, and fire from heauen, hee is in making faſt the ſecond time, in an euerlaſting chaine. Therefore it is ſaid, that hee ſhould be louſed but a ſhort space. For they are faine to relent of their open murthering and burning, & are now in God his iuſtice getting meaſure for meaſure,
            12 The time then of theſe thouſand yeeres, is from the firſt open and ſenſible ſteppes of the myſtery of iniquity, working on to the quickning of the Beaſt (which fell together with this binding vp of the Dragon) to the toppe of that impiety, when it came to the higheſt degree. And this is the onely time in all this propheſie, to Chap. 9. Sect. 5. bee taken definitely; becauſe of Antichriſt his whole working (which was in way euen from the Apoſtolike times, firſt by hid and inſenſible, and next by open ſteppes towards the height, from which height againe as by degrees it aroſe, ſo by degrees it muſt vaniſh) no preciſe or exact time could be ſet downe: but yet, to giue vs ſufficient cleareneſſe, the holy Ghoſt putteth the time from the firſt beginning of open working, to the height of impiety: and marketh the two pointes of this time, with moſt euident notes of the binding of the Dragon, and his louſing againe.
            13 In Conſtantine his time, that too great and open

ſteppes were laide for Antichriſt to mount vp to Sathan his throne, is too well knowne. And to what a height the miſtery of iniquity had wrought on, in the Pontificality of Boniface the eighth their owne ſtories giue cleare teſtimony: recording of him that hee entred like a foxe, raigned as a Lion, and died as a dogge. When, by a counterfeit Oracle hee had got himſelfe made Pope, hee would vpon no condition acknowledge the Emperour, except hee did take his title and dignity of him, as to whom properly it belonged. He excommunicated the French King, becauſe hee would not take his Crowne holden of him, and impudently and impiouſly diſcharged his Subiects of their allegeance. He blaſphemouſlie againſt the honour of Chriſt his Croſſe, inſtituted the firſt Iubilie at Rome, and put forth this decree, that the Biſhoppe of Rome ought to be iudged of none, although he ſhould carry innumerable ſoules with him to hell.
            
            14 The peruerſe mindes of the Romanes here bewray themſelues. For this time of a thouſand yeeres, which onely of all the times in this propheſie is to bee taken definitely, they will haue to bee indefinite; and al the reſt to be taken both definitelie and properly. And without either example of Scripture, or ſhew of alluſion, caſting it roundly by them, they will forſooth haue theſe thouſand yeeres here indefinitely put for all the time from Chriſt, to Antichriſt his raigne: who ſhall raigne (ſay they) three yeeres and a halfe before the laſt iudgement. But, if during theſe thouſand yeeres, the ſpeciall honor and chiefe crown of them who liue and raign in them, be their refuſing to worſhippe the Beaſt (whom euen Romans confeſſe to be Antichriſt) of neceſſity his Kingdome muſt haue beene in vogue theſe thouſand yeeres. And this againe ſheweth plainely, that theſe times of a 1260. dayes, 42. monethes, and a time, times, & halfe a time, are not properly and definitely put for the iuſt time of Antichriſt his raigne, as the Romans would inforce, ſeeing theſe thouſand yeeres hee beareth ſway:

further, if theſe times were definitely, and yet not properly to be taken, as ſome of our learned interpreters eſteeme, I ſee no reaſon why here the holy Ghoſt ſhould haue altered his ordinary ſtile. See Chapters 9. and 11. and 12.
            15 Now conſidering all the courſe of this propheſie, expreſſing firſt the ſtate of the Church in the ſeuen of Aſia, next, compriſing the whole future euents in ſeuen Seales: the ſeuenth whereof affordeth ſeuen Trumpets; and the ſeuenth of theſe ſeuen vials of the laſt wrath. Seeing alſo that in all this Booke, but ſeuen diuers times are recorded. Firſt, that of ten dayes, Chapter 2. 2. that of halfe an houre, Chapter 8. 3. that of fiue monethes, Chapter 9. 4. that of an howre, day, moneth and yeer of the ſixth Trumpet, Chapter 9. 5. that of 1260. dayes, 42. monethes, a time, times, and halfe a time, which are but one, Chapter 11. and 12. and 13. 6. that of three dayes and a halfe, Chapter 11; and now this of a 1000. yeeres is the ſeuenth, in huge proportion, exceeding all the former. Conſidering alſo, that this time of a 1000. yeeres, is in the courſe of this Chapter, and within ſhort ſpace, ſixe times recorded, and thereafter no time mentioned but euermore. Whither in theſe conſiderations, if this maner of leading implyeth any further myſtery, I referre it to godly and ſober conſiderations: not daring louſe the raines to curioſity in ſo diuine and hid matter; wherein yet I am perſwaded, thongh my weakeneſſe cannot find it out, that nothing is eyther in matter or manner of handling, which hath not in it a great depth of wiſdom.
            16 Thus was the dragons firſt reſtraint, in a certaine degree of time and meaſure. Followeth the ſecond, abſolute and euerlaſting. And it is cleared by the fore-going liberty, to which hee is louſed. From the firſt binding. So as all this point is in theſe two, the dragons ſecond liberty, and the euent thereof.
            17 In this his ſecond liberty, is the time when, and his

endeauour beeing looſed. The time is, at the expiring of the thouſand yeeres whereof wee haue ſpoken. His endeauour being looſed, is to practiſe againe, that from which, by his firſt taking, hee was with-held: that is, to ſeduce Nations. Which ſeducing, muſt bee vnderſtoode to be of that ſame kind, as heereafter is clearely ſhewed, in that hee brought them to compaſſe the tents of Saints and beloued City. For otherwaies, all the time of his reſtraint from this kind of working, hee by the Lieutenant of his power, ſeduced in another kind mightilie. The greatneſſe of this his endeauour, to this end, is cleared: firſt, by theſe whom hee ſeduced: and next, by their action vpon his inſtigation. In theſe who are ſeduced, are theſe circumſtances. 1 Their habitation. 2 Their quality. 3 Their number. Their habitation, is the foure quarters of the earth. Whereby is offered to our conception, both, Satan his earneſt and diligent practiſe in this his laſt puffe; and that, all the enemies ouer the whole earth, of what ſtate and condition ſoeuer, whom, in this his laſt fury, hee bringeth foorth, are heere deſigned. Their quality, is expreſſed in the names giuen them, of Gog and Magog. To ſhew them, deteſtable, for cruell diſpoſition to deſtroy: that by a huge deſtruction, they ſhall be deſtroyed: and that they are the inſtruments of Satan his laſt fury. Their number, is expreſſed in two notes. One, that they ouerſpred the plaine of the earth: the other, that they were as the ſand of the Sea for multitude.
            18 Such are they who are ſeduced. The end, whereto the Dragon leadeth them, is, to compaſſe the tents of Saints and the beloued City. Euen the vtter deſtruction (in their intent) of God his true Church, heere on earth, pitching in Tents, as yet in their warfare, and abſent from their eternall habitation: but who notwithſtanding, are the true Citizens of heauen, beloued Chap. 12. of God.
            19 Thus is the Dragons liberty, and his endeauour

thereupon. The euent heereof is double. One, of them, who thus ſeduced by him, were ſet on ſo euill a worke; that fire came from heauen and deuoured them. The other, of him who is their leader; that hee is now taken and commited to euerlaſting fire and torment. This his iudgement, is cleared by his fellowſhip therein: the Beaſt and falſe Prophet.
            
            20 This euent is further cleared and declared ſure, by ſetting downe the laſt degree of their deſtruction, in the laſt iudgement, when all enemies being brought vnder, death ſhall bee ſwallowed vp to victory. To ſhew vs, that this ſecond victory ouer Satan, and reſtraint of him from this his laſt rage, ſhall not bee, but onely for a certaine ſpace, as was that firſt: or in a ſpeciall reſpect, as that was; but it ſhall be abſolute and eternall. So as, from the time Chriſt began this ſecond time, ſitting on a white cloude, Chap. 14. 14. to make his iudgements manifeſt, Cha. 15. 4. And, from the time he began to erect this his great white Throne by the reuiued light of the Goſpell: when the time of the dead commeth to bee iudged, Chap 11. The ſeuenth Trumpet ſounding to the finiſhing of the myſtery of God, in full accompliſhment of all which the Prophets foretold, for deliuerance of the Church, and her goodly ſtate in grace: So as, the ſigne of the ſonne of man ſhall bee ſeene in heauen: the victory ouer her enemies, ſhall ſtill hold on, and the enemies ſtill fall, as did Haman before Mordecay, till by all the degrees of deſtruction, Eſter 6. 13. they at laſt, in the generall iudgement receiue finall ſentence: when death and the Diuell, who hath dominion thereof, ſhall be aboliſhed. And, for this purpoſe onely, it is, that heere, ſo liuely an hypotypoſis, of the laſt iudgement, is ſet downe. In the perſon of the iudge: the maner and order of iudging; and the execution: ſo farre foorth, as for the preſent purpoſe was needfull. The perſon of the Iudge is deſcribed in his office, adminiſtration thereof, and his dreadfull maieſty and power. In office, hee is a Iudge, a royall and a great Iudge, as hauing a

Throne and a great Throne. He is alſo faithfull, true, vpright, and glorious, and whoſe iudgements are cleare and manifeſt; by his white Throne. As he rode before, Chap. 19. on a white horſe, and did ſit Chapt. 14. on a white cloude. His adminiſtration is, in that hee ſitteth. His dreadfull maieſty and power, is expreſſed, in a wonderfull forme of iſhing before his preſence. Heauen and Earth depart, and ſo as their place is not found. To ſhew Iſai. 41. 12. a perfit departing: as that which in Scripture, is ſaide of the wicked, that he periſheth ſo, as his place is not knowen.
            21 The order of iudgement, is in the perſons iudged, and manner of proceſſe. The perſons, are all the deade great and ſmall: cleared, by enumeration of theſe who are dead in the Sea, who by any other kind of mortality, or who were in their graues. And herein, clearely is implyed the power of the Iudge. For no queſtion can bee of the liuing, when all the dead are forced to giue preſence. The manner of proceſſe is ſet downe, after the forme of well ordered humane iudicatories. In that bookes were opened: euen the records of mens actions: Dan. 7. 10. and another booke, the booke of life. The iudgement of earth, is, of theſe things which were in the bookes according to their workes. The forme of ſpeech is to be noted, in that it ſaith not, of things written in the bookes and according to their workes. To ſhew, that heere, are not two rules of iudging. But, that ſo men are iudged according to their works, as yet the iudgement is led and ordered by the bookes. For the ground and cauſe of the iudgement, is the booke of life: according as in it mens names are written, or are paſſed by: beeing either giuen to Chriſt of the Father, or left. Now, whom the Father giueth him, none is able to take out of his hand, but he Iohn 10. 28 Ioh. 6. 39. 44. Rom. 8. 29. raiſeth them vp at the laſt day. And, whom he electeth, them hee predeſtinateth to bee made conformable to the image of his ſonne: whom he predeſtinateth, he calleth effectually: whom he calleth, he iuſtifieth, and ſanctifieth,

heere, by his ſpirit to bring foorth fruits of righteouſneſſe, and ſo, at length glorifieth. Theſe fruits of faith, confirme vs in the aſſurance of our election, and that wee are in Chriſt Ieſus: that, which, further ſtrengthneth our peace, as writing it in our owne conſciences: which are the one ſort of bookes: and whoſe teſtimonie muſt accord with the other booke of life. Now, then in the iudgement, ſo are workes lookt on, as collation alwaies muſt be of the bookes, to ſee if our names be written in the booke of life, as aſſurance of life and ioyfull peace are written in our conſciences. Otherwaies, in it ſelfe, all our righteouſneſſe is but as a menſtruous clout. But yet, what Iſrael will not obtaine ſeeking to eſtabliſh their owne righteouſneſſe, which is by the Law, the election will Rom. 10. 3. & 7. obtaine.
            22 Such are the perſon of the Iudge, and the order and manner of proceſſe. Now, the execution followeth. Which, agreeably to the purpoſe of the holy Ghoſt, for which, onely mention of the laſt iudgement is heere made, is all in wrath, againſt death, hell, and ſuch as are not written in the booke of life: who are adiudged to euerlaſting fire, which is the ſecond death. And, this is to ſhew, as I touched before, that this laſt victory, ouer the Dragon and his inſtruments, ſhall bee full and perfect: holding courſe, from the firſt degree of their foile, therein, till death and the graue, which are the laſt enemies, be ſubdued. And, this execution of enemies was ſufficient to record in this place, where, this matter is not 1. Cor. 15. Oſe 13. handled, as though, now at this point of time, and incident caſe, the laſt iudgement were to fall out. As many, heereupon, haue imagined, that the ouerthrow of Antichriſt, and theſe huge Armies of opponents, ſhould bee conioined with Chriſt his laſt comming. But, the ſpirit hath no ſuch meaning. But, handling the victory of the Church ouer her enemies, to ſhew that it ſhould bee perfect, he letteth vs ſee that it ſhall hold on, till all enemies being ſubdued to Chriſt his feet, at laſt, death be ſwallowed

vp of victorie: and that the Dragons foile ſhould not bee, now, as at the firſt binding, from which after a ſpace, hee got looſe againe: But, it ſhould bee to finall deſtruction. And, in this ſenſe, the Apoſtle in the ſecond to the Theſſ. 2. telleth that Antichriſt ſhall bee aboliſhed with the brightneſſe of the Lord his comming. Not, as though he ſhall raigne till then: but that he ſhall be ſo conſumed heere with the power of the word of truth, as, without recouering ſtrength, he ſhall be deſtroied for euer: the full and perfect point whereof, is in the Lord his laſt comming, and finall ſentence againſt him. Therefore Cha. 17 the Beaſt is ſaid to goe to deſtruction. In the vſuall manner of Scripture, when God will confirme his Saints againſt dangers, and in hope of deliuerance, for their full ſetling, he leadeth them to the conſideration of that finall deliuerance, whereto euer our hearts ſhould bend themſelues. and in like manner, in denouncing deſtruction to the enemies (in the meaſure whereof, as it falleth out here, we neuer are ſatisfied) he leadeth vs to their laſt and finall ſentence. Thus the Lord calleth the Prophet, and other Dan. 12. faithfull, in that promiſed deliuerance from the tyranny of Antiochus Epiphanes, to the conſolation of the reſurrection. Acts 24. 15. & 26. 8. Heb. 11. 35. So, Chriſt, in his ſermons, often. Paul for all Chriſtianity, pleadeth the reſurrection. The Martyres ſuffered conſtantly, vnder the Lawe, looking for a better reſurrection. The Scripture teacheth vs, that, that day ſhall come as a thiefe, vpon a peaceable and ſecure world, marrying and taking in marriage, &c. Which vndoubtedlie, 1. Theſ. 5. 2. Matth. 24. will be, when, vpon deſtruction of all troublers, the Church enioying quiet ſtate, ſhall fall in the ſleepe of ſecurity. For, if the laſt iudgement and comming of Chriſt to it, had ſo notable markes, as the foile of Antichriſt, taking of the Dragon, and ſo great tumults, warres, and commotions, with the hauocke of ſo huge Armies beſiedging the Church, how could either that day comes as a thieſe on a peaceable world; or the Church, in ſuch cruell inuaſion, be at eaſe, and ſleeping? This errour, hath made the ſubſequent

matter to be of moſt part miſtaken: as if therein, the ſtate of the triumphant Church in heuens, were ſet foorth, as it ſhall be after the laſt day.
            23 A learned man lately commenting, and with high and iuſt commendation, vpon this booke, perceiuing well, that the ſubſequent condition of the Church muſt be vnderſtood of her ſtate heere in grace: and, ſo being, not ſeeing how this place could bee taken of the laſt iudgement, turneth it to an allegory of the conuerſion of the Iewes, by alluſion to the laſt iudgement: their conuerſion to the faith (in reſpect of their preſent and long beegunne deſperate eſtate, both temporall and ſpirituall) being as it were a riſing from the dead. According as, by the Prophets, in regard of the full point thereof, it is called: and by the Apoſtle a life from death. But, beſides that where a plaine ſenſe in proprietie is conuenient, farre ſought allegories are not meete, albeit for the wonderfulneſſe and inexpected falling out thereof, the Iewes reſtitution be, of the Prophets, called a riſing from their graues: yet, that thus, the whole deſcription, ſo cleerely in all the circumſtances, of the laſt iudgement, can be drawne thereto, I ſee no reaſon: ſpecially, where, agreeably to the manner of the holy Ghoſt, the deſcripton of the generall iudgement may bee taken properly and conueniently for the purpoſe in hand: and no neceſſity, for this, to interpret the ſubſequent Chapters, of any ſtate of the Church, in time, thereafter. Which doubt, will nothing trouble the iudicious Reader, conſidering the manner of the Propheticall deſcriptions, much different from common hiſtoricall narrations: in that they, by Hypotypoſeis, repreſent to the view, as preſent, thoſe things they propheſie. Further, to ſay in a reſurrection, whereby men riſe from ignorance and in duration, to the knowledge of God and imbracing of the faith, that they riſe to eternall deſtruction, it is vtterly abſurd. And, heere we ſee that all the execution is of enemies in torment and euerlaſting fire. The ſpirit euen, heereby as it were, pointing to vs his purpoſe,

of this narration in this place. And this argument, 
                  •
               uinceth that place, Daniel 
               
                  〈◊〉
               . to bee of the laſt reſurrection. For, none riſe the firſt reſurrection, to euerlaſting ſhame: but all are bleſſed. As for the word, there put, of Many, as if therein, an argument were implied, of ſome other reſurrection, then the generall, wherein All riſe, it helpeth nothing that opinion: as being put but in common, and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , repeated according, to the ſubſequent parti
               
                  •
               ition, of Many to glorie, Many to ſhame. And if thereon ought might be builded, with als good reaſon, heere the generall iudgement muſt bee vnderſtood, where All the dead ſmall and great doe riſe, &c. That the many and goodly Propheſies of the reſtoring of Iſrael, haue not as yet their full accompliſhment, till by faith they be grafted in againe, whence they were cut out, through vnbeliefe, it were either great ignorance, or perhaps blaſphemy to denie: ſeeing the Apoſtle to that purpoſe, citeth Propheſies, which, therfore, but in that caſe, cannot be fulfilled. Rom. 11. Againe, that it ſeemeth neceſſarie, ſo great a point not to bee ommitted in this Reuelation, I hartilie yeeld: but that therefore, this place ſhould, from a proper and well conſiſting ſenſe, be drawne thereto, I ſee no neceſſitie. For, that matter was, not obſcurely, in the ſixth Viall ſignified: and, more plainlie, in the Church her ſong, Chapter 19. and, if more be requiſite, who may not be ſatisfied (as ſuch myſteries are heere deliuered) with that, which in the next Chapter is ſaid of the new Ieruſalem; hauing, vpon this full ouerthrow of her focs, her ports caſt open towards all the quarters of the earth; and on them written the names of the twelue Tribes of Iſrael, to whom then they are made patent, that all Iſrael may bee ſaued?
            
            24 A Throne, Daniel 7. is erected, and one ſitteth, for iudging and deſtroying the Beaſts there mentioned, enemies and troublers of the Church then. And Daniel 12. the faithfull for conception of a perfect deliuerance, and full ouerthrow of their aduerſaries, are called to the

meditation of the laſt and full degree thereof, in the generall reſurrection. To that, heere is the alluſion: euen as, in the deſcription of the enemies heere, the alluſion was to theſe. To ſhew, not onely the like and full ouerthrow, of the troubles now of the Chriſtian Church, holding on to finall accompliſhment in Chriſt his laſt comming, as the other were aboliſhed at his firſt: but alſo, that the firſt, euen in the promiſe of God his diſpenſation, were types, of the latter. The not aduerting whereof, hath made many to miſconceiue the minde of the holy Ghoſt in the Prophets. While ſome, in accommodation of the promiſes and denunciations, ſo reſt in the firſt ſtate and time, as they looke not how, therein, God looked further: and others, ſo interpret them of the laſt ſtate and time, as, againſt the minde of the ſpirit, they apply them not, firſt and properly, to the ſtate then: Whereof, firſt, and for ſpeciall conſolation againſt the euils then, they are meaned: albeit they had alſo typically a further ſignification: as the wiſe and frequent alluſion in this Propheſie, prooueth, and accommodation through all the new Teſtament, no leſſe clearely.
            25 This great white throne (ſhadowed by that of Solomon) albeit then, in full and finall degree, it ſhall be erected, when our Lord returneth in the cloudes of heauen: yet, in ſome degree, it is erected, here in the cleare, and euident preuailing light and power of the Goſpell. So as, euen heere after a ſort, heauen and earth depart, that is, the whole ſtate of the world is changed: as, vpon pouring out of the ſeuenth Viall, was denounced: and, as for the like euent, though not in ſo full meaſure, was ſpoken of▪ at the opening of the ſixth ſcale. For, euen heere, we ſhall haue new heauens and a new earth, that is, a new ſtate of things, by the enemies vtter fall, and goodly, gracefull, and peaceable eſtate of the Church thereupon: when there ſhall be no more Sea: as, by Iſay is Propheſied often, and magnifikly in the ſubſequent Chapters Iſai. 42. 9. & 43. 18. & 65. 15. & 66. 22. is declared. Thus the ſtate vnder the Goſpell, in collation

to the former, is called of the Apoſtle, a new worlde, and ſo the condition of the Chriſtian Church (vpon deſtruction of Whore, Beaſt and Dragon, and ſtrange alteration of all the ſtates in the earth) enioying peace, ſhal bee yet in reſpect of her ſtate before, a new world. The full and perfect degree whereof ſhall then bee, when vpon the Lord his laſt comming, the heauen ſhall depart with a noiſe, and the elements ſhal melt with heat: what time, wee ſhall get new heauens and a new earth, wherin 2 Pet. 3. 
               righteouſneſſe no more ſoiourneth as in Tents, but ſtably dwelleth for euer as in a mountaine.
            26 So farre then is this diſcription of the laſt iudgement to bee properly vnderſtood, as yet wee muſt not imagine it to bee here ſet downe, either for the point of time when it ſhall fall out, for that it ſhall haue this coincident caſe of the ouerthrow of Gog and Magog: but onely for the cauſe aboue explaned. Neither is there in all this Propheſie, or (as I thinke) any where in ſcripture, any ground, whereon to gather determinately, the yeere or age of that day: whereof to inquire after the Lord his own anſwere, it is in my iudgement excuſeleſſe temerity: and to determine ought, is high preſumption. That ſome, otherwaies godly and learned men, excuſe their ſcanning hereat, by that, Chriſt, forecloſing al Creatures from the knowledge of the day and houre, leaueth ſo, place to ſearch the yeere or age: beſides that (in ſuch cleare euidence of the ordinary frame of Scripture ſpeech) this ſhift is both childiſh and ridiculous in my opinion, it is alſo too bold and groſſe dallying with the Lord his words.
            27 Now yet for bringing minds to acquieſce in this our interpretation, the Nations ſeduced, their notes, iudgement and names are more to be cleared. The alluſion is partly to Sodome, wherein all young and old from al quarters compaſſed Lot his houſe. And Sodome was a City Gen. 19. of the plaine, and they were deuoured by fire from heauen. It is alſo to the 7. of Iudges, where the Midianites
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               like Graſhoppers in multitude, and whoſe Camels were as the ſand of the ſea in number, pitched againſt Iſrael in the plaine: and were deſtroyed by three hundreth, but holding forth burning Lampes, and blowing Trumpets: (for the yoake of their burthen, and the ſtaffe of their 
               Iſai 9 4. 
               ſhoulder, and the rod of their oppreſſor are now to be broken, as in the day of Midian) an exceeding fitte type of this foile, which muſt be by fire from heauen: but ſuch as then ſhineth, when wee learne to breake the earthy pi
                  •
               cher that hideth it, and to blow the Trumpet of God his word loudlie. This fire came out of the mouthes of the two witneſſes: This is the breath of the Lord his Iſai 30. 2 Theſ. 2. Ier. 23. 29. Chap. 14. 18 & 15. 7. Mal. 14. 1. mouth. The word of God in the mouthes of his ſeruants, is fire, and the wicked are ſtubble before it. But the alluſion here chiefly, both in the names and manner of iudgement, is to Ezechiel 38. and 39. where diuers learned men thinke one and the ſame matter to be handled, accommodating both that and this place to the Turkes, as whoſe deſtruction both there and here in their iudgement is meaned: and accordingly with Abenezra interprete the little horne, Dan. 11. miſtaking (as I thinke) theſe places, and here, yet going further aſide, in thinking there and here, one and the ſame matter properly to bee deliuered. Whereto the names of Gog and Magog, giue no more reaſon of proper interpretation then could before the name of Babylon, and the whole frame and leading of this Propheſie, by continuall alluſion to the old Teſtament might haue taught another ſenſe to be ſought for: and that here Gog and Magog are to be taken Spiritually, as before Sodome and Egypt.
            
            28 By Gog and Magog in Ezeehiel, the Kings of Syria cruell oppreſſors of the Church of Iſrael are meaned: as by the little horne in Daniel, Antiochus Epiphanes the worſt of all. Wherof ſee Tremellius and Iunius vpon theſe places, Iunius vpon this, and the learned Commentarie of Hugh Broughton vpon Daniel. That the attempt of

               Gog and Magog, and their iudgement, thereupon is ſaid to be in the latter yeeres: it will not trouble the reſolution Dan. 8. of any, who ſeeth the rage of the Goates foure hornes (of the Prophet plainely interpreted, and of all men confeſſed to be that of Alexander his ſucceſſors, & namely, of the ſuccreſſing little horn Antiochus Epiphanes) called the laſt wrath. Both Ezechiel and Daniel, ſo ſpeaking not abſolutely, but reſpectiue of the laſt cruell troublers of the Church of Iſrael, before the firſt comming of Meſſias, and accordingly of their deſtruction. Wherein, if much more appeare to bee ſpoken, then in the meaſure of God his iudgement againſt them can bee ſeen fulfilled: we haue to conſider, not only the Hyperbolike ſtile of the Prophets in ſuch caſes, but as I haue already touched, that theſe Propheſies beſides the firſt & proper accommodation, had a further but a typicall relation. And truly, it were ſtrange to imagine how the Turke his Kingdome ſtanding, the Iſraelites ſhall ſo recouer their owne land, as they dwelling therein ſecurely, and without feare, hee ſhould plot to inuade Ezech. 38. 11. them. That here the names of Gog and Magog ſhould bee meaned, or at leaſt reſtrained to the Turkes, is very improbable: ſeeing the two witneſſes ſlaine at this louſing of the dragon, lie dead in the ſtreet of the great City, Chap. 11. and all Nations reioyce ou
                  •
               r them: ſeeing the Whore is drunke with the bloud of Saints, and in her is found Chap. 17. & 18 Chap. 13. all the bloud ſhed on the earth: ſeeing it is the Beaſt that maketh warre with the Saintes, and ouercommeth them: and therupon, whereas he was firſt like a Pard, in courſe of time, when the dragon is looſed, becommeth of his colour. Seeing alſo that out of the mouth of Chap. 17. Chap. 16. the dragon, Beaſt, and falſe Prophet, came theſe frogs, inſtruments of this ſeduction: and ſeeing they are deſcribed to be falſe Prophets, working miracles, and authoriſed thereto by the Beaſt and falſe Prophet: thus euidently deſigned to bee the Popiſh Clergy, and by experience, chiefly the Ieſuites. Laſtly, ſeeing here by

               Gog and Magog clearely are deſigned all the inſtruments of the dragon his laſt fury, from the foure quarters of the earth, the Turkes particularly cannot bee meaned. Like as herein is an euident Argument, why here Gog and Magog are not properly to bee vnderſtood, as in Ezechiel, who bringeth them ſpecially from the North. It is true, that at this point of time, when the dragon is louſed, the Turke his greatneſſe beganne without reſiſtance to vndoe all: God his iuſtice, in them louſing the foure Angels from Euphrates. But theſe Angels ſo louſed for puniſhment of falſe Chriſtians, their idolatry, witchcraft, murther, &c. more then direct enemies of the true Church, are not to bee eſteemed one with the dragon here louſed. Who, as at his firſt miſgiuing againſt the woman and her firſt ſeed, hee ſtirred vp the Beaſt of his authority to deceiue, firſt, like Balaam, and a fraudulent Pard: ſo here againe, being louſed for maintaining the credite of his Vicar (whom the ſemblance of the Lambe his hornes, falſe miracles, occupying of the holy City & Court of the Temple, and his fitting as God in the Temple of God, could no longer beare out: the rod now being applyed to meaſure, and his mouth found out whoſe it is) by the Beaſt, he maketh warre with the Saint
                     •
                   and ouercommeth them. Falling to open and cruel murther: the Dragon, Beaſt and falſe Prophet, all iointly bending their whole endeauours to ſeduce the Kings of the earth, enemies of all ſorts, to compaſſe the tentes of Saints, and beloued City. The City and Court of the Temple, trod vnder foot, and occupied of the Beaſt, albeit called holy, for that the Temple was within them, Chap. 11. yet were caſt out. Here the Tents of Saints, and beloued City are beſieged. The foure Angels from Euphrates were inſtruments of God his wrath againſt the world, and for the ſinnes ſpecified, Chapter 9. 20. 21. from which the ſealed ones were free. Here the endeauour of Gog and Magog is directly againſt the Saints. Gog and Magog then are the inſtruments whatſomeuer of Sathan

his laſt fury againſt the Church, whom for vpholding of Antichriſt, or at leaſt, for keeping downe the full preuailing light o
                  •
                the Goſpell, and gracefull ſtate of the true Church, he ſtirreth vppe, of what Nation ſoeuer, Turks or others.
            29 The whole courſe of this Propheſie framed to the diſpenſation in the old Teſtament, and condition of the Church then, openeth clearely the reaſon of the alluſion. This is certaine, that in the condition of the Church of Iſrael, as I haue ſaid, wee are not onely to looke vpon things in propriety, but alſo to conſider them as ſtampes of things to come. Hereof it is, that as all the deliuerances promiſed from their enemies, and afflictions then had a further reſpect (as the meaſure of their preſent deliuerances, nothing anſwerable to the high promiſes; eaſily brought the godly to conſider, and waite for better) ſo alſo were their troubles and troublers, types of other and more dangerous enemies, and the deſtructions denounced againſt them (which in the firſt properly taken, were not ſeene fulfilled in the degree threatned) raiſed the hearts of the faithfull to waite in the end for a more abſolute victory and conſtant peace. The firſt great affliction of Iſrael was in Egypt by Pharao, that great dragon, as Chapter 12. Itouched. The next great affliction and captiuy was by Babel, and theſe Beaſtes in Daniel. Now after the peoples deliuery from Babel, City and Temple being reedified: the laſt cruell oppreſſing enemy, and ſtayer of true worſhippe before Chriſt his comming in the fleſh, was Gog, and of Gog ſpecially Antiochus Epiphanes: as Daniel, Ezechiel, and bookes of Machabees ſhew clearely. For the Romans were not long before Chriſt, but drawne in as ſequeſtres by the Iewes owne partialities (whereto pride brought them after they had beene helped by a little helpe) and albeit the ſtronger, yet ſo farre ſuffered and maintained the liberty Da
                     •
                  . 11. 34. both of ſtate and religion, as at Chriſt his birth Herod was

a mighty King, and the ſtate and religion for freedome from any forraine oppreſſion, flouriſhing. Hence it is, that as for expreſſing the firſt troubles and troubler of the Chriſtian Church, and her deliuery there from, alluſion is to Egypt, &c. And for expreſſing the next huge euill of Antichriſt, the alluſion is to Babel, and that in a Beaſt carrying a note of all the foure in Daniel: ſo here to expreſſe the laſt enemies, who after her comming out of Babel and Sion reedified, ſhall be inſtruments of Sathan his laſt puft, the holy Ghoſt alludeth to Gog and Magog. For whoſe deſtruction, as a great white throne was ſet vp, that at the firſt comming of Chriſt; the ſaints Dan. 7. might get the Kingdome: ſo here, to ſhew that theſe laſt Miniſters of Sathan his rage ſhall fall ſtill to finall deſtruction in the Lord his laſt comming, a great white throne is erected. And as vpon the full ouerthrow of Gog and Magog, Ezech. 38. and 39. Thereafter the ſtate of City and Temple are ſet down, moſt goodly: ſo by alluſion thereto, here vpon the vtter foile ofher enemies, the new Ieruſalem is magnifickly deſcribed. That of Ezechiel is of the ſtate of the Church of Chriſt vnder the Goſpell, generally in relation to the Church before Chriſt, and vnder the law. This here in the ſubſequent Chapters, is of the Church ſpecially, now victorious ouer theſe enemies, and gracefull through the conuerſion of the Iewes and Eaſterne Kingdomes to the faith: enioying plenty of light and peace, in relation to the Chriſtian, Church, before in her wreſtlings and ſufferings by theſe enemies, now ouerthrowne.
            30 By the courſe of this Propheſie it would appeare, that firſt the Whore ſhall bee deſtroyed, next, that the Kingdome in the head thereof the falſe Prophet ſhall be done away, and that thereafter, Sathan for his laſt endeauour ſtirring vp Nations againſt the Church, ſhall bee in theſe his inſtruments, ſo abſolutely foiled, as the Church from thence ſhall enioy quiet ſtate. For whither

things ſhall thus fall out in courſe: or if thus, by parte, the ouerthrow of all the enemies be ſet downe, to ſhew a perfect victory, I dare not determine. And if (as poſſibly, and very probably it may fall) after the burning and ſacke of the City of Rome by Chriſtian Princes; and next afte
                  •
                
               
                  •
               he ruine of the Kingdome, and head thereof, the falſe Prophet: that the Dragon by ſome reſidue of the Frogges, ſhall ſtirre vp nations, and perhaps, of them the Turkes; (that ſo God may deſtroy all them who haue deſtroyed the Church) yet wee ſee cleerely what ſhall be the euent. For both the inward enemy and traitor, the beaſt ſhall be deſtroied: and all outward enemies, who by Satan his inſtigation (now madly furious, that his time is ſo ſhort) ſhall riſe againſt Sinn, ſhall finde it a cup of poiſon. The Turk hitherto hath been God his ſcourge againſt the world, and falſe Chriſtianity: and therefore hath preuailed, But if hee riſe againſt the true Church, fire from heauen ſhall deuoure him. Yet that heere ſpecially the Turkes are meaned, I ſee no reaſon. And as I can take vp the drift of the Holy Ghoſt in this Propheſie, it would rather appeare, and my heart inclineth ſo to thinke by the fall of the Beaſt, and conuerſion of Iewes thereupon to the faith, that the Turkes and other ſtates of the Eaſt ſhall bee brought to embrace the Goſpel; albeit, perhaps, firſt taught thereto by ſome noble foile. For no queſtion but as the euent of the ſeuenth Viall maketh cleere, the whole eſta
                  •
               e of the earth ſhall ſuffer ſuch alteration, as was not ſince men firſt inhabited the ſame.
            31 Now for the different meaſure of iudgement vpon the Army, and vpon their Captain
                  •
                the Dragon: whoſe iudgement is according to that of the Beaſt, and falſe Prophet, beſides the reaſons aboue touched vpon the end of the 19. Chapter; wee muſt further conſider, that the Dragon is ſuch an enemy as no foile of him can ſecure vs, till he be ſealed vp in euerlaſting torment. And

for the Beaſt and falſe Prophet, ſignifying a Kingdome, and order of ſucceeding heads ouer it, and not deſigning any one particular perſon, as the head of impiety: a perfect and vnrecouerable deſtruction of them both, both in God his iuſtice, and for the Churches full ſecurity, was requiſite.
         
         
            To the Reader.
            
               HEere ſhould haue followed the like Commentary vpon the two laſt Chapters 
                     〈◊〉
                   vpon the former, but for ſome ſpeciall reaſons, they are omitted. Vſe that which heere thou haſt with an vpright heart, and giue glory to God.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A TABLE CONTAIning the moſt notable things in this booke.
            
            
               
                  
                     A
                   Rule for right Accommodation of Story to the ſeuen ſeales of this booke. 41
               The wrong ground whereby men marre the Accommodation. 46
               How farre time muſt bee lookt to in the Accommodation. 89
               The Aire. 170
               Our Altar Chriſt. 37. 60. 81
               The Ambition of the Romane Biſhops. 65
               
                  Angels are about the Church for two reſpects, to protect her and to learne wiſdome by her. 29. 30
               
                  Angels are not to be worſhipped. 210. Angels put for the name of office not of nature. 59. The Angel of the couenant. 50, 59
               
                  Antichriſt his beginning. 70, Whence, and in what manner hee arriſeth. 118, 119. 120, 175. The miſchiefe comming by him compared with the floud of Noah. 77. His name. 79. The number of his name. 124. What ſort of enemie he is. 137, 140. That he is the Pope. 113, 183 185. Acommon deceiuer of alboth Iewes and Gentiles. 80. How he hath not power to ſlaie men, and yet with him is found all the blood ſhed on the earth. 72. 84. How farre he did preuaile. 139. How to iudge of his followers. 136, 137, 141. The firſt and ſecond degrees of his fall. 157. The third degree of his fall. 158. The fourth, 160 The fift, wherein is a wiſe and iuſt retribution. 161. The

ſixth, 163. His deſtruction irrecouerable and vtter ruine. 78, 89, 165, 177, 218. His vnexpected foile. 218. His irrecouerable fall compared with the fals of the Beaſts in Daniel. 219.
               
                  Armageddon. 165
               Chriſt his Arrowes kill all but differently. 34
               A diuine Artifice of the ſpirit 160
               The Attire of the Bride 208
            
            
               B
               
                  BArbarous nations ouerturners of the Romane Empire, although Satan his intention in ſpewing them out of his mouth was farre other. 110
               A great Battell in heauen 103, 108
               Why men are named Beaſts. 123

                     That the firſt Beaſt is the ſtate of Rome, not vnder the perſecuting Emperours (as the common opinion is) but of the ſame time and condition with the ſecond Beaſt, that is, vnder the Popedome, it is prooued by foure cleere notes of the firſt Beaſt, proper to the Popedome: The firſt note 113. The ſecond, the third, and the fourth note cleereſt of all, 114. How the ſame Antichriſt (to wit, the Popedome) is ſet fourth in both the Beaſts, 118. 121. What reaſon the Beaſt and falſe Prophet be diſtinguiſhed, ſeeing they are but one. 121. 177. 178, 
                           •
                        18. What the wound in the ſixth head of the Beaſt was, and the curing of it. 116. 117. In what reſpect but ſeuen heads are attibuted to the Beaſt, albeit in number they bee eight, 118. 176. Who is the ſeuenth head of the Beaſt, 122. 177. The Beaſt is the eight head and one of the ſeuen, to wit, the ſixt. 116. 122. 176. Who the Beaſt is, 123. 178. His ſeuen heads. 175. How he had beene, and then in Iohn his daies was, and how hee was to come: and what bee the Kings, called his Heads. 176. The hornes of the Beaſt. 179. Why to this Beaſt is attributed not only hornes as to that in Daniel 7. but further alſo, heads. 179
                  
               
               
                  
The Beaſt in compariſon ſet againſt Chriſt. 217
               
                  Beaſts throne and elders. 20. 202
               Chriſt his garment dipt in Blood. 214
               Pope Boniface the eight. 231
               The Bookes opened in the laſt iudgement. 235. 236
               The Bride her preparation. 206. Her attire. 207. 208
            
            
               C
               THe degrees of a true inward Calling to the miniſtry. 91
               The length of the Land of Canaan 144
               The Captaine of the Lord his Hoſt. 214
               His power to doe all things, 213
               The Character of the Beaſt. 124. 136. 219
               
                  Chriſt in diuers reſpects is both God ſitting on the throne, and alſo the Lamb ſtanding betweene the throne and the Beaſt and Elders. 13. He is diſpenſer of all both mercy and wrath. 60. His comming downe from heauen. 85 He is Lord of Sea and Land. 87. Hee commeth in his Kingdome with power. 107. 110. His garments dipt in blood. 214. He is our Garment. 162
               The Church her conſtant gracefull ſtate, in the preſence of God in her. 12. In her goodly ſtate heerethrough 13. In God his diſpenſation; terrible for her. 14. And gracious towards her, in three graces. 15. Her happineſſe by this ſtate. 20
               Without the true Church is neither ſaluation nor any true knowledge. 24
               The true Church preſerued euen vnder Antichriſt. 53. 71
               Her caſe vnder him. 93. 137. And it is ſhewed in three diſtinct ſpeeches. 138
               The Church her enemies and ſufferings after what manner they be deſcribed in this Prophecie. 104
               The primitiue Church her habit and her trauelling in birth 105. Her flight to the wilderneſſe. 190. Why ſhe is called a mountaine. 166
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
The Church her eſtate in the laſt daies. 261

                     That the laſt two Chapters of the Reuelation muſt bee vnderſtood of the Church militant 264
                  
               
               The Roman Clergy. 70. 196

                     Their properties. 78
                  
               
               A Cloud a note of diuine maieſty. 86
               A delightful Cōgruity in the order of God his working. 164
               
                  Conſcience: the twofold ſtate thereof; the intollerable torment thereof comming by Popiſh Doctrine 72. 73
               
                  Conſtantine the great 44. 109
               
                  Contention ſet foorth by fire; the effects thereof 62

                     How it was among the Churchmen 63
                  
               
               The Courſe of the Reuelation. 32. 101. 142. 153. 232

                     And of the Trumpets. 61
                     The Artifice thereof noted. 84. 90. 100. 101
                  
               
               The Cry of ſoules of Martyrs 37
               The Dragon his Crownes are vpon his heads, but the Beaſt his vpon his hornes 113
               Chriſt hath many Crownes 213
               The Cup. 135. 136
            
            
               D
               THe Day of Iudgement ſhall come on a ſecure world. 169
               
                  Death of two kinds. 64
               Of a third ki
                     •
                  de. 67
               
                  Death firſt and ſecond, 223, 224
               To Dye in the Lord. 142
               
                  Deſire of further k
                     •
                  owledge. 49
               The threefold Dignity of God his Saints. 14
               
                  Diocleſianus a cruel perſecuter. 43
               What Diſpoſition is requiſite for the perception of Diuine Myſteries 173
               A Doore open in heauen 9. How wee muſt enter thereat; and the neceſſity and fruit of entring. 10
               Our Doore to God is Ieſus Chriſt. 259
               
                  
The Dragon who, and of what time he is. 105
               His binding and to whom he is bound. 222. 228
            
            
               E
               THat great Eagle 109
               The Earth in oppoſion to heauen for the earthly ſort. 10
               For the place of the viſible Church 49
               The Earth in an other third ſenſe. 156
               The loue of the Earth; the effect thereof. 70
               A great and ſtrange Earthquake 170
               The Eaſt, a pleaſant diſcourſe vpon the comming of the Angel from the Eaſt. 50
               The occaſion of the falling away of the Eaſt from the truth: and their con
                     •
                  erſion againe 163
               To Eate the word of God. 91
               To Eate the fleſh of the Whoore. 181
               The E
                        ••
                     s of Chriſt as a flame of fire 212
               
                  Elders, Throne and Beaſts. 202
               Romane Emperors bloody perſecuters; and how ſome were forced to honour the Saints. 48
               The Germaine Emperors. 175. 179
               The Graecian Emperors 178
               The Enemies of the Church in the old and new Teſtament. 104. 145
               Example. 193
            
            
               F
               HOw to iudge of our Fathers in time of Antichriſt. 136, 141
               
                  Fire from the Altar of a double effect. 60
               
                  Fire of Gods ſpirit, of loue, and the fire of contention; the different companions and effects of the two fires 62
               The Fire of Ambition. 63
               
                  Fire, Brimſtone and Iacinthe 83
               
                  
The Fire of Chriſts feet 86
               To haue power ouer Fire. 146
               How the Fire is mingled with the Sea. 150
               Chriſt his eies a flame of Fire. 212
               The Flood caſt out of the Dragon his mouth. 109
               
                  Flying through the middeſt of heauen. 68. 134. 187
               
                  Frogges comming out of the mouthes of the Dragon, Beaſt and falſe Prophet. 161. 162

                     Their properties. 164
                     Who they are. 165
                     
                        Fulminatrix legio. 43
                  
               
            
            
               G
               CHriſt his Garment dipt in Blood. 214
               His neme written on his Garment. 216
               Our Gate and onely doore to God is leſus Chriſt 259
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 254
               
                  God his ſeate in his Church, his nature, and Trinity of that one ſhadowed by three Iewels. 12

                     His patience 82
                  
               
               
                  Gog and Magog. 233

                     That they are not particularly the Turkes: who they are. 242. 243. 244. 245
                  
               
               
                  Golden Vials. 27. 153
               The three Graces of God towards his Church 15
               Pope Gregory the ſeuenth. 229
            
            
               H
               THe mourning of Hadadrimon 167
               
                  Haile for cold preaching. 62
               For iudgement. 99
               
                  Heretikes their diſpoſition. 66
               Haleluiah. 200
               Harpes. 27. 148
               
                  
Harueſt. 145
               
                  Heauen in oppoſition to earth throughout this Prophecie is taken for the true Church in oppoſition to the worldly ſort. 10
               
                  Heauen put for the glory and honour of the great men of the earth 40

                     Amultitude in Heauen 200
                     The Heauens caſt wide open. 211
                  
               
               Hornes. 26

                     Why the Beaſt is ſaid to haue two hornes like the Lambs, ſeeing to the Lambe are attributed ſeuen. 115
                     Tenne hornes of the Dragon and of the Beaſt. 123. 179
                     The difference betweene the tenne hornes Daniel 7. and the tenne hornes Reuel. 13. and 17. 179
                     Why the hornes of the Beaſt haue crownes and not the hornes of the Dragon 113
                  
               
               Horſes. 33
               The Hoſt of heauen. 215
            
            
               I
               ALluſion to the fall of Iericho to the fal of Babel. 100
               
                  Ieſuits the origine, their buſie endeauours, their date, they are the laſt puffe of Satan his mouth and of the Vicar of his throne. 165
               The conuerſion of the Iewes 80. 164. 167

                     But moſt euidently. 168, 139
                     Whether they ſhall inhabit their owne Landagaine. 168
                     How great a way the Popes fall ſhall make to their conuerſion. 169
                     Their conuerſion and ioy vpon his fall. 201. 206
                  
               
               
                  Iohn diſpoſed the Canon before his death 269
               The Impenitency and Induration of Papiſts. 160. 161
               The ordinary degrees of true Illumination. 25
               How we ſhould looke on the condition of the Church of Iſrael in the old Teſtament. 245
               
                  
What is requiſite to Iudge righteouſly. 212
               A deſcription of the laſt Iudgement. 234. 235
               The manner of proceſſe in the laſt Iudgement, how it ſhall be ledde by that which is written in the bookes, and yet according to our workes: ſet foorth not for it ſelfe or time thereof, but to ſhew the continuall, recureleſſe, and finall deſtruction of the enemies, and goodly ſtate of the Church thereupon, holding ſtill one to the laſt Iudgement, and ſo, eternall. 236. 237

                     The yeere or age of that day cannot determinatly bee gathered vpon any ground in Scripture. 241
                  
               
               Iulian. 229
            
            
               K
               KIngs. 194
               
                  King of Kings and Lord of Lords. 215
               The Keies which the Popes haue, to wit, of the bottomleſſe pit. 70
               Chriſt and his Miniſters haue theſe ſame Keies in a farre different ſenſe. 221
            
            
               L
               THe Lambe of God. 27
               In what respect the Lambe his ſlaughter is the reaſon of his worthineſſe. 28
               The Lambe his mariage. 206
               Seuen burning Lamps. 15
               Legio fulminatrix. 43
               
                  Lightnings, thundrings and voices. 14
               True Light bringeth euer true ioy. 24
               White Linen apparel. 153
               Where our Church was before Luther. 140
               
                  Lions, Buls and Cherubins in Salomon his Temple, types of the Miniſters of the word. 18
               Two Lions of diuers qualities. 24
            
            
               
               M
               
                  MAgeddon or Megiddon. 165. 166
               
                  Mahomet his time of riſing: by what meanes he ſpred his doctrine: the ſwift courſe of the victories of his ſucceſſors. 82
               A Man. 42
               The face of a Man. 17. 78
               A Man-childe. 106
               The number of a Man. 126
               The meaſure of a Man. 257

                     Of an Angel. 258
                  
               
               The Marriage of the Lambe. 206
               The ſoules of the Martyrs cry. 77
               The Merchants and Merchandize of Rome. 195
               God euen in wrath remembreth Mercy. 60
               
                  Miniſters of God his word are neceſſary for begetting in vs the life of God. 16

                     The properties requiſite in them. 17
                     The light and feeling that ought to be in them 88
                     They are the light of the world 188
                     The degrees of a true inward calling of a Miniſter. 91
                     The type of the Miniſters who were firſt open conteſters with Antichriſt in three rankes. 133. 134. 135
                     How they were perſecuted. 141
                     True Miniſters haue power ouer fire. 146
                  
               
               Myracles. 151
               Chriſt is our Morning ſtarre. 267
               Why the Church is called a Mountaine. 166
               
                  Mourning muſt goe before ioy. 23
               The Mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Mageddon 167
               The Myſtery of God; the finiſhing thereof. 88 89 99. 155
               What is requiſite for the perception of Myſteries. 173
               A Myſtery where of the Author in ſoberneſſe confeſſes bee dare not determine. 12. Another. 232. Another. 258.
            
            
               
               N
               ANtichriſt his Name. 79
               Chriſt hath a Name which none knoweth but himſelfe. 213
               His Name King of Kings. 215
               His Name the Word of God. 214
               To haue the Name written on the garment and one the thigh 216
               A New World. 241

                     How Chriſt reneweth the world. 252
                  
               
               The Night for humane ſciences 68
               
                  Noah his flood ſemblable to the euil of Antichriſt. 77
               
                  Number of the Elders twenty foure, the reaſon thereof. 13
               The Number of foure 17. 49

                     In an other reſpect. 81
                     The Number of twelue. 120. 128
                     The Number of the name of the Beaſt. 124
                     The Number of the name of God. 125
                  
               
            
            
               O
               VVHat makes the Obduration of Papiſts 173
               
                  Odoacer King of the Heruls 17
               Our praiers are Odours. 27

                     How and in whom they are Odours. 59
                  
               
               The Order of the Reuelation. 32. 142. 153. 232

                     The great artifice thereof. 48. 90. 94. 98. 100. 101
                  
               
            
            
               P
               HOw to iudge of Papiſts. 136. 137. 141
               The cauſe why Papiſts be ſo obdured 147
               Their vnity. 180
               
                  Papiſticall ſeducers may be iuſtly puniſhed by death, yea and

ſhould be. 159

                     Their impenitency. 160. 161
                     Their deſperate ſorrow becauſe of the light of the Goſpel. 161
                  
               
               Chriſt his feete are Pillars. 86
               
                  Pharao a type of the Dragon. 104
               That the Pope is Vicar of Satan his throne. 112

                     That he is the Beaſt that Antichriſt. 113
                     It is alſo proued by three infallible tokens. 183
                     And by a plaine and forcible argument euinced. 185
                     The ſhifts of the Papiſts for exempting the Pontificality from this blot. 183
                     Whence he arriſeth. 175
                     His fall irrecouerable. 78. 89. 165. 177
                     His preſumption, obſtinacie, and vnexpected foile. 218
                  
               
               Aplaine croſſing of all Popery. 54
               An incouragement to Praier. 60
               The falſe Prophet all one with the Beaſt; and for what cauſe they be diſtinguiſhed. 121. 177. 178
               The Lord God of the holy Prophets. 254. 265
            
            
               R
               
                  RAine twofold. 62
               The Rainebowe about Chriſt his head. 86
               All Religion. 19
               The firſt Reſurrection. 224

                     Who they are that are ſaid Chap. nineteenth, to riſe the firſt Reſurrection. 224. 225
                  
               
               The Reuelation worthy of our ſtudy. 11. 265

                     The dignity thereof ſhewed in two great points. 21
                     The courſe thereof. 32
                  
               
               
                  Riches and authority without wiſdome are but the weapons of a foole 30
               The Riches of Chriſt. 30
               
                  Riders on Horſes. 33
               
                  
Chriſt his Riding on a white horſe. 212
               White Robes in Scripture haue a triple ſignification. 38
               
                  Rome her preſumption. 192. 218
               The Renting of her in three. 171

                     By whom ſhall her fall bee. 152. 163. 182
                     The firſt and ſecond degrees of her fall. 157
                     The third degree of her fall 158
                     The fourth. 160
                     The fifth. 161
                     The ſixth. 163
                     What her fall ſhall be. 181
                     It is irrecouerable. 165. 177
                     And vnexpected. 192
                     The certainety and greatneſſe thereof. 188. 191. 198
                     The equity thereof. 189. 198. 205
                  
               
               Yet in conſidering the equity, a diffeerence is to bee put betwene the ſtate & euery particular mēber of that ſtate. 193
            
            
               S
               TO the Saints is giuen a kingdome euen heere. 107
               
                  Satan his twofold dealing againſt the Church. 105. 106

                     What is his firſt attempt alwaies. 106
                     How he is ſaid to be in heauen, to fight there, to bee caſt downe out of heauen into the earth. 107
                  
               
               The Scripture is onely to bee heard and no voice elſe in the Church of God. 25
               In what reſpect it is a little Booke. 86
               It is kept ſecure by the Pope. Ibid.
               
               It muſt be eaten. 91
               In the Scripture all is reuealed requiſite for light or manners. 266. 267. 268
               To couplerightly the parts thereof. 268
               The glaſſie Sea a type of the Word. 15. 149
               The Sea for the common worſhip. 49. 64

                     For that which is below. 120
                  
               
               
                  
The Red Sea and pillar of fire, types of the Word and Spirit 150
               For what reaſon the Sea is ſaid Chap. 15 to be mingled with fire. 150
               There was no more Sea. 120. 250
               
                  Seamen. 196
               The Seale of God. 51
               
                  Seducing of two ſorts. 228. 233
               The twofold Seed of the Church. 130
               
                  Seuen Lamps 15
               
                  Seuen hornes and ſeuen eies of the Lambe. 26
               
                  Seuen points of his praiſe. 30
               
                  Seuen heads. 118. 175
               
                  Seuen Seales, Seuen Trumpets, Seuen Vials. 153
               
                  Seuen, diuers times recorded in all this booke, and concerning this number Seuen. 232
               The Shining of the Bride her attire. 208
               
                  Showers twofold. 62
               Two great Signes in heauen 100
               The Signe of the Dragon. 102. 147
               The Signe of the Sonne of Man. 147. 212
               To Sit. 191
               The Slaughter of the Lambe the reaſon of his worthineſſe, and in what ſenſe muſt thinke ſo. 24
               
                  Sobriety. 88. 211
               Example of Sobriety in the Author 12. 232. 258
               
                  Solitary places 188
               The Holy Spirit his proceſſion and name of Comforter ſignified by the Rainebow diffunded about the Throne 12

                     In a diuers conſideration he both ſitteth in the throne, and alſo is before the throne ſet foorth in Seuen burning Lamps. 13
                  
               
               
                  Starres, for great men of the earth. 40. For Paſtors. 67

                     And in that caſe how they are to be conſidered. 68
                  
               
               To ſtand in the Sunne. 216
            
            
               
               T
               The Tents of Saints 233
               
                  Theodoricus the Oſtrogoth, the ſeuenth head of the Beaſt. 122
               
                  Thrones. 161
               
                  Thrones, Beaſts, and Elders. 202
               
                  Thrones ſet for ſaints. 228
               Chriſt his white Throne. 235. 240
               Seuen Thunders. 87

                     Why their ſpeeches were vttered and yet not written. 88
                  
               
               The Times recorded in the Reuelation. 73

                     A refutation of Propheticall yeeres (as they call them. 74. 96
                  
               
               How to vnderſtand the Times of the Reuelation. 76
               The Time of tenne daies. 76
               The Time of fiue monthes. 77
               How the Trumpets beginne and ende in reſpect of time. 80. 89. 90.
               The Time of fourty two monthes, and of 1260 daies, and of Time, Times, and halfe a Time. 96. 231
               The Time of three daies and a halfe. 97

                     Which alſo is the ſpace that the Dragon is let goe looſe after his firſt binding. 222
                     The effects of that his looſing 203
                  
               
               The Time of a thouſand yeeres. 226
               It is the onely Time in all this propheſie to be taken definitly. 230.
               The Thighi; to put the hand vnder the thigh: Chriſt his name written on his thigh. 216
               
                  Tragicall times of ſome Emperours. 43
               
                  Treaſons of Papiſts: by whom they are atchiued: how good and worthy works they doe eſteeme them. 72

                     And what ſetteth them ſo madlings a worke. 165
                  
               
               The Tribes of Iſrael. 53

                     
                     Why they are recorded but to be twelue ſeeing they were thirteene. 127
                  
               
               
                  Trumpets. 58
               
                  Twelue. 120. 128
               
                  Turkes, their heades, terrible Army, the great deſolation they make.
            
            
               V
               GOlden Vials types of faithfull and pure hearts 27
               Golden Vials cups of wrath. 153
               The reaſon why they come in place after the trumpets. 154
               On whom they are powred out. 156
               
                  Vintage. 146
               Of the Viſibility of the Church. 138. 139
               The Vnity of the Church of Rome. 180
               The Voice of Chriſt is bold as a Lion, and powerful as thunder: How to know if the Miniſters ſpeake his voice.
               Pope Vrbane the ſecond, and his ſucceſſors, kindlers of the holy warre for recouery of Ieruſalem▪ 229
            
            
               W
               LOue of the Wages ofvnrighteouſnes 196
               The Warre proclaimed in Paradiſe. 102. 105
               Chriſtianity is a Warfare: againſt whom it is: and how to fight it out. 108

                     And ouercome. 180
                  
               
               Counſel and ſtrength are for the Warre 213
               The holy Warre. 229
               
                  Waters of two ſorts. 67
               Many Waters. 162
               The drying vp of many Waters 162. 173
               
                  White colour, White horſes. 33. 145. 212
               
                  White robes. 38
               
                  
                  White linen apparell. 153
               A White throne. 240
               
                  Windes for influence of ſpirituall graces. 49
               Deepe Wiſdome. 204
               The Whoore deſcribed. 174

                     Who ſhee is. 182
                  
               
               How the reſtoring of Propheſie and diſpelling of darkenes is a Woe. 98. 160
               Two great Wonders in Heauen 100
               
                  Wondring of two ſorts. 174
               The Word compared to water, figured by the Lauer in the Tabernacle, and by the braſen Sea Temple: and in this booke Chap. 4. ſet foorth vnder the type of a glaſſie Sea before the throne. 15. 16
               The Word contemned, of a bleſſing becommeth the firſt of plagues. 34
               The Word is the weapon of Chriſt his victorie. 86. 88. 215
               Three degrees of operation which the Word of God hath in the hearts of his owne 132
               Our Worſhip to God muſt proceed of knowledge. 20
               The Wound of the Beaſt in his ſixth head 117
               How Works doe follow the dead. 142
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               
                  Faults eſcaped.
                  Page 8 Line. 1 Fault. Affliction that Correction. Affliction them that
                  Page 8 Line. 29 Fault. ſex. Correction. ſtep.
                  Page 27 Line. 12 Fault. three Harps Correction. their Harps
                  Page 31 Fault. laſt Correction. of ingratitude Correction. of our ingratitude
                  Page 42 Line. 2 Fault. oft Correction. of
                  Page 42 Fault. 32. Correction. vncouch Correction. vncouth
                  Page 43 Line. 10 Fault. Antonio Correction. Antonino
                  
                  Page 43 Line. 30 Fault. Antonius. Correction. Antoni
                           •
                        us
                  
                  Page 44 Line. 26 Fault. while Correction. which
                  Page 46 Fault. laſt Correction. bewhiche Correction. bewitch
                  Page 56 Line. 14 Fault. indure Correction. indeare
                  Page 60 Line. 29 Fault. God euen Correction. God is euen.
                  Page 91 Line. 16 Fault. beget them of the world great. Correction. beget them, of the world, great trouble.
                  Page 158 Line. 16 Fault. ſailed. Correction. failed
                  Page 160 Line. 34 Fault. firſt Correction. fift
                  Page 188 Line. 33 Fault. damoniak Correction. daemoniak
                  Page 239 Line. 2 Fault. Daniel 2. Correction. Daniel 12.
                  Page 212 Line. 26 Fault. Chap. 4. Correction. Chap. 6.
                  Page 219 Line. 20 Fault. there Correction. thereto
               
            
            
               In page 104. in the marge
                     •
                  t aboue the antepenult line, adde Micah 7. 15
            
               In page 219 line 20. after theſe words, for thereto is the alluſion, inſert theſe words, as alſo Dan 2. the Image whereby theſe ſame kingdomes were typically ſhewed, is then ſaid to be deſtroied when the ſtone falleth on the feete thereof.
         
      
   