
      
         
            
            
            
               ARTICLES to be enquired of within the Dioces of Wincheſter, in the Metropoliticall viſitation of the moſt Reuerend Father in Chriſt, Matthew by the prouidence of God, Archbyſhop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan. 1575
            
            AT LONDON Printed by Iohn Daye, dwellyng ouer Alderſgate. 1575
            
            ¶Cum gratia & Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧For the Clergie.
            
               
                  IN primis, whether any haue intruded them ſelues, & preſume to exerciſe any kynde of miniſterie in the Churche of God, without impoſition of handes & lawfull calling by ordinarie authoritie, and whether any admitted but to Deaconrie vſurpe the office of the Miniſter.
            2 Item, whether any laye perſons take vpon thē to read openly in the congregation diuine ſeruice, in any Church, Chappell or oratorie, without they be therunto vpon ſome vrgent cauſe, or great neceſſitie for a tyme licenced by the ordinary. Wherfore ſuch haue bene allowed, and how long they haue ſerued, and whether any of them haue taken vpon them to ſolemniſe Matrimonie, or to miniſter any Sacrament.
            3 Item, whether any homicide or felone, any notoriouſlie infamous, & diſabled by the Eccleſiaſticall lawes, any ordeined out of the Dioces where they were borne, or by lōg tyme made their abode without letters dimiſſories from their ordinarie, exerciſe the miniſterie, or any Eccleſiaſticall calling in this Dioces.
            4 Item, whether any Deacon or miniſter be remoued from any other Dioces to ſerue in this, without letters teſtimoniall of the ordinarie from whoſe Dioces he came to teſtifie the cauſe of his departyng thence, and of his behauiour.
            
               5 Item, whether any Deacon or miniſter in this Dioces go not comely and ſoberly in apparell accordyng as it is appointed in the Queenes maieſties Iniunctions, and in the aduertiſementes, or lyue diſordinatly in riotyng, gamyng, haukyng, huntyng, or beholdyng and garyng at any Idle paſtime, or exerciſyng any laicall trade, or miſterie for gayne and lucre ſclaunderous to their callyng in the Church.
            6 Item, whether any being once ordeined Prieſt or miniſter, doth not ſtill continue in their calling, or frequenteth and reſorteth not to the Common prayer, or at times appointed communicateth not, or haue caſt of their calling, and go and boaſt thē ſelues lyke laye men.
            7 Itē, whether any of them ſay or ſing in priuate conuenticles Maſſe, or any ſeruice contrary to the lawes of this Realme.
            8. Item, whether any be permitted to preach in any place within thys Dioces, not being therunto lawfully lycēſed either by the Queenes Maieſtie, or the Archbyſhop of the Prouince, or the Byſhop of the Dioces, and whether the Parſon, Uicare or Curate and Churchwardens of euery Pariſhe do call for euery ſuch licence, and peruſe it before they ſuffer the party to preach.
            9 Item, whether your Preachers ſet out in their ſermons the Queenes Maieſties authoritie ouer all her ſubiectes, & in all cauſes, and exhort their

hearers to due obedience vnder the ſame, to the folowyng of her Maieſties Iniunctions, and other lawes, ſtatutes, orders, aduertiſmentes and decrees ſet forth by common authority for the eſtabliſhyng of Chriſtian Religion and maintenaunce of the Eccleſiaſticall pollicie in this Realme, or whether any of them haue done or ſayd any thyng to the contrary.
            10 Item, whether they likewiſe in theyr preachyng excite and ſtyre vp the people to charitie one with another, to godlyneſſe of lyfe, often and deuout receauyng of the holy Communion, frequentyng diuine ſeruice, hearyng the worde of God read or taught, and ſuch like, and alſo to all kynde of Ciuill dutyes meete for ſubiectes, or be curious in mouing new needeleſſe doubtes, wherby the people may be ſooner ſtyrred to debates and controuerſies, then edified in holſome doctrine, continued in Chriſtian loue, or prouoked to godly lyfe.
            11 Item, whether in their conuerſation and behauiour, they be modeſt, graue, and ſober, accordyng to theyr callyng, and for the better credite of their doctrine, or otherwiſe.
            12 Item, whether your Parſons or Uicars, be continually reſident vpon their benefices, if they be abſent, where they be: whether in their abſence their cures be ſufficiently diſcharged and ſerued.
            13 Item, whether they haue any other or moe benefices,

in what coūtrey or Dioces they lye, whether they came to any of them by fraude, guile, deceit, or ſymonie.
            14 Item, whether they make or cauſe to be made their monethly and quarterly Sermons, inſtruct and examine the youth of theyr Pariſhes in the Catechiſme at Euenyng Prayer on Sondayes and holydayes: whether they moue the Pariſhioners and the Parētes to buy the Catechiſme lately ſet forth with additions by the Queenes Maieſties authoritie: whether they reade the Homylies on Sondayes, when there be no Sermons, and the Queenes Maieſties Iniunctions euery quarter.
            15 Item, whether and howe long after his Induction, your Parſon or Uicare read openly in your Church at diuine ſeruice, the Articles of Religion whiche concerne the confeſſion of the true Chriſtian fayth, and the doctrine of the Sacramētes appointed to be publiquely read by an Acte of Parliament made in the xiij. yeare of her Maieſties reigne.
            16 Item, whether they pronounce diuine ſeruice and other thynges to be read at common prayer playnely and diſtinctly to the hearyng and intelligence of the people, & miniſter the Sacramentes reuerently, in ſuch ſort as is ſet forth by the lawes of this Realme, the Queenes Maieſties Iniunctions, and the aduertiſmentes, without any kinde of variation.
            
               17 Item, in the tyme of celebration of diuine ſeruice whether they weare ſurpliſſes, or celebrate the ſayd ſeruice in the Chauncell or in the Church, Baptiſe in Baſons or in the Fontes ſtandyng in the places accuſtomed, miniſter the holy Communion in water bread, or cōmon bread, in prophane Cuppes, diſhes, bowles, old maſſing Challices, or in a decent communion cuppe prouided and kept for the ſame onely of purpoſe, & whether the Communicantes receaue ſtādyng, ſittyng, or kneeling.
            18 Item, whether they haue entred into their benefices without lawfull ingreſſe therunto by Inſtitution, or Collation & Induction, whether they maintaine their manſions houſes, Chauncels and other edifices pertainyng to their benefices and Churches in ſufficient reparations, and whether they make ſpoyle or waſt of any thing partaining to them.
            19 Item, whether ſuch of them as may diſpend an C. pound in ſpirituall liuynges by the yeare, alloweth to the exhibitiō of ſome Scholler in Cambridge or Oxford iij. pounds vi. s. viij. pence yearely, and what ſcholler receaueth it.
            20 Item, whether any of thē haue demyſed any of their benefices, or any part of them otherwiſe then is appointed in an Act of Parliament. an. 13. of the Queenes maieſties reigne cap. 17. or in defraude thereof conuey the fruites of the ſame by ſome other ſhiftes any other wayes.
            
               21 Item, whether they recorde from time to time in a Regiſter all mariages, Chriſtening and Burials, and yearely deliuer the copies of them to the Byſhop by Indenture.
            22 Item, whether in the dayes of perambulatiō they vſe any other rite or Ceremonie then to ſing or ſay in Engliſh the ij. Pſalmes beginnyng. Benedic anima mea. &c. with the Letanie and Suffrages thereto, and one Homely of thākes giuyng ſet forth and deuided into foure partes, without any other ſuperſtitious ceremonie heretofore vſed, whether womē go about with them, and to what valew there was heretofore wont to be beſtowed at the ſtādyng and reſtyng places of the ſayd Rogations to be beſtowed.
            23 Item, whether they vſe to comfort the ſicke ſpecially at the tyme of their paſſyng out of this tranſitorie world, and what textes of Scripture they haue ready for the ſame purpoſe.
            24 Item, whether any of them or their Curates not being lawfully authoriſed to preach take vpon them to expound any Scripture, or by the way of exhortation moue any matter of doctrine, but be content onely to read grauely & aptely the ſeruice, leſſons, and Homelies ſet forth without any gloſing or addition to the ſame.
            25 Item, whether they admit any notorious ſinners or vncharitable perſons to the holy Communion, any that can not ſay without booke the Lordes Prayer, the Articles of Chriſtian Fayth,

and the x. Commaundementes, or ſuffer any children to aunſwere as Godfather or Godmother at Baptiſme except they haue receaued the holy Cō
               munion, and can ſay the Catechiſme.
            26 Item, whether they keepe competent hoſpitality, accordyng to theyr lyuinges, and if they be not reſident, whether they beſtow the xl. part of their liuyng yearely amongeſt the poore, if theyr lyuing be aboue xx. l. a yeare.
            27 Item, whether ſuch beneficed men, or enioying any ſpirituall lyuing, as be not reſidēt at their liuinges, if they pretend ſtudye at any of the Vniuerſities, be once in the yeare called home to the Ordinary to be examyned how they profite in learnyng, whether any be ſuffred wyth the liuing of the Church to become ſeruing or wayting men, Lawyers clarkes, or otherwyſe to lyue diſſolutely or in a mere lay vocation therwith.
            28 Item, whether your Parſon, or Vicar was inducted into poſſeſſion of your parſonage or vicaredge ſince the xiij. yeare of the Queenes maieſties raigne, whether he was then Deacon or miniſter, and in what yeare of hys age: whether he was an able preacher lycenſed thereunto, and by whom: whether, and how long after his induction he read opēly in your Church at diuine ſeruice, the declaration of vniformity in Religion ſet forth by the two Archbyſhoppes of Canterbury and Yorke.
            29 Item, whether any parſonage or vicarege, or

any other ſpirituall liuing in thys Dioces be holden by the name and title of any beyond the ſeas, and whether the cauſe of hys beyng there be lawfully approued and allowed.
            30 Item, beſides benefices wyth cure of ſoule, what other dignities, promotions, prebendes or ſpirituall lyuinges your Parſon or Vicar hath, what be theyr names, and where they lye.
            31 Item, whether the proprietaryes of parſonages wyth vycariges endowed, leaue a ſufficient portion of the fruites, or annuitye to the Vicares to diſcharge the cure of ſoules, and to keepe hoſpitalitye: whether they helpe and aſſiſt them in the preaching and ſettyng forth of Gods worde, and ſeyng the Queenes maieſties Iniunctions, and other ſtatutes, orders, and aduertiſmentes ſet forth by publicke authoritye well obſerued: Whether they wythhold from theyr Vicares theyr due portions of fruites or monye, or ouercharge thē with reparations of Chauncels, dutyes for viſitations and ſynods, or other paymentes, and whether for the eaſe of the ſayd Vicares, they pay ſuch dutyes as by compoſition or cuſtome hath heretofore bene due.
            32 Item, whether the pariſhe clarkes be admitted without the conſent of the Parſon or Vicar: whether they be not obedient to the Parſons, Vicars, or their Curates, ſpecially in matters touchyng the celebration of diuine ſeruice, and the Church buſines: whether they keepe the bookes &

ornamentes of the Church, the quyer or the place where diuine ſeruice is appointed to be done, the Communion table, the Pulpit, and the Font fayre and decent, for diuine ſeruice, adminiſtration of the Sacramentes and preachyng: whether any withhold from the ſayd Clarkes their accuſtomed wages, reliefe and beneuolence.
            33 Item, whether any Scholemaſter teach openly or priuately within thys Dioces, in any noble or gentlemans houſe, or any where els not beyng allowed and examyned by ye Ordinary for ſyncere Religion, honeſt conuerſation, and ſufficient learnyng: whether they teach any other Grammer, or any other Catechiſme then is ſet forth by the Queenes maieſties authority: whether they ſuffer theyr ſchollers to read any bookes tendyng to the impugnyng and derogation of the order of religion now ſet forth, or propounde to them any Themes, vulgares, or ſubtill queſtions, wherby matters of Religion concluded and eſtablyſhed myght be made doubtfull vnto them, or they induced to deryde or ſcoffe at any godly order, Ryte or Ceremony now ſet forth and allowed.
         
         
            For the Laytie.
            34 IN primis, whether any pariſhioner is negligent or obſtinate in commyng to his owne pariſhe Church or Chappell for diuine ſeruice, and their receauyng the holy Communion at the leaſt

thriſe a yeare, contempne the word of God, or indeede or worde deſpiſeth or ſetteth lyght by the publike order of Religion ſet forth & eſtablyſhed.
            35 Item, whether any contempne, hurt, ſtryke, or any wayes abuſe any miniſter or Deacon, ſpecially in the tyme of celebration of diuine ſeruice, adminiſtration of the Sacraments, or preaching of Gods worde, or whether any of them neglect or refuſe to bryng or ſend their children and ſeruauntes to be catechyſed.
            36 Item, whether Innes, Tauernes, victayling and typling houſes or gamyng places be patent or entred into, in ſeruice or preachyng tyme, whether there be any adulterers, drunckards, baudes, ſcoldes and brawlers, priuy and crafty ſowers of diſcorde, open and manifeſt vſurers, ſorcerers, inchaunters, or any hauing confidence in any ſuch deuiliſhe imaginations in your pariſhes.
            37 Item, whether you Churchwardēs & ſworne men, and ſuch as were before you, haue according to the acte of Parliamēt therfore in the firſt yeare of the Queenes maieſties raigne prouided, leuied of euery one that wilfully or negligently is abſent from Church, or vnreuerently behaueth hymſelfe at common prayer as is in the ſayd acte appoynted xij. d. for euery ſuch offence. Wherunto the ſaid forfayture is applyed, what accompt therof yearly is made, & whether your poore mans box be accordingly kept, and the almes therof accompted yearly to your pariſhe.
            
               38 Item, whether all Images, altars, Shrynes, and other monumentes of Idolatry and ſuperſtion be vtterly defaced & put out in your pariſhes: whether your Churches and Churchyardes be well repayred, adorned and fenced: whether the Roode loftes be pulled downe, and a partition made and kept betwixt the Chauncell and the Church, according to the aduertiſments. Whether likewiſe all maſſe bookes, Antiphoners, Grayles, & other ſuch bookes which ſerued for ſuperſtitious Latin ſeruice, be defaced and aboliſhed.
            39 Item, whether you haue in your Churches all thinges requiſite for commō prayer & adminiſtration of the Sacramentes, and preaching: As à Bible of the largeſt volume, the booke of common prayer, a table of the x. Commaundements before the Communion bourde, the aduertiſmentes, the admonition for degrees of matrimony, à conuenient pulpit well placed, à comely and decent Communion Table ſtāding vpon a frame wyth à faire couering of ſome carpet, ſilke or linnen cloth to lay vpon it, a Communion cuppe wyth à couer of ſiluer, and ſuch lyke.
            40 Item, whether any ſale of your church goods haue bene made, by whom, and to whom: whether an Inuentory be kept of all ſuch goods as haue from tyme to tyme bene purchaſed, geuen or bequeathed to the Church, whether an accompt be therof yearly made: whether the ſayd goods be encreaſed or decayed, and by whoſe default or

negligence: In whoſe handes the ſayd Church goodes or any of them remayne.
            41 Item, whether you ſee that on Sondayes & holydayes, Innes, tauernes, & victualling houſes be not frequented at ſeruice tyme, and ſhoppes alſo ſhut vp, & your Pariſhioners ceaſe from worldly buſines, whether any other holydayes be kept then ſuch as be appointed in the booke of Commō prayer, whether any hereſies, falſe opinions, Popiſh and ſuperſtitious doctrine, be mainteined in your Pariſhes and by whom.
            42 Item, whether there be any in theſe partes, that haue maried within degrees of affinitie or conſanguinitie, by the lawes of God forbidden, ſo ſet out in a table for an admonitiō. Any man that hath two wiues, or any woman that hath two huſbandes. Any that beyng diuorced or ſeparated aſide, hath maried agayne. Any maried that haue made precontractes. Any that haue made priuy or ſecret contractes. And that haue maried without banes thriſe ſolemnely aſked. Any couples maried that liue not together, but ſlaunderouſly liue a part: Any that haue maried out of the Pariſhe Churche, where they ought to haue the ſame ſolemniſed.
            43 Item, whether therebe any ſecret or priuy cō
               uenticles or exerciſes in diſputations for matters of Religion in any of your Pariſhes, whether any ſuperſtitious and ſuperfluous ringyng at burials, Saintes euēs, or feſtiuall dayes be ſuffered. Whether

any Lordes of miſrules, Sommer Lordes or Ladyes, diſguiſed perſons come vnreuerently into the Church and ſpecially in the ſeruice tyme to play any games, who they be that cōmit ſuch diſorders or accompany and mainteyne them.
            44 Item, whether any patrones haue by thē ſelues or by other directly or vndirectly practiſed for the preſentyng of any Clarke to any ſpirituall lyuyng before the ſayd preſentation, or after to haue money or money worth or any other commoditie. Whether the Churche of your Pariſhe be voyde, how long it hath ſo bene, who receiueth the tithes and profites therof, and by what authoritie, whether the patrone or any other haue pulled downe any Church, chaūcell or manſion houſe taking away the lead, belles, ornamentes, goodes or glebe landes or conuerted the tithes, reuenues or poſſeſſions of the ſayd Church to his owne priuate vſe.
            45 Item, whether any conceale the will and teſtamēt of any departed or fulfill not ye ſame, chiefly in Legacies bequethed to good and godly vſes, whether any executor haue defrauded any widow, fatherles child, or any other in their minoritie of their legacies, or any adminiſtrator appointed to adminiſter to the vſe of any in their minoritie haue beguiled them and not geuen accompt of their ſayd adminiſtration. Whether any adminiſter without probate of the Teſtament or takyng authoritie from the ordinary, and whether any legacies heretofore giuen to vſes now forbidden, be not conuerted to ſome godly and lawfull vſe.
            
               46 Item, whether midwiues be of ſober life and vncorrupt religiō, not ſuſpected of Papiſtry, whether any of them vſe in the tyme of womens trauell any witchcraft, charmes, Latine prayers or inuocations, or take vpon them to Baptiſe, whether when they be preſent at the deliuerie of any child knowne or ſuſpected to be begotten in vnlawfull matrimony, do not ſtreightly charge the mother to declare who is the father and where it was begotten, and immediatly certifie the ordinarie or at the leaſt the Curate & Churchwardens of the Pariſh therof.
         
         
            
               ❧ Articles of enquirie for the exerciſe of ſpirituall iuriſdiction within this Dioces.
            47 IN primis, whether the Eccleſiaſtical iuriſdiction in this Dioces haue bene exerciſed by expert and hable men ſuch as the law requireth. Whether the Chaūcellor, Archdeacons, or any vnder them haue at any tyme ſuffered faultes & trāſgreſſions to remaine vnpuniſhed for mony, gaine, pleaſure, frēdſhip, or any other affectionat reſpect, whether in matters of inſtaunce betwixt partie & partie they haue denyed audience, ſpecially at the complaint of the poore frēdles and fatherles, or by admitting friuolous and vnfit matters, or excludyng and barring reaſonable and neceſſary defences, haue delayed or peruerred iuſtice or the execution therof. Whether they haue impeached or manaced parties in iudgemēt ſo that they haue bene

ſtayed or cōpelled to deſiſte from perſecuting their Appeales or complaints to the Queenes maieſtic or the Archbiſhop for iuſt griefes and wronges to them procured.
            48 Itē, whether any of them haue bene burdenſome to any in this Dioces by exacting & takyng exceſſiue fees, rewardes or cōmodities by the way of promotion, gift, contribution, redemption of penaunce to their owne vſe, obteining of any benefice or office, or any other like wayes, whether in their viſitatiōs and Sinodes they ſpend the time any otherwiſe then in diligēt Inquiſition and reformation of diſorders, or ſuffer the Clarkes or ſeruaūtes of their retinue riotouſely to behaue them ſelues.
            49 Item, whether Archdeacons in their viſitations ſee that all neceſſary bookes and ornamētes for diuine ſeruice be had in euery pariſh, and whether Church goodes and ſtockes be augmented or empayred, whether Churches, Churchyardes, mā
               ſion houſes be well repaired and fenced. Whether in their Synodes they take accōpt of the Clargy how they profite in the ſtudy of holy Scripture, whether they graunt any licence to celebrate matrimony the banes not thriſe ſolēnely aſked, either for prohibition of tyme or any other ſuch cauſe.
            50 Item, whether they haue vprightly & vnfeynedly both obſerued in their own perſons, and towardes all other put in due executiō the Eccleſiaſticall lawes of this Realme the Queenes Maieſties

Iniunctions & other her highnes cōmaundementes, orders, decrees, and aduertiſementes ſet forth for the publike adminiſtration of Gods holy word and Sacramētes. Whether they haue commēded and fauored all thoſe that ſought the ſame, and condignely puniſhed all thoſe that ſought the contrarie.
            51 Item, whether the Deanes of your Deanries be of the beſt learned ſort, and beſt conuerſation, and leaſt ſuſpected for ſuperſtitious or ſchiſmaticall doctrine & opinions: whether they doe marke the lyfe and ſtudy of the clargie, and enforme the Ordinary or Archdeacons therof: whether they be negligent in executing mandates or precepts ſent vnto them frō any Eccleſiaſticall court: whether they enquire of lyght womē which come into their Deanries to be brought a bed, of Curates and ſcholemaſters not licenſed, of priuy cōtractes and mariages, of concealed Images and monuments of ſuperſtition, and of other cloſe diſorders vſed within their Deanries, certifying the Ordinary therof for due and ſpedy reformation.
            52 Item, whether your peculiar Judges exerciſe their Juriſdiction by themſelues or by learned deputies, and not by vnable men, as their farmers & ſuch lyke: whether they haue ſkilfull regiſters and perfect record of their actes and procedings: whether they winke at ſuch as be harboured in their peculiers for auoyding of proceſſe and correction in thys or any other Dioces, and detect them not to the Ordinary.
            
               53 Item, whether your apparitors haue taken money or money worth, for concealing or cloking of any vice, or haue conueyed any offenders from one place to an other to eſcape puniſhment, or cited any body without due proceſſe, or delay the execution and ſeruyng of their proceſſe, or geue warnyng to the party cited, to keepe him out of the way, or diſpitefully ſerue their proceſſe in time of diuine ſeruice, to the diſturbance of the pariſhe: whether they appointe vnderſomners or ſubſtitutes to doe their office, or threaten any with proceſſe, or without, for bribes in corne, woll, cheſe, or any thyng els: whether any of them be ouerchargeable to the Clargie or Layty in trauailyng about the executing of their ſayd proceſſes.
            54 Item, whether the Regiſters and Notaries within this Dioces make iuſt & true recordes of actes done & paſſed in their preſentes, and deliuer at ye parties requeſt true copyes of the ſame without exceſſiue taking: whether they or any of them take annuall fees of any of the clergy, or their farmers, for exhibiting proxies in viſitations or ſynodes, or excuſing their abſence, and ſauing theyr apperance when they ſhould iudicially come in, or any other reſpect, whereby parcialitie myght grow, and equity be excluded out of iudgement.
            55 Item, whether the Proctors of the Eccleſiaſticall court be cōtēted with their ordinary fees: whether any of them incourage their clyentes to perſiſt in euyll and wrongfull cauſes, or bargayne with them before hand for the gayne of any ſute

after the euictiō: whether any of them deuiſe and obiect friuolous, impertinēt and dilatory matters or allegations, to the intent to prolong ſutes, and hinder the expedition of Juſtice, and ſpecially in cauſes of Matrimony, alementation of fatherles children, and ſuch lyke ſummary matters.
            56. And generally you ſhall enquire and preſent all euill lyuers or offenders of Gods moſt holy lawes, and ſpecially ſuch as ſtubburnely refuſe to conforme themſelues to vnitie and good Religion, or that diſturbe the ſame by brutyng abroade rumors of the alteration therof, or ſeeke new deuiſes and innouations.
            
         
      
   