
      
         
            
            
            THE
DOLEFVLL
Euen-Song,
OR
A TRVE, PARTICVLAR
AND IMPARTIALL
narration of that fearefull and ſudden
calamity, which befell the Preacher Mr. DRVRY
a Ieſuite, and the greater part of his Auditory,
by the downefall of the floore at an aſſembly
in the Black-Friers on Sunday the 26.
of Octob. laſt, in the after noone.
            TOGETHER WITH THE REHEARſall
of Maſter DRVRIE his Text, and the diuiſion thereof,
as alſo an exact Catalogue of the names of ſuch
as periſhed by this lamentable accident: And
a briefe application thereupon.
            
               MATTH. 7. 1.
Iudge not, that yee bee not iudged.
            LONDON,
Printed by Iohn Hauiland, for William Barret, and
Richard Whitaker, and are to be ſold at the ſigne
of the Kings head, 1623.
         
         
            
            
            To the Chriſtian moderate
Reader.
            
               VPon Judden accidents
men commonly paſſe
ſudden cenſures, and
for want of deliberate
and ſteady aime, vnder or ouerſhoot
the marke: eſpecially that
kinde of marke, which the moſt
skilfull hand, guided by the ſharpeſt
eie, can neuer certainly hit,
ſcarce diſtinctly diſcerne. Of Gods
iudgements iudiciouſly Saint Auguſtine,
and modeſtly, Iudicia
Dei nemo poteſt comprehendere,
nemo certe reprehendere.

No man can comprehend
them, no man may reprehend
them. Boldly therefore may a
moderate ſpirit vndertake to reprehend
thoſe encroachers vpon
Gods prerogatiue, who take vpon
them to comprehend in the ſmall
veſſell of their ſhallow vnderſtanding
the boundleſſe Ocean of Gods
ſecret iudgements: hauing no other
conduit thereunto, then the
ouert act of a corporall ſtroake, and
outward chaſtiſement.
            Jn the ſounding the depth of
this late diſmall accident, it is not
hard to diſcerne what tongues and
pens haue, out of partiall obliquitie,
or precipitate iudgement, caſt
too ſhort, or loſt their plummet in
the deepe.
            
               
To auoid which inconueniences,
the chiefe care and endeuor, taken
in this enſuing Tract, hath beene
partly by a more certaine information
to ſtrengthen the line, and
partly to lengthen the ſame by a
more particular and fuller relation:
that ſo the indifferent reader,
taking the plummet into his owne
hand, may caſt with the better
aime, for the ſhunning all rocks
and quicksands, either of ſtupid
neglect, in not conſidering at all,
or of ouer-curious prying, in the perſonall
application, of Gods extraordinary
works in this kinde.
            So iudge well, and Farewell.
            
               Thine in Chriſt,
T. Goad.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            BLACK-FRYERS
LONDON, 1623.
            
               
                  Octob. 26.
                  Nouemb. 5.

                        ſtilo

                              veteri
                              nouo,

                                    being Sunday.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ABout three of the
clocke in the afternoone
of the
aforeſaid Sunday,
in a large
Garret, being the
vppermoſt, and
from the ground
the third ſtorie of an high building of
Stone and Bricke, were aſſembled a
multitude of people, Men and Women,
of diuers ages and conditions, amounting

to the number of two or three hundred
perſons, to heare a Sermon there
to be preached by one Maſter Drury, a
Romiſh Prieſt, and Ieſuite of name, and
ſpeciall note. To this Garret or Gallery,
(being ſituated ouer the Gate-houſe
of the French Ambaſſadors houſe) there
is a leading paſſage by a doore cloſe to
the vtter gate of the ſaid houſe, but
without it, open to that ſtreet: By which
paſſage many men and women vſed to
haue daily recourſe to the Engliſh
Prieſts chambers there.
            There is alſo out of the ſaid Lord
Ambaſſadors with-drawing Chamber,
another paſſage meeting with this, and
both leading into the ſaid Garret. Which
Garret was within the ſide walls, about
ſeuenteene foot wide, and fortie foot
long: at the vpper end whereof was a
new partition of ſlit Deale, ſet vp to
make a priuate roome for one of the
Prieſts, which abated twelue foot of the

length. About the middeſt of the Gallery,
and neere to the wall, was ſet, for
the Preacher, a Chaire, raiſed vp ſomewhat
higher then the reſt of the floare,
and a ſmall table before it. In this place
the Auditorie being aſſembled, and
ſome of the better ſort hauing chaires
and ſtooles to ſit on, the many ſtanding
in throng, and filling the roome to the
doore and ſtaires, all expecting the Preacher,
hee came forth out of an inner
roome, clad in a Surplice, which was
girt about his waſte with a linnen girdle,
and a Stole of Scarlet colour hanging
downe before him from both his ſhoulders.
Whom a man attended, carrying
in one hand a Booke, and in the other
an Houre-glaſſe. An Embleme not vnfit
to ſuggeſt to him, his Auditorie, and
vs all, that their, and our liues, not onely
paſſe away continually with the defluxion
of that deſcending motion of
the Sand; but alſo, euen in ſuch times

and places, may poſſibly fore-runne the
ſame, and bee ouerturned before that
ſhort hourely Kalender ſhould come to
recourſe.
            Maſter Drury the Prieſt, as ſoone as
he came to the Chaire, kneeled downe
at the foot of it, making by himſelfe in
priuate ſome eiaculation of a ſhort praier,
as it ſeemed, about the length of an
Aue Marie. Then ſtanding vp, and turning
his face toward the people, hee
croſſed himſelfe formally: premiſing
no vocall audible prayer at all, (neither
before his Text, nor vpon the diuiſion
of it) wherein the people might ioyne
with him, for the bleſſing and ſanctifying
an action of that Nature. Which
omiſſion, whether it were a lapſe of memorie
in him, or a priuiledge of cuſtome
belonging to thoſe ſupereminent
inſtructors, I diſpute not; but leaue it
to the conſcionable iudgement of euery
Chriſtian.
            
               
Immediatly he tooke the Booke, being
the Rhemiſts Teſtament, and in it
read his Text, which was the Goſpel appointed
for that Sunday, according to
the inſtitution of the Church of Rome;
which day now fell vpon the fift of
Nouember by the Gregorian Kalender,
current ten daies before ours, and accompted
by the Romaniſts the onely
true Computation. Whereupon ſome
goe ſo farre as to make a numerall inference
of a ſecond reflecting Tragedy.
But, for my part, I ſurrender all ſuch iudiciarie
calculation into the hands of
the Higheſt, who according to his prouidence
diſpoſeth of times and ſeaſons,
and of all euents befalling in them.
            
               The ſaid Goſpell in the Rhemists tranſlation,
is as followeth in theſe words:
Therefore is the Kingdome of Heauen likened
to a man being a King,The Goſpell vpon the 21. Sunday after Pentecoſt. that would
make an account with his ſeruants. And
when hee began to make the account, there

was one preſented vnto him that owed him
ten thouſand Talents. And hauing not
whence to repay it, his Lord commanded
that he ſhould bee ſold, and his wife and
children, and all that he had, and it to bee
repaied. But that ſeruant falling downe,
beſought him, ſaying, Haue patience toward
me, and I will repay thee all. And
the Lord of that ſeruant moued with pitie,
diſmiſſed him, and the debt he forgaue him.
And when that ſeruant was gone forth, he
found one of his fellow-ſeruants that did
owe him an hundred pence: and laying
hands vpon him thratled him, ſaying, Repay
that thou oweſt. And his fellow-ſeruant
falling downe, beſought him, ſaying,
Haue patience toward mee, and I will repay
thee all. And he would not: but went
his way and caſt him into priſon, till he repayed
the debt. And his fellow-ſeruants ſeeing
what was done, were very ſorie, and
they came, and told their Lord all that was
done. Then his Lord called him: and hee

ſaid vnto him, Thou vngracious ſeruant,
I forgaue thee all the debt becauſe thou beſoughteſt
me: oughteſt not thou therefore
alſo to haue mercy vpon thy fellow-ſeruant,
euen as I had mercy vpon thee? And his
Lord being angry, deliuered him to the tormenters,
vntill he repayed all the debt. So
alſo ſhall my heauenly Father doe to you,
if you forgiue not euery one his brother
from your hearts.
            Which when he had read, hee ſat
downe in the chaire, and put vpon his
head a red quilt cap, hauing a linnen
white one vnder it turned vp about the
brimmes: and ſo vndertooke his Text;
firſt ſhewing in plaine and familiar ſtile
the occaſion of our Sauiours deliuering
this parable, then diſtributing the
whole into parts, as they depended
one on the other; out of which he choſe
three principall points of doctrine,
which he propounded to inſiſt vpon
in that Sermon, viz.
            
            1 The debt which man oweth to

God: and the accompt which he is to
make vnto him of that debt.
            2 Gods mercy in remitting this great
debt.
            3 Mans hardneſſe of heart, and frowardneſſe,
both towards God and towards
his brethren: together with the
remedies, which man may vſe for the
procuring of Gods mercy, and curing
himſelfe from this contagious diſeaſe
of ingratitude.
            Mans debt he amplified in regard of
our creation, and redemption, the ſpirituall
and temporall benefits, which
we enioy in this world, and in Gods
Church, &c.
            Vpon the following parts hee diſcourſed
with much vehemency, inſiſting
eſpecially vpon thoſe words, I forgaue
thee all thy debt, ſhouldeſt not thou alſo
haue had compaſsion on thy fellow, euen
as I had pitie on thee? And thence extolling
the infinite mercy and goodneſſe
of God, whereby he doth not only giue

vs all that we haue, but forgiues vs all
our treſpaſſes and offences, be they net
uer ſo deepely ſtained with the ſcarle▪
dye and tincture of our guiltineſſe
Which mercifull bounty of our heauenly
Father is here parabolized vnto
vs by a certaine man that was a
king, &c.
            
            Two or three of that auditory auow
with ioynt teſtimony, that, in the proceſſe
of the latter part, which he handled,
he earneſtly laid open the terrors
and burthen of the heauy debt of puniſhment,
which we are to pay at the
laſt iudgement, if the debt of ſinne be
not acquitted before. Declaring withall
the mercy of God in prouiding
meanes to cancell this debt, by the Sacraments
ordained in the Catholique
Church, in ſpeciall by the Sacrament
of Penance; and therein by Contrition,
Confeſſion, and Satisfaction. And
thence inferring in what miſerable caſe

Heretiques are, who want all ſuch
meanes to come out of this debt, becauſe
they are not members of the Catholique
Church.
            But whatſoeuer the matter, or manner
of his laſt ſpeech was, I doe not curiouſly
enquire, as making interpretation
of Gods iudgement in ſtopping the
currant of his ſpeech at that inſtant.
Leſt in ouer forward cenſuring the ſame,
we ſhould be deemed as vncharitable,
as our Aduerſaries, eſpecially the Ieſuits,
are againſt thoſe Churches and perſons
that admit not the Papacy.
            Moſt certaine it is, and ouer manifeſt
by lamentable euidence, that, when the
ſaid Ieſuite had proceeded about halfe
an houre in this his Sermon, there befell
that Preacher and Auditorie the
moſt vnexpected and ſuddaine calamitie,
that this age hath heard of to come
from the hand, not of Man, but God, in
the middeſt of a ſacred exerciſe, of what

kinde or religion ſoeuer. The floare,
whereon that aſſembly ſtood or ſate,
not ſinking by degrees, but at one inſtant
failing and falling, by the breaking
aſunder of a maine Sommier or
Dormer of that floare; which beame,
together with the Ioyces and Plancher
thereto adioyned, with the people thereon,
ruſhed downe with ſuch violence,
that the weight and fall thereof, brake
in ſunder another farre ſtronger and
thicker Sommier of the Chamber ſituated
directly vnderneath: and ſo both
the ruined floares, with the people ouerlapped
and cruſhed vnder, or betweene
them, fell, (without any time of ſtay)
vpon a lower third floare, being the
floare of the ſaid Lord Ambaſſadors
withdrawing Chamber; which was
ſupported vnderneath with Arch-work
of ſtone, (yet viſible in the Gate-houſe
there) and ſo became the bundarie or
terme of that confuſed and dolefull

heape of ruines, which otherwiſe had
ſunke yet deeper by the owne weight
and height of the downfall: the diſtance
from the higheſt floare, whence
the people fell, to the loweſt, where
they lay, being about two and twentie
foot in depth.
            Of the Gallery floare only ſo much fell,
as was directly ouer a Chamber of 20.
foot ſquare, called Father Redyates
Chamber, and being the vſual Maſſing
roome for the Engliſh reſorting thither.
The reſt of the Gallery floare, being
not ſo full thronged, ſtood firme, and
ſo was a refuge and ſafeguard to
thoſe of the Auditorie that had planted
themſelues at that end. From whence
they beheld that moſt Tragicall Scene
of their brethrens ruine; themſelues
alſo being not onely ſurprized with the
ſtupifying paſſions of affright, and
apprehenſion of that danger, which as
yet they could not think themſelues to

haue eſcaped, but alſo, for the time, impriſoned
in the place it ſelfe; from
whence there was no paſſage by doore,
or otherwiſe, vnleſſe they ſhould aduenture
to leape downe into the gulfe
of their fellowes wofull eſtate. In this
perplexity, diſmay it ſelfe not bereauing
them of counſaile, but rather adminiſtring
ſtrength to their trembling
hands, they with their Kniues opened
the Loame-wall next vnto them, and ſo
making their paſſage thence into another
Chamber, eſcaped that danger.
            As for the reſt (being the farre greater
part of this Aſſembly) who in a moment
all ſunke downe to the loweſt
floare, their caſe, as it can ſcarce be paralleled
with a like example of calamitie,
ſo hardly be deſcribed with the due
and true circumſtances. Who can to
the life expreſſe the face of Death, preſenting
it ſelfe in ſo ruefull and different
ſhapes?
            
            
               Quis talia fando
               Temperet à lachrymis?
            
            What eare, without tingling, can
heare the dolefull and confuſed cries of
ſuch a troope, men, women, children,
all falling ſuddenly in the ſame pit, and
apprehending with one horror the
ſame ruine? What eie can behold, without
inundation of teares, ſuch a ſpectacle
of men ouerwhelmed with breaches
of weighty timber, buried in rubbiſh,
and ſmothered in the duſt? What
heart, without euaporating into ſighes,
can ponder the burthen of deepeſt ſorrowes
and lamentations of parents,
children, husbands, wiues, kinsmen,
friends, for their deareſt pledges, and
chiefeſt comforts in this world, all bereft
and ſwept away with one blaſt of
the ſame diſmall tempeſt?
            Such was the noiſe of this dreadfull
and vnexpected downefall, that the
whole city of London preſently rang

of it, and forthwith the Officers of the
city (to whom the care of good order
chiefly appertaineth) and in ſpeciall Sergeant
Finch the Recorder, repaired thither
the ſame euening, carefully prouiding
for the ſafety of the ſaid Ambaſſadors
houſe and familie, and, for preuenting
all diſorders in ſuch a confuſion,
that might ariſe by the confluence of
the multitude, ſhut vp the gates and
ſet guards vpon the paſſages. With all
ſpeed poſſible ſome were imployed for
the releeuing and ſauing ſuch as yet
ſtruggled for life vnder this heauy load:
Which could not ſo ſoone be effected,
as they in charity deſired; for that the
ruines, which oppreſſed the ſufferers,
did alſo ſtop vp entrance to the helpers:
who thereupon were faine to make a
breach in through an vpper window of
ſtone. From hence they haſted downe
with pickaxes and other inſtruments,
to force aſunder, and take of, by peecemeale,

the oppreſſing load of beames,
ioyces, and bords. At the opening
whereof, what a Chaos? what fearefull
obiects? what lamentable repreſentations?
Here ſome bruiſed, ſome diſmembred,
ſome onely parts of men:
there ſome wounded, and weltering in
their owne and others bloud, otherſome
putting forth their fainting hands
and crying out for helpe. Here ſome
gaſping and panting for breath, others
ſtifled for want of breath. To the moſt
of them being thus couered with duſt,
this their death was a kinde of buriall.
            
               Haue the gates of death beene opened
vnto thee?
               Iob. 38. 17. 
               or haſt thou ſeene the doares
of the ſhadow of death? Verily if any
man could looke in at thoſe gates, and
returne, he would report ſuch a pourtrait
as was this ſpectacle.
            In this dolefull taske of withdrawing
thoſe impediments, laying forth the

dead bodies, and tranſporting the maimed,
all that night, and part of the next
day was ſpent, though charitie and skill
did whet their endeuours with all dexteritie
and expedition.
            The next morning, according to the
Lawes of our Land, which prouide that
the Kings Maieſtie ſhould haue an account
of his Subiects dying Per infortunium,
the Coroners Inqueſt was there
impanelled vpon the dead corpſes, that
after their view of them, they might
be buried with conuenient ſpeed.
            By the ſaid Coroner, and Iury, eſpeciall
care was taken to ſuruey the place,
and materialls of the ruines with all diligence,
for the finding out the immediate
cauſe and manner thereof: the rather
for that it was giuen out by ſome
preſently vpon the miſchance, that ſome
Proteſtants, knowing this to be a chiefe
place of their meetings, had ſecretly
drawne out the pins, or ſawed halfe a

ſunder ſome of the ſupporting Timber
of that building. Which was found to
be a calumny no leſſe ridiculous, then
malitious.
            The moſt probable apparant cauſe of
the ſuddaine failing of that floare, charged
with ſuch a weight of people, was
iudged to bee in the maine Sommier
thereof, which being not aboue ten
inches ſquare, had in the very place,
where it brake, on each ſide a mortaiſe
hole directly oppoſite the one againſt
the other, into which were let the Tenants
of two great pieces of Timber,
called Girders: ſo that betweene thoſe
Mortaiſes, there was left not aboue
three inches of Timber. This Sommier
was alſo ſomewhat knottie about that
place, which, in the opinion of Architects,
might make it more brittle, and
readie to knap in ſunder. The maine
Sommier of the lower roome, was about
thirteene inches ſquare, without

any ſuch Mortaiſe; and brake, not (as
the former) in the middeſt, but within
fiue foot of one end, and more obliquely
and ſhiuering then the other. No
foundation, nor wall failed. The roofe
of the Gallery with the ſeeling vpon it
remaine yet intire; as alſo a ſmall filling
wall, faſtned to the rafters, which yet
hangeth where the floare is gone.
            This downefall was not to al deadly:
to ſome only frightfull, or in part hurtfull:
who being thus taken vp out of the
pit of horrible danger, nay plucked
out of the very iawes of Death, as alſo
thoſe other of this Aſſembly, who (as
before ſaid) fell not at all, but yet ſtood
in the verie brinke of this mortall ieopardie,
haue all great cauſe neuer to forget
this day, but to enter it into their
Kalender for a mercifull and miraculous
deliuerance. Neither is it enough for
them to lift vp their hearts in thankſgiuing
to God (as I make no doubt they

doe) for this vnexpected reſcue from
ſo great an vnſuſpected death, but they
are alſo to lay it to their hearts, whether
this ſudden ſtroake and cracke be
not the hand, and voice of God, to
call them home from wandring after
forraine Teachers, that lead the ignorant
people captiue and carry them
hood-winked into the ſnares of danger,
corporall, ciuill, and ſpirituall: that
hereupon they may ſeriouſly conſider
what ground they haue to forbeare, or
forſake our Church-aſſemblies, and to
refraine from hearing ſo much as our
diuine ſeruice, againſt which they haue
no other exception, but this, that in
hearing it they may heare, and vnderſtand,
whereas in the Romiſh Seruice,
euen in the Euen-ſong then intended
in this conuenticle, audientes audirent,
& non intelligerent, videntes viderent,
& non cernerent. The women, and
common people might vnderſtand as

much as they doe this ſentence in Latine,
taken out of the Prophet Iſay, too
truly prophecying of ſuch.
            Of thoſe that fell, and eſcaped without
any notable hurt, I heare of by
name ſome perſons of note, as Miſtris
Lucie Penruddock of a worthy family,
who fell betweene two that then periſhed,
the Lady Webb and her owne maid
ſeruant, yet was herſelfe preſerued aliue
by the happy ſituation of a chaire,
which falling with her, reſted hollow
ouer her, and ſo became to hir a ſhelter,
or penthouſe to beare off other ruines:
alſo the Lady Webbs daughter, though
falling neere vnto hir mother, and Eleanor
Saunders, who was couered with others
that fell vpon hir, yet by Gods
mercy, recouered out of thoſe bloudy
ruines.
            There was alſo a Scholler, (whom
my ſelfe ſince ſaw and had ſpeech withall)
who was the eaſier drawne to that

Aſſembly, becauſe he formerly was inclining
and warping to that ſide, as hath
appeared by publike euidence. He was
alſo inuolued in this common downefall,
whereout he eſcaped beyond expectation:
being one of the vndermoſt
in that heape, and lying vpon the very
floare, and ouerwhelmed with the
boards and timber, which lay vpon
him, yet not ſo flat, and ſad, as vpon others,
but ſomewhat hollow and ſheluing,
by the leaning of ſome of the timber
againſt the wall. Out of this den of
death he, with maine ſtrength & much
difficulty, wrought himſelfe, by tearing
the laths of the ſeeling, and creeping betweene
two ioyces, from vnder the timber
to an hole where he eſpied light: &
then one of the Ambaſ. family opening a
doore releeued him being yet ſo aſtoniſhed
that he ſcarce was apprehenſiue
of the courteſie done to him. Who
thus refreſhed, preſently returned and

vſed his beſt ſtrength to draw others
out of that ſnare, which he himſelfe had
newly broken, without any other detriment
than of his clothes; of which faire
eſcape I hope, he will make good vſe, &
often call to minde our Sauiours caueat,
(which ſince in my hearing hath beene
rung in his eares) Vade & ne pecca amplius,
ne deterius conting at tibi.
            
            There was alſo (as he reporteth) a
young girle of the age of ten yeeres, or
thereabout, who then crying ſaid vnto
him, O my Mother, O my ſiſter, which
are downe vnder the timber and rubbiſh.
But hee wiſhing her to be patient,
and telling her that by Gods grace they
ſhould get forth quickly, the child replied,
that this would proue a great ſcandall
to their Religion. A ſtrange ſpeech
proceeding from a childe of ſo tender
yeeres, who, euen in that perplexity, ſeemed
to haue a deeper apprehenſion of
publique ſcandall, then of priuate loſſe.

               A leſſon fit for farre elder to learne, ex
ore infantium, & lactentium, &c. Out of
the mouth of babes and ſucklings thou haſt
ordained ſtrength.
            Moreouer, one of the men that fell,
then ſaying, O what aduantage will
our aduerſaries take at this; another of
them replied thereto, If it be Gods will
this ſhould befall vs, what can wee
ſay to it? A pious anſwer, and Chriſtian
reſolution, borrowed, as it ſeemes,
from the patience of the Prophet Dauid,
Tacui, Domine, quia tu feciſti. I held
my peace, becauſe thou, Lord, hast done it.
            
            An hard taske it were to vndertake
the giuing a particular account of the
number and quality of thoſe that any
waies ſuffered in this fall, the diuerſity
of reports, according to mens priuate
inclinations, enlarging or contracting
the ſame. In generall moſt euident it is
that of the people that fell, thoſe that
eſcaped beſt for bodily hurt, were, at

               
                  〈◊〉
                howſoeuer deeply ſtricken in their
minds with affright and feare: others were
bruiſed or wounded, but not mortally,
receiuing only a gentle ſtripe from the mercifull
hand of a chaſtizing father; others
for the preſent came forth, or rather were
carried out, with life, but enioyed it for a
ſhort time, yeelding vp the ſame in their ſeuerall
homes within a few daies, yea ſome
not many houres, as by after-enformation
to the Coroners Iury, yet depending, may
appeare. But the greater number of thoſe
that fell neuer roſe againe, nor ſhall, till the
Elements ſhall melt with heat, and the ruines
of a farre greater fabrique than that
houſe, (euen of the whole earth with the
workes thereof) ſhall awake them, and vs
all, out of the bed of death, to giue account
of what we haue done in the body.
            Of theſe, whom it pleaſed God thus to
call out of this world, the number is moſt
currently eſtimated to be betweene 90. and
100. If any man, out of affection to them,
or curioſity, enquire more exactly, of the

Ambaſſadours houſe, was digged a great
pit, (eighteene foot long, and twelue foot
broad) in which were laied foure and forty
corpſes in order, piled one vpon the other,
partners in the ſame bed, as a little before
they were in the ſame paſſage to it. Vpon this
common Graue, was ſet vp in the earth, a
blacke Croſſe of wood, about foure foot
high, which on Tueſday in the afternoone,
was by one of the Ambaſſadors ſeruants
taken vp and carried into the houſe, leſt (as
it ſeemeth) any ſcandall ſhould bee taken
thereat by the people, that then, and after,
came to that houſe to view the Stage of this
mournfull Tragedy.
            There was alſo another pit, (long twelue
foot, broad eight foot) made in the ſaid Ambaſſadors
Garden neere adioyning, wherein
fifteene other were interred.
            Beſide theſe diſperſedly here aboue numbred,
there are heard of vpon diligent enquirie
of the ſaid Iury and others, diuers more
encreaſing the liſt of this funerall troope,
whoſe names follow in the Catalogue.
            
               
As for interpretation and application
of this ſo remarkeable and dolefull
an accident, our duty is firſt to entertaine
a Chriſtian and charitable opinion
of their perſons whoſe lot it was
to become an example vnto others: and
ſecondly to make a profitable vſe thereof
vnto our ſelues.
            Too well knowne it is to the world,
how hardly our aduerſaries conceiue,
ſpeake, and write, not onely of our Religion,
but alſo of our perſons, damning
and tumbling downe all of vs
without difference into the bottomleſſe
pit of deſtruction, and throwing
vpon our heads, not the ruines of
one loft or houſe, but the whole
mountaines of Gods wrath and heauieſt
iudgements. Such curſes and
edicts of damnation againſt vs their
pulpits thunder out, their printing
preſſes grone vnder, their pamphlets
and libells proclaime; all wee are giuen

gone for Caſt-awaies, Miſcreants,
damned Heretiques; With vs no
Church, no Faith, no Religion, no
God.
            If ſuch a calamitie had befallen any
flocke of ours in our Common prayer,
or Sermons, all muſt haue gone quicke
to hell: there would haue beene more
inuectiue ſeuerall cenſures and bookes
againſt vs than were here perſons ſuffering.
What exclamation of the downfall
of hereſie, of the paſſing away of
nouelties with a cracke, of receiuing a
terrible blow, of the very beames in the
wall crying out againſt vs, of the ruine
of old wormeaten hereſies, of the traſh
and rubbiſh of the new Goſpell demoliſhed.
In ſuch ſort vpon leſſe occaſions,
are wee and our profeſſion traduced
and ſlandered publikely beyond
the ſeas, and priuately in corners at
home. Nor is it maruell that ſuch
flaſhes to ſcorch vs in our good names,

are caſt forth out of that fiery Aetna of
Romiſh zeale, which hath ſent forth
materiall flames to conſume many of
our liuing bodies, and ſome alſo of
our dead. Hic liuor nec poſt fata quieſcit.
And though this fire hath beene
couered with aſhes in theſe parts, for
many happy yeares, yet of late a ſparke
thereof brake forth, euen in the middeſt
of the bonfires kindled in London at
the happy returne of our Prince; when
as a certaine Roman Zelote,This party was one of the aſſembly, yet liuing, and receiued a marke of remēbrance there, by a peece of wood, who thus a little before took care for ſauing wood. repining
at the exceſſiue expenſe of fuell therein,
ſaid openly in the hearing of many that
if ſuch waſte of wood were made, there
would ſhortly be neuer a fagot left to
burne heretiques.
            But we haue otherwiſe learned
Chriſt, who being reuiled, did not reuile
againe, but committed his cauſe to him that
iudgeth righteouſly; Et preces effudit pro
ijs etiam, qui ſanguinem eius effuderūt; and
powred out prayers for thoſe, that ſhed

and powred forth his bloud, (as ſaith
an ancient Father.) From him we learne
not to inſult ouer our enemies, or to reioyce
at their ruine, but to weepe at
their calamitie: not to enter into Gods
ſecrets, but to tremble at his iudgements.
            And therefore our dutie, in regard
of their perſons, is firſt to be tender
and carefull how ſo much as in our
inward thoughts we paſſe any particular
iudgement vpon them. For though
the euent it ſelfe may ſeeme to offer a
topicall inference from the fall of both
the floores; namely, of the preaching
and the Maſſing roome, that both
their Doctrine and Sacrifice are weakely
and ſlenderly ſupported, and that
God was diſpleaſed as well with their
Pulpits, as Altars; yet for the particular
eſtate of thoſe who were combined in
that action, and enueloped in the ſame
paſſion, it were moſt vncharitable and

groundleſſe from their temporall deſtruction
in this time and place, to collect
their eternall confuſion.
            And howſoeuer our Aduerſaries for
the truth of their Church draw an Argument
no leſſe vnnaturall than vncharitable,
from the ſuppoſed, ſudden,
and vnhappy ends, of ſome of thoſe
whom they call Heretiques, and to that
end forge hideous fables of the death
of Luther, Caluin, &c. and in particular,
very lately ſome of them haue paſſed
an heauy cenſure vpon Doctor Sutton,
a learned and painefull Preacher, and
ſolid Refuter of their errors, whom to
the great loſſe of our Church,
            Abſtulit vnda vorax & funere merſit
acerbo,
            Ouer whom they triumph, as if the
deepe therefore ſwallowed him, becauſe
he was vnworthy to tread vpon
the earth, or breathe in the ayre; Yet we
ought to be, and are farre from ſaying

that the Plancher of that building
would not beare theſe Romaniſts, becauſe
they were more loaden with the
weight of ſinne, then others. Wee are
taught by the Chapter appointed in the
Kalender to bee read in our Churches
the very next morning after this dolefull
accident, to iudge otherwiſe. Luke
13. There were preſent at that ſeaſon,
ſome that told him of the Galileans, whoſe
bloud Pilate had mingled with their ſacrifices.
And Ieſus anſwered, and ſaid vnto
them, Suppoſe yee that theſe Galileans
were greater ſinners then all the other Galileans,
becauſe they haue ſuffered ſuch
things? I tell you nay.
            
            Secondly, wee are to condole for
them, and that in three reſpects. Firſt,
out of naturall humanitie, as they are
men, of the ſame mould with vs, ſubiect
all to the ſame paſſions, and liable

to the ſame outward calamities, and
dangers of this mortall life. In this
conſideration euery of vs is to ſay to
himſelfe, of himſelfe and others.
            Homo ſum, humani nihil à me alienum
puto.
            Secondly, out of morall ciuilitie, as
fellow-borne Country-men, and naturall
Subiects vnto the ſame moſt gracious
King, in whoſe eies the death of his
meaneſt Subiects is precious. In this
reſpect euery of vs, either preſently
viewing that Tragicall ſpectacle of ſo
many bruiſed and battered carkaſes, ſo
many ſmothered corpſes, which yeſterday
breathed the ſame Engliſh aire with
vs: Or ſhortly after hearing of ſo wofull
an Hiſtorie, is, with teares in the
eye, and melting griefe in the heart, to
deplore at leaſt with ſome ſuch Epitaph,

or funerall Elegie, as was vſed by
a Lacedemonian.
            
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            Thirdly and principally, out of Chriſtian
charitie, as towards thoſe who
profeſſe the name of Chriſt, and deuotion
in his worſhip, howſoeuer tainted
with many errors and ſuperſtitions, of
which their Leaders and Guides are
more guilty than the ſimple obedient
flocke miſled by them. In this duty
we are euery of vs to grieue for thoſe
that are gone, and to commiſerate
with the holy Apoſtle, the preſent
eſtate of ſuch other as remaine captiuated
in the ſame blindneſſe of Ignorance,
Rom. 9. & 10. I have great
heauineſſe, and continuall ſorrow in my
heart, for my Brethren, my Kinſmen according
to the fleſh. Brethren, my hearts
deſire and praier to God for Iſrael, is
that they might bee ſaued. For I beare
them record, that they haue a zeale of

God, but not according to knowledge.
            
            This for our conſtruction hereof, as
we looke downe vpon others in their
fall. Now for our inſtruction as this
example reflecteth vpward vpon our
ſelues. Wherein firſt our ingratitude is
checked, and thankefulneſſe awaked
which we owe vnto God for our manifold
preſeruations, as in other kindes
perpetually, ſo not ſeldome in this.
Surely if our heauenly Father ſhould
ceaſe his care of preſeruing vs, as we
too oft giue ouer our due care of ſeruing
him, nor field, nor houſe, nor Church
it ſelfe ſhould be ſafe vnto vs: carnall
ſecurity and forgetfulneſſe of God creeping
into not only our chambers, halls,
and receptacles of mirth and iollity, but
too oft euen into the houſe of God it
ſelfe: the Temple of our ſpirituall ſacrifices
being not ſo reuerently frequented
as our duty and profeſſion require.
And yet, howſoeuer wee may obſerue

Gods hand ſometimes to haue ouertaken
diuers of our brethren by downfalls
vpon the earth, or into the water,
and of late by the fearefull dint of fire
darted from heauen with thunder, and
other humane caſualties, at home or
abroad, yet haue our ſacred aſſemblies
(for ought I can remember) beene
free from mortality by ruine. And
whereas we haue many examples of
the decay and ſudden lapſe of diuers
our materiall Temples made with
hands, yet hath God ſo diſpoſed of the
time or manner of ſuch ruines, that
none of the liuing Temples of the Holy
Ghoſt haue beene demoliſhed thereby.
Witneſſe in London the Churches
of Lothbury, of St. Butolfs, of St. Giles
in the fields, and the Church it ſelfe of
the Black-Friers: in all which the ſtones
forbare their downeward motion, till
the peoples abſence. And moſt lately
in the Towne of Neteſherd in Norffolk,
               
the beames of the Church roofe being
by the fall of the ſteeple beaten downe
among the people in time of Prayer, yet
not one periſhed thereby. To theſe perhaps
many reading and pondering this,
can adde other examples of the like preſeruations
in other places of this land.
The memory whereof muſt reuiue our
hearty thanks to God, with praier for
our future protection, eſpecially in
the houſes of praier, wherein he is
worſhipped in ſpirit and truth by vs,
and his word preached ſoundly and
faithfully vnto vs.
            Secondly, foraſmuch as ſome few of
this Aſſembly were not in opinion
Romaniſts, nor came thither out of affection
to the Popiſh partie, but rather
out of curioſitie, to obſerue their rites
and manner of Preaching, eſpecially
vpon the 
                  •
               ame giuen out, and expectation
of then and there hearing a rare
man, an admirable Ieſuite, a Preacher

               Nonpareil, in compariſon of whom the
greateſt Lights of the Proteſtant Miniſterie
are but Glowormes; this may be
a ſpeciall Caueat to ſuch roauing wanderers
as only taſted of that Cup whereof
others dranke the Dregs: they were
ſome of them iuſtly ſtricken in body,
though not mortally, but all in minde,
with terror, amazement, and horrible
conſternation. And one, as is ſaid, felt the
vtmoſt of that ſtroke, and for company
tooke part with thoſe in death, with
whom he conſented not in life and opinion.
Plinie the elder (as his Nephew reports
of him) paid deare for the ſatiſfaction
of his curioſitie, when, not
content with Contemplation, and
Relation from others, hee would
needes in perſon approach neere, to
behold with his eies the very flames
of the burning hill Veſuuius in Italy,
the ſulphureous ſmoake and vapour
whereof, preſently ſtifled him. To

come neerer to our ſelues, thoſe Chriſtians
eſcaped not much better, who
(as both Tertullian and Cyprian obſerue)
when they were preſent at the
Theaters and ſhewes, inſtituted to the
honour of the Heathen gods, were ſuddainly
ſurpriſed and vexed by the Deuill,
who was nimble enough to maintaine
his claime to them, by pleading
Inueni in meo, I tooke them as I found
them, vpon mine owne ground. What
though the Romaniſts preſume farre
without warrant, and dare out-face
our Lawes, which wholeſomly prouide
againſt ſuch conuenticles, yet let
euery obedient ſubiect and childe of
our Church, beware how he put his
foot into ſuch ſnares: reſoluing rather
with the holy Patriarch, and ſaying in
his heart, O my ſoule, enter not thou into
their ſecret:
               Gen. 49. 6 
               vnto their aſſembly mine
honour be not thou yoaked. In ſuch caſes
the Prophets haue vſed and enforced

from exorbitant examples argument,
not of imitation, but auerſation, and oppoſition.
Though Iſrael tranſgreſſe, yet
let not Iuda ſinne.
            
            Thirdly, for vs all, theſe dead corpſes
ought to bee a liuely mirror, wherein
we are to behold what we may expect
in that kinde, or ſome other, euen farre
worſe, if we doe not preuent and auert
Gods iudgements by iudging our ſelues,
and vnfeinedly repenting of our ſinfull
courſes. Out of ſuch examples our Sauiour
readeth vs a double Lecture, not
onely of charitie, in not cenſuring others,
but alſo of repentance, in cenſuring
and condemning our ſelues, that
we be not condemned of the Lord. Vnleſſe
yee repent,
               Luke 13. 4. 
               yee ſhall all likewiſe periſh.
A vaine plea it will be, That wee
haue caſt out of our Churches Romiſh
ſuperſtitions, if wee ſtill reteine in our
ſoules and bodies our predominant
corruptions; that our faith & doctrine

is moſt pure, if our liues remaine impure;
that we haue faire leaues & bloſſomes
in our outward profeſſion, if we
bring forth no fruit in our practiſe and
conuerſation. Reatus impij pium nomen,
ſaith the moſt religious Biſhop Saluian.
An holy Title and profeſſion,
if the life bee not ſutable, is, not a plea,
but a guilt, not a diminution of offence,
but an improuement. Well ſaid Tertullian
of himſelfe that, whereto euery of
vs is to ſubſcribe his owne name, Ego
omnium notatorū peccator, nulli rei, niſi poenitentiae,
natus. A ſinner I am, marked with
ſpots of all kinds, & born to no other end, thē
to make my life a taske of repentance. We
are all by profeſſion bound apprentiſes
to this Chriſtian trade, nay borne vnto
a kinde of intereſt and propriety to
it. Of all intelligent natures onely man
is capable of that. God cannot repent,
becauſe he cannot ſinne, nor erre: an
Angell, though mutable in his owne

nature, (and ſo liable to ſinne) yet once
falling by ſinne, can neuer riſe by repentance.
Onely man, falling, both in
the vniuerſall ruinous eſtate of all his
kinde, and daily in his actuall lapſes,
hath by the hand of Gods grace and
mercy in Chriſt, the cords of loue reached
forth, and let downe into the pit
vnto him, whereof by repentance and
faith he taketh hold, thence to be raiſed
to newneſſe of life, and ſo forward
to eternall life, through the merits and
paſſion of our bleſſed Redeemer, who
came, not to call the righteous, but ſinners
to repentance.
            
               LAMENT. 3. 22.
               It is of the Lords mercies that we are
not conſumed: becauſe his compaſsions
faile not.
            
         
         
            
            A Catalogue of the Names
of ſuch perſons as were ſlaine by the
fall of the roome wherein they were
in the Blacke-fryers, at Maſter Druries
Sermon, the 26. of Octob.
1623. Taken by information
of the Coroners Iurie.
            
               
                  
                     MAſter Drurie the Prieſt
that preached.
               
               Mr. Redy are the Prieſt,
whoſe lodging was vnder
the Garret that
fell: the floore of which
lodging fell too.
               
               
                  Lady Webbe in Southwarke.
               
               
                  Lady Blackſtones daughter, in Scroops
Court.
               
               Thomas Webbe her man.
               
               William Robinſon Taylor, in Fetter
lane.
               
               Robert Smith, Maſter 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  
Anne Dauiſon, Mr. Dauiſons daughter,
of the Middle-row in Holburne, Tayler.
               
               Anthonie Hall his man.
               
               Anne Hobdin.
               Marie Hobdin.
               
                  lodging in Mr. Dauiſons
houſe.
               
               Iohn Galloway Vintener, in Clarkenwell
Cloſe.
               
               Mr. Peirſon,
Iane his wife,
Thom. & Iames,
his two ſonnes.
               
               
                  in Robbinhood Court
in Shooe lane.
               
               
                  Miſtris Vdall.
               Katharine Pindar, a
Gentle woman in
Mrs. Vdals houſe.
               
               in gunpowder alley.
               Abigal her maide.
               
               Iohn Netlan a Taylor of Baſsingborne in
Cambridge ſhiere.
               
               Nathaniel Coales, lying at one Shortoes
in Barbican, Tayler.
               
               Iohn Halifaxe, ſometimes a Waterbearer.
               
               Mary Rygbie, wife to Iohn Rygbie in
Holburne, Confectioner.
               
               Iohn Worralls ſonne in Holburne.
               
               
                  
Thomas Brisket, his wife, and his ſonne,
and maide, in Mountague cloſe.
               
               
                  Miſtris Summers, wife to Captaine Summers
in the Kings Bench.
               
               Marie her maide.
               
               
                  Miſtris Walſted in Milkeſtreet.
               
               Iohn Raines, an Atturney in Weſtminſter.
               
               Robert Sutton, ſonne to Mr. Worral a
Potter in Holburne.
               
               Edward Warren, lying at one Adams a
Butcher, in Saint Clement Danes.
               
               
                  A ſon of Mr. Flood in Holborne, Scriuener▪
                  
               
               Elizabeth White, Andrew Whites daughter
in Holburne, Chandler.
               
               Mr. Stoker Tayler, in Salisburie Court.
               
               Elizabeth Sommers in Graies-Inne lane.
               
               Mr. Weſtwood.
               Iudeth Bellowes, wife of Mr. William
Bellowes in Fetter lane.
               
               
                  A man of Sir Lues Pembertons.
               Elizabeth Moore widow.
               
               Iohn Iames.
               Morris Beucreſſe Apothecarie.
               
               Dauie Vaughan, at Iacob Coldriches,
Tayler in Graies Inne lane.
               
               
                  
Francis Man, brother to William Man in
Theeuing lane in Weſtminſter.
               
               Richard Fitzgarrat, of Graies Inne, Gent.
               
               Robert Heifime.
               Mr. Maufeild.
               Mr. Simons.
               Dorothy Simons.
               Thomas Simons a boy.
               
               
                  In Feſant Court
in Cow lane.
               
               Robert Parker, neer Lond ſtone, Merchant.
               
               
                  Miſtris Morton, at White-fryers.
               
               
                  Miſtris Norton,
Marrian her maide.
               
               
                  at Mr. Babingtons
in Bloomesburie.
               
               Francis Downes, ſometimes in Southampton
houſe, Tayler.
               
               Edmond Shey, ſeruant to Robert Euan
of Graies Inne, Gent.
               
               Ioſilin Percy, ſeruant to Sr. Henry Caruile,
lying at Miſtris Ploidons houſe in
high Holburne.
               
               Iohn Tullye, ſeruant to Mr. Aſhborn, lying
at Mr. Barbers houſe in Fleetſtreeet.
               
               Iohn Sturges, the Lord Peters man.
               
               Thomas Elis, Sr. Lewis Treſhams man.
               
               Michael Butler in Woodſtreet, Grocer.
               
               
                  
Iohn Button, Coachman to Miſtris Garret
in Bloomesberry.
               
               
                  Miſtris Ettonet, lying at Clearkenwellgreene.
               
               Edward Reuel, ſeruant to Maſter Nicholas
Stone the Kings Purueyor.
               
               Edmund Welſh, lying with Mr. Sherlock
in high Holborne, Tailer.
               
               Bartholomew Bauin, in White Lyon
Court in Fleetſtreet, Clarke,
               
               Dauie an Iriſh man, in Angell Alley in
Graies Inne Gent.
               
               Thomas Wood, at Mr. Woodfalls ouer
against Graies Innegate.
               
               Chriſtopher Hopper, Tailer lying there.
               
               George Cranſton, in Kings ſtreet in Weſtminſter,
Tailer.
               
               Iohn Blitten.
               Iane Turner, lying at one Gees in the old
Baily.
               
               Frithwith Anne.
               
                  Miſtris Elton.
               Mr. Walſteed.
               Marie Berrom.
               
                  
Henry Becket, lying at Miſtris Clearks
houſe in Northumberland Alley in Fetter
lane.
               
               Sarah Watſonne, daughter to Maſter
Watſonne a Chirurgian.
               
               Iohn Beuans, at the ſeuen Stars in Drury
lane.
               
               
                  Maſter Harris.
               
                  Miſtris Tompſon, at Saint Martins within
Alderſgate, Habberdaſher.
               
               Richard F
                     ••
                  guift.
               George Ceauſtour.
               
                  Maſter Grimes, neere the Horſ-ſhooe tauerne
in Drury lane.
               
               Mr. Knuckle a Painter dwelling in Cambridge.
               
               
                  Maſter Fowell, a Warwickſhire Gent.
               
               
                  Maſter Gaſcoine.
               Francis Buckland and Robert Hutten,
both ſeruants to Maſter Saule Confectioner
in Holburne.
               
               Iohn Lochey, a Scriueners ſonne in Holburne.
               
               
                  One William ſeruant to Maſter Eirkum.
               
                  
Iohn Brabant, a Painter in Little-Brittaine.
               
               William Knockell, A man-ſeruant of Mr.
Buckets a Painter in Alderſgate ſtreet.
               
               
                  One Barbaret,
Walter Ward,
Richard Garret,
               
                  enquired after, but not
found.
               
            
            The particulars concerning thoſe that ſuffered
in this lamentable accident, hath beene ſo
obſcured that no exact account could bee had
of them, no maruell then that dilligence of enquiry
could not preuent ſome miſtake in the
catalogue formerly printed with this Relation;
which catalogue is now renewed and rectified,
by more certaine intelligence than heretofore
hath beene related.
            FINIS.
         
      
   