
      
         
            
            
            BACCHVS BOVNTIE,
            Deſcribing the debonaire dietie of his
bountifull godhead, in the royall obſeruance
of his great feaſt of Pentecoſt.
            
               Neceſſarie to be read and marked of all, for
the eſchuing of like enormities.
            Faecundi calices quem non fecere diſertum?
            By Philip Foulface of Ale-foord, ſtudent
in good felloſhip.
            AT LONDON
Printed for Henry Kyrkham, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop, at
the little north dore of Paules Church, at the ſigne
of the black Boy. 1593.
         
         
            
            
            To the right worthie, and renowmed
Roiſter, Sir Richard Swaſh, Lorde and Master
on mount Maluorn, cheefe controller on Salisburie
plaine, keeper of Accounts-in the Cart-way, chiefe Foster in
the foreſt of Dalamere, high Generall of the Downes, Baron
of Birlip hill, Sergeant of the Shoares and Sea ſide, and
Vicar of the Vallies: your dayly Orator Philip Foulface,
wiſheth all health, wealth, might, long
life, and proſperous ſucceſſe, in all
your affaires and enterpriſes
where ſo euer.
            
               WHen Iupiters head was great with
childe, and the time of trauaile nere
at hand: he skorning to complaine,
yet put to his ſhiftes, was faine to
ſend for Vulcan the Smith, to craſe
his crowne with a downedriuing
blow; not only to cauſe the ſwelling
to ceaſe, but alſo to prouide
paſſage for the birth of his babe. Which thing when
Vulcan had performed in giuing him a ſound pat on the
pate, out ſtart Pallas at the opening of his head, and danced
before him ſo maiden-like, that the preſent ſight ſo
pleaſant, expelled all former paines in the birth. Euen ſo
(moſt worthie ſir) when the confuſed Chaos of this matter
following, was firſt inhabitant in my witleſſe head:
then feared I no ſuch ſwellings, as ſince I did feele, nor regarded
thoſe throwes, which now are ouerpaſt. Neuertheleſſe,

when my braines fell to their buſines, and began
to beate as tho my head had been ready to burſt, diſdaining
withall the help of mother Crackfart the Midwife;
Iuno Lucina was as deafe as a diſhclout, ſo that Volens
nolens I betooke my ſelfe to the hearbe Hellebore, whoſe
pleaſant operation produced ſo preſent a purgation, that
forthwith there followed a moſt ſpeedie deliuerance, excluding
cares, renuing ioy. This young impe thus borne,
being brought to the font, was named Bacchus Bounty.
Which Bounty I willingly offer vnto your worthines;
doubting not at all, but that you will highly accept of
him; not only becauſe he is a bonny boy, and the gift of
a welwiller: but alſo becauſe hee was begot by Bacchus
your welbeloued friend; conceaued by me, & nouriſhed
euer ſince with the iuice of the grape. From Ale-foorde
this 9. of December. Anno Dom. 1592.
            
               Bounden to your bignes,
Philip Foulface.
            
         
         
            
            Philip Foulface to the
courteous Reader.
            
               
                  SO many men (ſome ſay) ſo many mindes,
               The braueſt Gnatho cannot but offend:
               Mens mindes doe wauer like vnconstant windes,
               Hard then ſometimes to pleaſe our dearest friend.
               Some hungrie curre may bark aboue the rest,
               But pleaſe, or displeaſe, I haue done my best.
            
            
               He that delights to heare of mortall warres
               Is too austere to reade this little booke:
               But he that ioyes to heare of good ale iarres,
               I licence him with leaue herein to looke.
               Here (gentle reader) maiest thou finde great ſport
               To eaſe thy cares, if hither thou reſort.
            
            
               And welcome all, which reade and meane none ill,
               No further ill than I, and welcome all:
               A mery minde to mirth enclineth ſtill
               If waightie cauſes doe not backward call.
               Be mery then: reade here, and doe not ſpare,
               And welcome ſtill: here is no better fare.
            
            FINIS.
            
               Philip Foulface.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            BACCHVS BOVNTIE,
            Deſcribing the debonaire dietie of his
bountifull godhead, in the royall obſeruance
of his great feaſt of Pentecoſt.
            
               
                  Quint. Allicit externas praeſuaui nectare gentes.
                  Polit. —non mollia pleno
                  Deſunt vina cado.
               
            
            
               THe groutheaded Graecians, eſpeciallie the
annointed Achiues, I meane the Beziladiſtes,
thoſe deuout doctors of Lob libers
canne, theſe (I ſay) with their knightlike
crue, thought it an high aſſumption to be
as fathers in a frolicke feaſte, or as baſe
borne brothers, in bickering with the
broth of bountifull Bacchus. Which
coppernoſed crue, the Knuckledebunions of Rome▪
                ſo aſſaulted
with a freſh Canuazado the citie of Vinoſa, that the alarum
of the Romans brake Nectars necke, head, and ſhoulders;
in ſo much that Veſta in great outrage ruſhed out of a rocke,
and dedicated to ſwéet father Bacchus as Crimſon a colour as
was then ſéene in her péereles peticote, moſt fragrantlie fuming
vp vnto Bacchus; and likewiſe into the noſtrills of all
his noſled nouiſes whereſoeuer.
            This newfound Sacrifice in this ſort offered to this burſten-bellied
God; lent ſuch a ſwéet ſent to the reſt of the gods
and goddeſſes, eſpecially to platter-faced Iupiter, that preſently
he appeaſed their furie, mitigated the afore offered iniurie,

renued Nectar to former iollitie, & ſent out Mercurie as Ambaſſadour,
to parle with Neptune rector of the Seas; that
Triton his truſtie trumpeter ſhould ſound along from ſhoare
to ſhoare throughout the whole worlde the bleſſed bountie of
Bacchus.
            
            
               Mercury diſcharging himſelfe, and Triton by commaundement
of his king, tied to the aforeſaid chardge, with clattering
clang he thundred out ſuch ioyfull newes, that not only
mount AEtna yeelded forth fierie flames in ſignification of
ſodaine ioyes: but alſo Olympus merily mounted, in hope that
Permeſſus that pleaſant ſpring, ſhould bée ſomewhat tainted
with the ſwéet taſte of ſo louely a liquor.
            The decréed tidings of Iupiter are worde by worde in effect
as followe.
            
               PAſſe Mercury to Neptunes briniſh bowers,
               My wiſh, my will, in haſt to him vnfolde;
               Let Tryton ſcale thoſe hieſt fleeting towers,
               In Bacchus praiſe let all his tale be tolde.
               Let him commaund, the Curiſts change their liues,
               In vaine ſtriues he, with Bacchus brood which ſtriues.
            
            
               The Bacchanals hence forth ſhall beare the ſway
               With help of Hypocrites they ſhall doe well,
               This gift I giue, it ſhall be as I ſay,
               Their forwardnes in fraies ſhall beare the bell.
               I giue them right to ſweare it out with wordes,
               I giue them might to ſwaſh it out with ſwordes.
            
            
               I will that theſe the auncient order holde,
               Th'order of knighthood neuer to decay:
               The greateſt ſoakers ſhalbe leaſt controulde,
               Each Tyro ſhall of Nectar make his pray:
               And whoſe conceipts God Bacchus deemes the beſt,
               Shall haue a rich reward aboue the reſt.
            
            
               
               Come Ganimedes, come with chriſtall cups,
               Some nappie Nectar bring me here in place,
               Accurſt be he which Nectar only ſups,
               And turns not ouer pot by pot apace.
               Accurſt be he which after Ceres gapes,
               And ſhunnes to ſucke the ſugred ſappe of grapes.
            
            
               In griefe liue they with carkes of cares oppreſt,
               Which leaue their liquor and away depart,
               Till Bacchus haue them crowned with his creſt,
               Whoſe force expelles all ſorrowes from the hart.
               With Viuat Bacchus, let the Ocean ring
               The ſame let Africk, Aſia, and Europe ſing.
            
            Now Eccho, the babbling nymph at the ſound of Tritō, hauing
intelligence hereof; reſounded this decrée ſo mightilie
towards the maine, that it eaſily entred into the hearing of
all the inhabitants in euery hauen. And euen as at the bellewing
of the bonnie white Bul, the ardent heates of Paſiphaë
were more & more increaſed; in ſo much that one horne of his
head, was more precious in her preciſe imagination, then all
her former ſacrifices dedicated as dainties to delectable Diana:
euen ſo as ſoone as the bruite of moſt bountifull Bacchus
was blazed abroad, Tom Typſay, an engliſh tapſter, wel-nere
choaked with a marueilous drie heat, which he of late had got
by lifting ouerlong at old mother Redcaps; this Tom Typſay,
I ſay, with a wel tried tankard trailing at his taile: the more
he thought of Bacchus bountie, the more he deſired to trie the
experience: and the further hée laboured after his liking; the
longer he luſted after his liquor: wiſhing at euery foote, the
worthie preſence of ſo gracious a God.
            Thus Tom Typſay, not only in hope to tipple with the beſt,
but truſting to merite a further rewarde: fell flat downe on
both his maribones, holding vp his hands on hie towardes
the heauens, and made his Oriſon to the renoumed god Bacchus,
as hereafter followeth.
            
               
               BOnny Bacchus God of wines,
               Cheefe maintainer of our vines,
               Sucker the ſoule, in greefe which pines,
               Water to drinke, I hold not good,
               Thy iuice oh Bacchus breeds beſt blood.
               Nectar (good Bacchus) Nectar ſend,
               
               Braue Bacchus doe thy bounty lend:
               Vnto Tom Typſay ſtand a frend,
               And ſo thy fame ſhall neuer ende.
               
                  Nectar, ſweet Nectar, is my wiſh,
               Behold my tankard, and my diſh,
               As for my plate I haue it ſolde,
               And for pure broath my money tolde;
               Yet once againe let me beholde,
               Euery morning warme or colde,
               Nappie liquor ſtout and bolde
               Commended and boaſted
               In a pot trimly toaſted,
               The pots feet finely roaſted
               In a worthie fire.
               And firſt of all for my part,
               To beſiege and ſacke the quarte
               Till it warme me well at hart,
               And then doe it feele
               Sincke downe into my heele:
               And ſo next to take the paines
               To paſſe vpward through the vaines,
               And ſoake withall into theſe braines,
               Which witles now alas remaines
               For want of good liquor.
            
            Scarſe had he ended this his petitory prattle, but Bacchus
as willing to lend him a long eare to heare, as hée to open a
wide mouth to aſke: and as deſirous to fetch him in for a foot
man, as to turne him off his truſſe, & as ready to féed him as
fat as a foole, as to teach him the tricke to ſhue the go
                  •
               ſe: preſently

he rouſed vp his moyſty head, and from a muddie mufe
ſo cléered vp his cherilike countenance, that the maieſtie of
his noſe ſéemed as the beames of the ſunne ſhining along
throughout the coaſtes of Archadie. But miſſing the ſight
of him whom he lately heard, forthwith he tumbled vpon his
tunne, and ſtanding bolt vpright, through the merueilous influence
which to him was imparted by Euriopazeus; he ſaw
Tom Tipſay in an excéeding quandary, in ſo much that Bacchus
for very pittie, through the might of his deitie, ſo curiouſly
ſoared through the airie region, that in a moment he deſcried
this perplexed Tapſter, and drawing nere him, he hailſtd
him after this maner.
            Whereas (my friend) thy groanes are ſo great and grieuous,
that they haue aſcended the hieſt cloudes, which cry out
in thy behalfe for my accuſtomed clemency, and pierced withall
into my bountifull tunne, which now troubled with the
ſharpnes of thy ſpéech, threates out a danger to her former
ſwauitie: behold Bacchus, Bacchus I ſay, thy beſt beloued god,
ready preſt to performe what thou art willing to demaunde.
            Say on therefore boldly and feare not: and withall know
this, that Bacchus hath not only a care to kéepe his clients in
ſafety, but great cauſe (no doubt) to preſerue them in felicity:
for who is he that hath euer heard, much leſſe ſéene, that any
of the gods, at any time ſo tendred the welfare of their ſuppliants,
as from age to age, both dayly and hourely béen ſéene in
me. The tyrannie of Iupiter is teſtified by his threatning
thunderbolte: the malice of Mars is expreſſed by his bloody
blade. The outrage of Pallas is diſſembled by the booke; but
euidently perceiued by the piercing launce. The broyles of
Pan are performed by the crooke. The furie of Syluanus is
knowne by the Clubbe: the diſmall decrées of Diana are noted
by her dartes, and to be briefe, all the other gods and goddeſſes,
Hercules like are cloyed with ſuch cholericke clubbs;
that their mouthes taſte nothing ſauing wordes of wrath,
and their déeds ſéeme vndecent, vnleſſe they ſmel of reuenge.
            But Bacchus that braue god, whom thou ſéeſt here preſent,

abhorreth that his wightes ſhould bee wearied with the
waight of ſuch vnweildie weapons. No, no, I beare (as thou
maieſt ſée) a beautifull braunch of goodly grapes in token of
ioy & gladnes: whereas the terrour of other gods, to the griefe
of many, doth prognoſticate ſorrow and ſadnes.
            Now therefore Tapſter, if thou wilt be as readie to make
trial of my bountie, as I willing to inuite thée to my banquet;
beholde, Whilſon-wéeke is néere at hand, then are my feaſts
called Bacchanalia; then reſort together the whole band of
Bacchus in their chiefeſt brauerie, amongſt whome (if it ſo
pleaſe thée) thou ſhalt be entertained as a gueſt moſt welcom
to Bacchus.
            
            
               Tom Typſay hearing ſo courteous a diſcourſe, as a man
marueilouſly amazed for ioy, ſtood a long time ſtaring in Bacchus
face, not able poore ſoule (as then) to make a reply. But
Bacchus, a perfect phiſitian willing to preſerue his patient in
ſo pitifull a plight, reuiued his ſpirites with the ſwéet moyſture
of his tunne, and refreſhed his braines with the iuice of
his grapes. Hereat Tom Typſay awaking as it were from a
drouſie ſlumber, yéelded to his god Bacchus a tub full of
thankes, and promiſed at the time appointed to bée there
with the firſt. Yet becauſe hée knew not the place, hée demanded
of him thus.
            Sith your worſhips godhead hath vouchſafed to commaund
my companie to ſo famous a feaſt; let it not diſpleaſe
your maieſtie to put mee in memorie of the place:
elſe by the maſſe, I promiſe you, I feare mée, I ſhall neuer
finde out your honours houſe; I pray you ſir how do you
call it?
            To reſolue this doubt (quoth Bacchus) vnderſtand therefore,
that my manſion houſe is called Alepotto, ſcituate on
the ſouth ſide of Quaffington, enquire for mée at the ſigne
of the ſcarlet noſe, and from thence ſhalt thou bée ſet aright
into Beerebury lane, ſo that being there, thou canſt not
miſſe to finde out my palace, for thou ſhalt plainely ſée it
before thine eyes.
            
               
Hereat Tom Typſay made a long legge, vowing to bée
there without faile, and Bacchus willing to diſmiſſe him,
bleſſed the Tapſters tankard with part of his bountie, and
thereupon departed.
            Thus the Tapſter in great haſte hies him home as mery
as any hare in the moneth of March. For whereas before
this ſo comfortable a conference, hée was ſo lazie, that euery
foote ſéemed to haue a leaden héele: euerie legge in
ſuch a quandarie, as though they had tooke ſome new acquaintance
with the goute; yea his very head ſo heauie,
as if it had béene harneſſed in an horſe-nightcap: and his
whole bodie ſo diſtempered, as though he had beene prickt
to the very heart with a belclapper: beholde, nowe the
caſe is altred, and hée is altogether become another man:
for now is hée as nimble as a dogs taile, as couragious
as a butterflie, and as merrie at the heart, as the beſt
paire of bagpipes in all the countrey.
            But as times are altred, ſo diuers accidents are inferred.
Happie was Midas when it was graunted vnto
him, that all which hée touched ſhould bée golde: but ſoone
haples againe, when his meate was metamorphoſed into
metall, and hée with his wiſh ready to ſtarue. Glad was
Acteon at the ſight of Diana, when ſhee bathed her ſelfe
amongſt her nimphes: but luckles was his lot, when
ſhortly after hée became himſelfe a preſent pray to bée deuoured
of his owne dogs. And ioyfull was Tom Typſay in
remembraunce of the bountie of his god Bacchus, but ſorrowfull
alas at his returne when firſt hée came within
the viewe of his wife: for ſhée (as is the manner of all
headie huſwiues, whoſe tongues are more readie to raue,
than their hands to worke) not ſticking one iot to teache
him a new leſſon, tooke him roundly by the topping, and
welcomed him home after this manner.
            Ah ah ſirra, I ſée by Aſtronomie that the Moone is
euen now at full, and the ſigne ſetled iuſt in the noſe: in ſo

much that (as by all mathematicall probabilities I doe coniecture)
backe and bellie may this yeare both goe bare, ſo
that there be no want of harnes for the head. Well, well I
néed not to tel thée what thou art, the gilding of thy noſe ſufficiently
bewraies thy good behauiour. In ſo much that either
Luna hath come downe alone, and in taking thée for her olde
Endimion, hath made thée her newe Moone face: or (as thy
tottering too and fro doth plainely teſtifie) thou haſt had ſome
long tariance at Simon Soakers houſe, the coppernoſe ſmith,
your euer aſſured friend. But one thing aſſure thée, for ſo am
I certainely perſwaded, that as the diuell hath already dubbed
thée for a drunkard: ſo hereafter, one time or other, but
neuer too late, Don Tyburne will inuite thée to a liueles feaſt,
and teach thée the croſſe caper in an halfepennie halter. And
thus in a fuſtian fume flung away.
            If true it be, as many report, that a curſt queanes tongue
is as ſharpe as a razor: experience then proueth, that this
poore ſhaueling néeded no better a barber. How euer it be, I
will referre it to their rehearſall, which haue had their
crownes ſmoothed as well with a crabtrée combe, as thoſe
which haue tried the ſharpnes of the ſiſers.
            But euen as the clap of the thunder the greater it is, the
ſooner it ceaſeth: and the blaſtes of Boreas the more furious
they are, the leſſe while is their continuance: ſo likewiſe, a
womans mouth the more full it is of wordes, the leſſe it is of
force, and ſooner it waſteth into winde. The falling out of
louers is the renuing of loue, and the bitternes of the tongue
is eaſely ſeaſoned with the ſwéetnes of the lippes: for what
with pleaſing ſpéeches, ſwéete conceipts, the clinking of the
pot, and the drinking of new Nectar, theſe two ſwéete ſoules
became both as one, and the heate of their former furies were
frozen vp as it were into a lake of euerlaſting loue.
            Thus whiles this couple continued in ſolacing themſelues
to their hearts content, behold Whitſontide drew on: and to
be briefe, away they both doe walke to the banquet, but becauſe
theſe gueſtes were wrapped vp in their chiefeſt roabes;

it wil not be a miſſe to deſcribe them in their chéefeſt brauery,
as they paſſed along on their iorney.
            
               THe Tapſters hat was all in blew:
               Beſeeming well his nut-browne hiew:
               His noſe was ruddy as I weene
               And bending as the Faucons beene.
               His thin-ſet heire along did ſit
               Which repreſents a woodcocks wit,
               Yet bald withall was Tipſay found
               With eares ſide hanging like a hound.
               His eyes were fiery on each ſide
               His mouth was open gaping wide,
               His lippes great as cable rope,
               His teeth white as waſht in ſope.
               A briſtled beard did flower his cheekes,
               His breath was ſweete as vnſet leekes.
               Vpon his chinne a wart did grow
               
                  Bacchus thereby might well him know.
               About his neck he wore a ruffe
               A quarter long, which was enuffe.
               His iacket gray, well fac'd with furre,
               His voyce was like a barking curre.
               His ſhoulders did like horſeloues ſtand,
               As pillers to vphold his band.
               His back was ridged like a boare,
               His belly like a tunne before.
               There hangs a tap betweene his legs
               From whence he turneth foorth his dregs.
               On either hand was placde a cuffe,
               And brauely was he breecht in buffe.
               His leggs they were ſo crooked ſeene
               A yoked hog might run betweene.
               One foot was of the largeſt ſice
               The other clubbed crabtree wiſe.
               
                  
And here deſcribed is the gueſt
               Which Bacchus bad vnto his feaſt.
            
            Now as concerning the coſtly attire of the Tapſters wiſe,
becauſe I am in haſt at this time, I am rather willing to ſlip
ouer ſo cumberſome a matter with filence, than to trouble idle
heads with matters of ſo great importaunce.
            As they thus traueled togeather, at length they obteined
their long deſired hauen, and entered into the Pallace of
god Bacchus, where they were, ſo worthilie entertayned,
that the ſunne in his midday ſpheare ſhining out moſt brightlie,
doth ſcarce halfe repreſent ſuch glorie, as was by report
ſéene in this feaſt. For whereas commonly now a daies, wée
either inuite them of our acquaintance, or ſuch whoſe new-found
friendſhip may be as meanes to cure olde ſoares: this
mightie god Bacchus, to the wonder of the worlde, inuiteth
not onely ſuch as bée his familiars, but men altogether vnknowne,
as well the poore as the rich.
            Sée then the goodnes of this ſo gracious a god, al yée, which
in the drieſt drought of ſummer had rather ſhroude your
throates with a handfull of hemp, then with the expence of
an odde Crinclepouch waſh your ſelues within and without,
and make your ſelues as mery as dawes: yea learne yée niggards
at god Bacchus to bée liuely; whoſe eſpeciall fauour
ſpreads out it ſelfe ſo far, that euery nation doth magnifie his
name, euery countrey ſpeakes in his commendation and all
people paint him out with pen and penſill, in ſo much that Iupiter
himſelfe doth wonder at his worthines.
            But to returne from whence I came, their entertainment
I ſay was ſuch, that they rather thought themſelues tranſported
into Paradice that place of pleaſure, then remayning
in any earthly habitation: for there they ſaw a royal reſort as
well of all lands and languages, as of all degrées and callings
whatſoeuer.
            There was Ganimedes ſent from Iupiter, to imploy his ſeruice
at Bacchus table, there was halting Hebe ſent by Iuno to

furniſh this feaſt with all ſolemnitie. There was Sylenus, a
ſtately ſeruitour, waiting at euery winke, & preuenting euery
want. Yea ſuch was the bounty of Bacchus, that he ſent downe
to Plutus prince of hell, and craued the company of diuers his
acquaintance, which Plutus performed accordingly.
            Thither rode great Alexander vpō the back of prauncing Bucephalus,
brauely accōpanied with Sardanapalus king of Aſſiria,
quéene Semiramis and Ninus her ſonne, firſt founders of Babilō.
            
            After theſe came Claudius Tiberius, the Romaine Emperour,
who for the zeale hée had to the vintrée, was merely termed
Caldius Biberius mero: with him came Caligula, Nero, and Heliogabalus,
Anthonie, Cleopatra, and ſuch like.
            After theſe againe came ſtumbling in blind Homer the grecian
poet, and with him came Ariſtophanes, Menander, & others:
and along with theſe came Virgill, Horace, Ouid, olde father Ennius,
Geffery Chaucer, Lydgate, Anthony Skelton, Will. Elderton▪
               
with infinite mo, whoſe ſeuerall names to rehearſe, were no les
labour then to make a mouſe to piſſe ouer Poules, or a louſe to
leap ouer the high tops of Maluerne hills.
            Moreouer after theſe came young Cicero, who for the large
looſe that he had in turning downe his liquor, was called Bicongius;
with him came the blockheaded Balatronus, and Vibidius,
Mecenas trencher-mates: & that old huddle and twang Ariſtodemus,
the ſhadow of Saint Socrates.
            
            And Proſerpina the infernall quéene, willing to honour Bacchus
in what ſhe might, releaſeth Tantalus from out of the riuer,
cauſeth Syſiphus to ceaſe from his tumbling taſke, ſets Ixion frée
from his torture: cals downe Prometheus, and compels the vultures,
deuouring his heart, to ceaſe from their pray, and for the
tune only that Bacchus feaſt continueth, ſhe doth licence them al
to depart.
            Glad were they to be releaſed tho but for a time, and glad was
Bacchus that it was his lot to welcome ſuch willing gueſtes.
            As Bacchus was thus moſt buſie amongſt his friends, behold
a reuerend route reſorted towardſt his court with a trumpet
before them ſounding moſt melodiouſly in token of great ioy,
for that they were ſo nere the pleaſant paradice of god Bacchus.
               
Who they were, from whence they came, and in what manner
they appeared in preſence, followeth as thus.
            Firſt of all came Dauid Drie-throte, from Lesbona in Portugale;
in his hand hee held a peece well fild with wine of Canary,
which with cap and knee hee preſented to god Bacchus, and gaue
place to the reſt.
            Secondly, came Alexander Addlehead, from Dun Baur, a Scot,
who offered to his god a dozen of red herrings to ſeaſon his mouth
before he ſat downe to taſte his liquor.
            Thirdly, there ſkipt in a Spaniard, of the city of Logronio, named
Blayner Bloblip, who gratifying his god with two limons, &
an orenge pill, with a moſt lowly legge he lept aſide.
            Fourthly, came wallowing in a Germane, borne in Mentz, his
name was Gotfrey Grouthead; with him he brought a wallet full
of woodcocks heads, the braines thereof tempered with other
ſauce, is a paſſing preſeruatiue againſt the ale-paſſion or paine in
the pate.
            Fiftly, came poſting in one Peers Spendall from Brunduſium, an
Italian frier, with a pot full of holy water, ſprinkling to and fro,
and round about him, to driue away the diuell, leaſt hee ſhould
chance to come inuiſible and deceaue them of their drinke.
            The 6. was one Frauncis Franckfellow, a Corinthian in the
the coaſts of Achaia, with him he brought a box of oyle, that Bacchus
therewith might baſte his belly, when it was ready to crack,
with licking vp ouer lauiſhly the ſmall crums that tumbled out of
his tunne.
            The ſeuenth was one Simon Swil-kan, he came from Colops a
citie in Africa, and preſented to Bacchus a buttock of Bacon:
which broyled on the coales, and ſo eaten, will ſet a man on
longing for his liquor before ſunne ſhine, bee the morning neuer
ſo moyſty.
            The eight was of Capſa, a towne well knowne in Numidia:
his name was Geffery Gooſcap, and with him hee brought a
night cap for god Bacchus great godhead, leaſt through his hot
compotations in the day, his head ſhould crow with cold conſumptions
in the night.
            The 9. was a iolly gentlewoman, named miſtris Merigodown;
               
ſhe came from Archelais, a citie in Cappadocia, with a fanne of fethers
in one hand, and a looking glaſſe in the other: which both ſhe
gaue to Bacchus: the one to gather winde, leaſt his breath ſhoulde
faile him when he blew a long blaſt in a wine pot: the other to ſee
to his noſe, leaſt continuing ouerlong in a fierie colour, it ſhoulde
chance to be changed into a Carbuncle.
            The 10. was one Phillip Filpot, brought vp in Varica a citie of
Iberia, and one of the ſect of Saint Sinckator. This Philip was
a phiſition, and brought to his god Bacchus a certaine potion,
merueilous in operation, of which who euer he were that did
drinke after hee had beene well whitled, by vertue thereof, if
hee once were a ſleepe, ſhoulde neuer awake till hee were
wiſer.
            The 11. was a Iewe borne in Ioppa, hee had to name Chriſtopher
Crabface, a man famous in Aſtrologie: hee brought in
his hand a Prognoſtication newly compoſed, which hee beſtowed
on god Bacchus. In which booke hee had largly ſet down
diuers detriments accidentall this yeare: Eſpecially this I noted,
that many drunkards whiles they looked vpwards on high
towards the man in the Moone, ſhall breake their necks downwards
below in the bottome of a ditch.
            The 12. was Gilbert Goodfellow, from Arbila, an Aſſyrian:
this Gilbert was a butcher, and brought with him an
hoggs head, a ſheepes tongue, and a calues chauldron; the
hogs head for harneſſe againſt entreatie: the ſheepes tongue to
temper his owne the better in telling of a true tale, and a
calues chauldron to wrap vp his noddle, leaſt in the ende of a
banquet his inward heate ſhould fume out with a farewell to all
good felowſhip.
            The 13. came from Choka a citie in Arabia, named Nicholas
Neuerthriue; hee brought with him a pudding pie, pretilie
powdred with ſuch hot ſpices as his countrie plentifully dooth
afforde: which beeing once taſted, dooth maruellouſly encreaſe
a moyſtie appetite, which Bacchus receaued very thankfully.
            The 14. was called Hodge Heauie-breech, hee came frome
Miſerga a cittie in the confines of Perſia: Hodge by his

occupation was a Cardmaker, who for the zeale he had to god Bacchus
and al good fellows, offered vp to him that renowmed ruffler
the knaue of Clubs, with a box of trim trillilles, commonly called
the dice: the one to aide him in a needeles combat, the other after
his loſſe, to ſerue him in ſtead of recreation.
            The 15. was one Maudlen Moonface, a mery gentlewoman
of Dublin, a citie in Ireland: with her ſhe brought a glaſſe ful, noſe
high of Aquauitae, the operation where of is no leſſe monſtrous
than m
                  •
               rueilous, for being drunke in a morning it ſo warmeth the
heart, as if the body were in a bath, whoſe inward heats whē they
begin to budforth, tranſforme themſelues into goſbery grapes to
be ſeene moſt plainely as vnder a vizard of gliſtering glaſſe.
            The 16. was a pleaſant Parthian of the ſtately cittie Catompylon,
called Loblurchall; this youth was a feate fellow, and a fine
faulkner, with him he carried a water Wagtaile, readie to flie at the
faireſt goofe in Wincheſter: which preſent god Bacchus accepted
very gratefully.
            The 17. was borne in India, at a faire citie called Tyndis, this
forſooth was a coy dame, called Cate Craſhpot, ſhe came clincking
a quart pot for ſweete muſicke, in ſtead of the ta
                  ••
               ret, to which maner
of melodie god Bacchus liſtned exceedingly.
            The 18. was one Baudwin Barrelbely from Ormuſa, a place
ſufficiently knowne in the ile of Cypruſſe, with him he brought a
firkin full of wine of Baſterdes: aſſuring god Bacchus on his fidelitie,
that ſo many as he made thereof partakers with him, as long
as they applied themſelues to the harty carouſe, ſhould neuer be
daunted by death, and faile footing.
            The 19. came from Garma in Aethiopia, called Goody Goodale:
ſhee (in token of pure deuotion) deliuered to Bacchus a 
                  •
               ack
full of groute, and a ſack-full of hops, ſtanding ſtoutly in this opinion,
that the barly broath aboue all other did beare away
                  •
               th bell,
and that neither grape nor very might in any reſpect be compared
to the maieſtie of the mault.
            The 20. was a worthie yeoman, one Tom Toſpot, he came from
Friburgum an Heluetian, he as willing to pleaſure himſelfe, as to
honour his god, preſented to Bacchus, a dainty deuiſed compound,
of ſundry ſimples paſtiewiſe, as the trimming of tripes, the fat of

chitterlings, and the marrow of ſwéet ſouſe, lapt vp altogether
within the cruſty walls of paſte royall, in ſo much that a world of
be
                  •
               ly cheere was contained therein, which god Bacchus receaued
with ſo great thankes, that he promiſed to honour the eating thereof,
with the beſt increments of his ouer-flawing tunne.
            When theſe had ended their deuotion, they were placed all in
order, and vſed as moſt welcome gueſts: buſie was Bacchus in vttering
his bounty, and the reſt of the ſeruitors no l
                  •
               ſſe diligent, ſo
that no man wanted his wiſh, nor depriued of his will.
            Scarſe had they tipled gyrum wiſe, as commonly the ſect of
the Surratims vſe to doe, as only of triall to wet their whiſtles: but
in comes Bat Barlycap, a mery muſitian, ready with cap and knee
to giue them a ſong: which proffer god Bacchus accepted gladly;
wherupon M. Barlicap tempered vp his fidle, & begā as followeth.
            
               THe Gods of loue
               Which raigne aboue
               Maintaine this feaſt:
               Let Bacchus find
               Their hearts moſt kind
               To euery gueſt.
               And long may Bacchus braue it here
               in pleaſures to abound,
               That wine & beere, & belly gut cheere,
               with plenty here be found.
            
            
               I pray likewiſe,
               That ere you riſe
               You drink your fill,
               That no man want
               Nor finde it skant
               Whereof to ſwill.
               Then may you all carouſe in bliſſe,
               and bid farewell to woe,
               Who liues in this, he cannot miſſe
               but ſtraight to heauen goe.
            
            
               Be mery all
               Both great and ſmall
               Be mery here,
               And with your liquor
               Sweetly bicker,
               Doe not feare.
               Waſh wel your throates which now are dry,
               and ſpare not you for coſt,
               I tell you true, no ſhot is due
               where Bacchus rules the roſt.
            
            
               Sadnes and griefe
               Bring no reliefe,
               Bid them adiew:
               In paine none pine
               Which loue ſtrong wine
               I tell you true.
               Then learne to laffe, carouſe & quaffe,
               and ſpare not while you may.
               Hey dery dery, my maſters be mery,
               and looke for a ioyfull day.
            
            This ſong thus ended, the whole hall for ioy did ring out a loud
laffing peale, and thanked the fidler for his mirth. Bacchus made
him drinke, Silenus bad him not ſpare, ſo Barlicap did drink till his
eyes did ſtare.
            Thus euery man falls to his taſke, and hee happie that is able

to ſtand ſtoutly in the forefront, to giue the braueſt onſet.
            Whiles thus they tipled, the fidler he fidled, and the pots danced
for ioy the old hop about, commonly called Sellengars round:
euery man ſet to his foot, there was not whip ſnatch and away, but
plaine rack and manger, where euery one dranke himſelfe out of
danger: cups and cans went clip clap, the gueſts were al welcome,
their tongues ran at randome, ſir Prattle kept a wrangling, and
dame Tattle a great iangling, each one was mery, & no man wanted
words to ſolace his next neighbour: to be briefe, heauen was
here, and hell where they were not, yea who but the gueſts of god
Bacchus.
            
            Amids theſe only pleaſures, and ioyes incomparable, Iupiter
ſends downe Mercury to make them pleaſant: & Venus the queene
of loue, ſent alſo her ſon Cupid to creep in amongſt thē for kindnes,
and to lead them along blindfold vnto luſt & loathſome ſelf-liking.
            Then Pluto the maſter diuell of hell ſeeing fit opportunity and
place conuenient, ſent amongſt the ioyfull gueſts of this feaſt, the
furies of hell, who with all ſpeed poſted to god Bacchus pallace, to
exerciſe their helliſh outrage.
            Now Cupid lingred not out his time, but did driue his dartes
amongſt thē with ſuch force, that ſome for pure loue wedded them
ſelues to wine: ſome became ſworne brethren to the beere pot, other
ſome matched themſelues only to Metheglin, one liked this,
another that, all was wonderfull to behold.
            
               Bawdwin Barrelbelly was greatly grieued with loue gripes,
eſpecially through the deſire hee had to goody Goodale the
AEthiopian.
            
            
               Kit Crabface ſo ardently burned in the loue of Maudlin Mooneface,
that well nere he burned himſelfe to aſhes.
            
               Mercury he caſt his eloquence amongſt them by horſe loades at
once, ſo that large promiſes with no performance, were as eaſie to
be heard, as ſmall bells in a morrice daunce.
            
               Meduſa, Megera and the reſt of thoſe furious hags, flie al at once
in amongſt them, and ſets their teeth on edge to practiſe villanie,
one againſt another: one puls his felow by the beard without cauſe;
another crackes his next felowes crowne with a quart pot, one
flings a glaſſe in another mans face, another makes a buckler of

his hat to ſaue himſelfe before, whiles another with a black iack
breakes his head behinde: one cries downe with him, downe with
him, not able of himſelfe to kill a louſe, another lies lurking vnder
the table altogether ſpeechles.
            Here Dauid Drithroat gathered vp his teeth, which Pierſe
Spendall the Frier had lately ſtrooke out, becauſe Dauid like an
vnmannerly knaue, preſumed to piſſe in the holy water pot.
            There Gotfrey Grouthead begins to fume, and fometh at the
mouth like a ſauage bore, hee falls at variance with miſtris Merigodowne,
and hales her along by the haire of the haead: in ſo much
that (thou knaue) was as common amongſt them as cartway, or
probo in the ſchooles: and (thou whore) as vſuall a terme, as hait
hary in the mouth of a carter.
            Whiles thus they lay on heapes, one on the neck of another,
ſome ſpurning others wt their heeles, ſome ſcratching their heads
where they itched not, ſome ſprauling vnderneath moſt glad to
riſe vp againe, ſome wiping the blood away from their faces: ſome
rubbing their ſhinnes which they burſt on the frames: ſome gaping
for winde, almoſt choked with flies, while theſe, I ſay, did lie in
this ſo great diſorder, the gods aboue were conſtrained to winke
at their follies, and the diuels below reioyced at the viewe of this
our mortall wretchednes.
            Thus Bacchus aroſe, with the reſt of his Barons, and diſmiſſed
euery man very bountifully: who after long ſtumbling, at the
laſt returned from whence they came. And Bacchus himſelfe retired
to Archadie, whereat this day, for his ſingular liberalitie,
& bounteous behauiour towardes all inhabitants
trauellers & paſſengers, he is of power to make
a greater companie of able men then
any man of his degree.
            Et largas epulas & bona vina dedit.
            FINIS.
         
      
   