
      
         
            
            
            PAVLS
DESIRE OF
Diſſolution,
AND
DEATHS ADVANTAGE.
            A
SERMON PREACHED
at the Funerall of that right vertuous and
religious Gentlewoman Mrs Rebekka Criſp,
togither with the Teſtimonie then
giuen vnto her.
            By T. G. B. of D.
            LONDON,
Printed by Edward Griffin for William Bladen, and are to
be ſold at his ſhop at the ſigne of the Bible,
neere the great North dore of
Paules. 1620.
         
         
            
            
            TO MY LOVING
VNKLE Mr NICOLAS
CRISP,
AND
TO MY KIND COSENS
Mrs Rebekka Stroud, Mrs Anne
Skelton, Mrs Eſter Whitaker his Daughters,
with the reſt of that Familie; happy imitation
of the holy deceaſed both in Life,
and in Death.
            
               MY right deere, and deſeruedly beloued
Allies; finding among my
looſe papers the notes of that
Sermon that I made at the
enterrement of that bleſſed
Saint, lately wife to the one,
and mother to the reſt of you,
collected and transſcribed not
long after at the requeſt of ſome of you for your owne
priuate vſe and benefit: I thought it would not be
amiſſe to make it more publike; (the rather for that
diuers ſeemed to deſire it) and to adde vnto it the

teſtimonie then truly and vpon good ground giuen vnto
her: partly for the propagating and perpetuating
of the memory of ſo worthy a ſeruant of God, and
partly alſo and more principally for the enciting and
egging on of others, of that Sex eſpecially, to the imitation
of her.
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Ariſto
                     •
                  . ethic. l. 10. c. 1. Exempla maximè mouent. Cic. de orat. lib. 3. Validiora ſunt exempla quàm verba, & plen
                     •
                  us opere d
                     •
                  cetur quàm vcce. Leo ſerm. de ieiun. Good Examples (as the Heathen man
obſerueth) are of great force; and are therefore (not
without cauſe) ſo frequently propounded1. Cor. 11. 1. Epheſ. 5. 1, 2. Phil. 3. 17. Hebr. 12. 1, 2. & 13. 7. Iam. 5. 10. in Gods
word.Longum eſt iter per praecepta: breue & 
                     •
                  fficax per exempla. Sen. epiſt. 6. They preuaile oft more then precepts. Precepts
ſhew vs what we ſhould do: Examples goe further,
and ſhew vs how we may doe it; andHoc plus valent exempla, quod fieri poſſe docent quod factum eſt. Sermo quidam vinus & efficax exemplum operis eſt, facilè perſuadens quod intendimus, deum factibile probat eſſe quod ſ
                     •
                  ademus. Bern. de reſurr. ſer. 2. Ex aliorum factis fieri poſſ
                     •
                   credunt, quod forte, dā putant non fieri poſſe, pigreſcunt. Aug. epiſt. 134. Adiuvari ſe exemplie exoptat humana infirmitas, quo facilius ipſa etiam nunc faciat, quae ali
                     ••
                   feciſſe ante cognoſcat. Saluian. ad eccleſ. cath. l. 3. that the things
enioyned vs may be done of vs, becauſe they haue been
done by others
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Iam. 5. 17. Lege Bern. ſerm. de Martino. like our ſelues before vs: and ſo they
take away that obiection of impoſsibilitie, as if that
were required of vs, that could not be done, or that
none before vs euer did. Againe, as Examples in generall
are vſefull; ſo Examples of this Sex are in
ſome reſpect of the twaine the more needfull. That Popiſh
conceit ſticketh ſtill in the mindes of many; that
knowledge and booke-learning is for great Clarks onely;
meane men, and women much more then, haue no
neede of it, neither indeed can attaine vnto it. Yet
God telleth vs that they mustIerem. 31. 34. 
               all know him from the
higheſt to the loweſt,
               Iohn 17. 3. whom he ſheweth mercy vnto in
the remiſsion of their ſinnes. And ſurely, if to know
God in Chriſt be life eternall; thenSi cognitio Dei vita aeterna, tum ignorantia Dei mors aeterna. Bern. in Cant. to be ignorant of
him, cannot be, or bring but eternall deſtruction. Beſides
thatGalat. 3. 28. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Baſil. Sel. hom. 2. Chriſtianitie maketh no diſtinction of Sex.

               1. Tim 2. 15. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Clem Alex. Paed
                     •
                  g l. 1. c. 4. The ſame common ſaluation is propounded to both
Sexes:
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Baſil. the ſame meanes of attayning it are likewiſe
common to either.Act. 4. 12. 1. Cor. 11. 11. No ſaluation to man or woman but
by Chriſt:Mark. 16. 16. John 3. 16. no intereſt in Christ but by Faith,1. Tim. 2 15. Iohn 11. 27. 2. Tim. 1. 5. exacted
therefore of either: andRom. 10. 14, 17. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Clem. Alex. ſtrom. l. 5. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Marc. de lege ſpir. 102. Indiget fides cog
                     •
                  iti
                     •
                  ne, ſicut & cognitio indiget fide: neque enim eſſe poteſt ſides ſine cognitione, ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eſt cognitio aliquid ſine fide. Theodor. de cur. Graec. aff. l. 1. no Faith without knowledge,
the maine ground-worke of Faith. Now as there
is a neceſsitie of knowledge, faith, feare of God, and
other ſpirituall graces in either, ſo there is no impoſsibilitie
of attaining them, and ſome good meaſure of
them, vnto either. Examples of the weaker Sex apparantly
prouing this, are in that regard the more effectuall;
for that, as they ſhame men, if they come ſhort of
ſuch, ſo they giue women incouragement to contend,
and good hope to attaine vnto, what they ſee others of
their Sex haue before them by like contending attained.
But domeſticall examples are of all other the moſt
powerfull. And therefore whatſoeuer effect this ſhall
haue with others, it ought in ſpeciall manner to preuaile
with you, who had ſo ſpeciall intereſt in her, whoſe
memorie is ſo ſacred with all thoſe that here knew her,
and who were continuall eye-witneſſes of thoſe her gratious
parts and godly courſes, which most others had in
part onely by heare-ſay. And doubtles that is the greateſt
honour we can doe to our religious Aunceſtors deceaſed,
if we endeuour ſo to reſemble them in good
                  ••
               s
and godlineſſe, that by our religious courſes and cariage
we may be knowne to haue come of them, and they may
ſeeme to ſurviue in vs. The manner of her end, ſo
ſweet, ſo cheerefull, ſo comfortable, ſhould the rather
encite you hereunto, that, if you deſire to finde that
comfort then that ſhe did, and to giue that comfort to

others, that you had then in her, you take that courſe
that you ſaw ſhee did, lay a ſure foundation in life
for comfort in death, and be continually building vpon
it when it is once ſurely laid. Now that this weake
worke may a litle at leaſt further you therein, he vouchſafe
to grant, whoſe power appeares in our weakneſſe,
and who by weake meanes is able to effect weighty matters:
To his bleſsing, I commend both you and it, and
ſo rest
            
               Your louing Coſen
Tho: Gataker.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
TESTIMONIE
Giuen to
Mrs REBEKKA CRISP
at her Buriall.
            
               THE Bodies of Gods Sants as
well as their Soules are1 Cor. 6. 19. 
               members
of Chriſts bodie, and1 Cor. 6. 19. 
               Temples
of Gods Spirit: and are therefore
in decent and honeſt manner
to be laid vp in the wombe
of our common Mother the
Earth. The performance of this laſt office to our
right deare and deſeruedly reſpected Chriſtian Siſter,
Mrs 
               Rebekka Criſp, hath occaſioned this Aſſembly.
Concerning whoſe religious courſe of
life and conuerſation, togither with the Concluſion
thereof ſutable and correſpondent to the ſame,
much might be ſaid, and much be ſpoken, yea
ſo much, that it might to ſtrangers ſeeme either
meere formalitie or plaine flatterie, yet by thoſe
that throughly knew her, would not onely be acknowledge

for truth, but to come far ſhort of that
that 
                  〈…〉
                But neither 
                  〈…〉
                my
wont, 
                  〈…〉
                I, 
                  〈…〉
                long in this kinde: 
                  〈◊〉
               
rather, for that many take therin too much libertie,
and this exerciſe being intendedMagis viuorum ſolatiae, quàm mortuorum ſubſidiae. Aug. de cura pro mort. ger. more for the inſtruction
of the liuing then for the commendation
of the dead.
            That which I ſhall ſpeake of her, to the glory
of Gods grace in her, and the prouoking of others
to the imitation of her, ſhall be in few words,
and referred to two heads, her Piety, and her
Patience.
            For the former: it had pleaſed God to grace her
with a meaſure more then ordinarie of ſpirituall
grace, and of ſuch graces as are not ſo ordinarily
incident to that 
                  〈…〉
                of 
                  〈◊〉
               , and
ſoundnes of judgement
                  •
               . Which 
                  〈◊〉
                accordingly
applied and imployed, (part
                  •
               y by conſtant frequenting
of the publike Miniſterie, while God gaue
leaue and libertie, and p
                  ••
               tly: 
                  〈◊〉
                both then and
during the times of 
                  〈…〉
                meditation
and priuate conference with ſuch as reforted
vnto her,Rom. 12. 2. and might that way further her, * to
the ſearching out of the good and holy and acceptable
will of God. In this hinde ſhee was a great
Queſtioniſt▪ and (as thoſe religious Romane
               Paula, Marcella, & Euſtochium. Legatur Paulae epitaph: & Hierenymi Epiſtola ad eaſdem. Ladies
were ſometime to 
                  〈◊〉
               ) a whe
                  •
               ſtone to my ſelfe,
and I doubt not but the like alſo to others,Sic Hieron. ad Marcellam; Maguis pro
                     ••
                  cas quaeſtionibus, & torpēs acio ingenium, dum interr
                     •
                  gas, doces. by her
ſtudious enquirie occaſioning the mo
                  •
               e diligent
ſearch, and the more exact diſcouery of many particulars:
In regards whereof I may well, and doe
freely and ſincerely confeſſe, that, ſo oft as I reſorted

vnto her, I did tam proficere quàm prodeſſe, as
well benefit by her, as benefit her.
            Neither were theſe her Queſtions, as with many,
Later unculis I
                     •
                  
                  ditur; In ſupervacuis ſub
                     •
                  ilit as teritur. ſ
                     •
                  hol
                     •
                  , noes vitae diſcitur. Sen. epiſt. 106. Qu
                     •
                  ſcire magis i
                     •
                  vat quàm prodeſt▪ Ibid. In quibus 
                     •
                  ihil ali
                     •
                  d quàm acumen exercetur. Ib. 109. Quibus quiſquis ſe tradidit, quaeſtiunculas quidē r
                     •
                  fras nectit; cater
                     •••
                   ad vitam nihil profici
                     ••
                   Ibid. 111. Quibus doce
                     •••
                   magis diſputare quàm viuere. Ib. 9. 5. tending to idle ſpeculation; meere curioſities, or
vaine niceties, like a game at Cheſſe; rather quirks
of wit, fit for diſputation in ſchooles, then rules of
vſe for direction of life; but of ſuch points as bent
and aymed at the practiſe of piety, the tryall of
faith, and ſound ſanctification: That wherein ſhee
principally deſired and endeuoured to profit; and
ſo profited, that I may truly ſay of her, that ſhee
had not
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 2. Tim. 3. 5. an outward ſhew and ſemblance of godlineſſe,
or a verball diſcourſe of it, (the common
fault of too many profeſſors among vs) but the
very power and efficacie of it in extraordinary manner
and meaſure both imprinted in her heart, and
expreſſed in her life: She had learned,Sen. epiſt. 
               dicta in
facta vertere, to turne words into works; and as
Luk 2. 19. to treaſure vp with Mary what ſhee heard
and learned in her heart, ſo to worke it into
the affection, and to bring it forth into action,
to affect it with her heart, and to effect it in
her life.
            This, among other things, her ſincere piety, appeared
in her ſingular Patience. And it is Patience
indeede, that putteth Piety to the proofe. God had
trained her vp a long time in the ſchoole of affliction;
and ſhee was therein a good proficient: her
afflictions being vnto her, asGen. 17. 7. the waters to Noahs
Arke, a meanes to carry vp her thoughts and deſires
higher to heauen-ward. It pleaſed God to
bruiſe her with paines and weaknes, and euen to

               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Eſai. 53. 10. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Pſal. 90. 3. grinde to po
                  ••
               der her vigor with continuance of
affliction. Which yet ſhe euer ſuſtained with great
willingnes ofminde,Pſal. 90. 3. hauing oft in her mouth that
worthy ſpeech of Dauid,
               2. Sam. 15. 26. 
               Behold, here I am, let him
do with me what he will; and
                  
                     •
                  rudir
                     •
                   cupiens flagell
                     •
                  , non erut
                     •
                   do Job
                     •
                   Bern. in Cant. 33. deſiring euer, as ſhe
proteſted oft in the middeſt of her paines, not ſo
much the remouall of the croſſe, which ſhee eſteemed
but light, as patience to beare it, and grace to
make vſe of it: complaining of nothing ſo much
in her afflictions, as that by meanes of them ſhe was
diſabled to the performance of ſuch duties as ſhee
deſired with her Familie, and reſtrained in the intention
of her ſpirituall meditation; if in any thing
impatient, impatient of 
                  •
               ought that hindred that
way.
            Neither was this her patience ſuch as proceeded
either from ſome ſenſeleſnes and ſtupiditie, or from
ſome kinde of immanitie and inhumanitie,Qualu Stoicorū illa 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Aſfecti
                     •
                   humana (vel inhumana potius) canine aequanimitatis ſtupore formata Tertuli depatient. Indolentia iſta nō ſine magna mercede cantingit, immenitaris in, ſtuporis in corp. re. Grantor apud Oic. Tuſcul l. 3. Et verè Archytas in ethic. apud Stab. tō. 2. c. 
                     ••
                  s Ita enim 
                     •
                  mendandus eſt locus ille, qui nō ſine mendo in vulgat ishabetur: nec corrigunt ſed corrumpunt mentē autoris, qui pro ſubſti
                     •
                  u
                     ••
                  t: ſicut & ijde
                     ••
                   fruſtra ſunt, dū 
                  
                     •
                  lauſulam noviſſimam ſine cauſa ſolicitant. as in
ſome; (for ſhe was a woman made of meekenes
and lowlines, of minde, as of a tender conſtitution
her ſelfe naturally, and therefore ſoone ſenſible of
paine and griefe, ſo full of bowels of mercy and
tender compaſſion towards others, and free from
all auſteritie and harſhnes of ſpira) butNon et vera pa
                     •
                  ientia, vbi non eſt vera ſapientla, (vbi non eſt vera pietas.) Cyprian. de patient. from an
apprehenſion of Gods hand in thoſe things that befell
her and a concoience of ſubmitting her will to
his pleaſure whoſe wholly ſhe acknowledged herſelfe
to be, and was content therefore wholly to be
diſpoſed of by him.
            
               
But becauſePerſ
                     •
                  uerantia ſola virtutū coronatur. Bern. de temp. 114. Sola eſt cui aeternitas redditur. Idem de conſider. l. 5. Non inch
                     •
                  antibꝰ ſed perſeuerantibus praemium propunitur. Iſidor. de ſum. bon. l. 2. c 7. Siquidem, Non perſeuerare cultus eſt mutilus. Bern. in Cant. 
               perſeuerance, as Bernard ſaith, is all
in all; and is that that carieth away the crowne or the
garland from all:
               Supereſt vt laudabile principium condignum conſequatur finem, & cauda hoſtix capiti coniungatur. Bern. ep. 24. & 165. Caput animalis cum cauda in ſacrificijs offerendū. Lev. 3. 9. quia ſine perſeuerantia nihil placet. Rad. Ardens in 1a. 40a. As the reſt of her life had bin,
ſo her latter end was not vnlike; full of piety and
patience, of alacritie and cheerefulnes, wholy taken
vp with holy and heauenly meditation, and longing
exceedingly for the time of her diſſolution. God
ſhewed in her to all that were about her, that it is
not in vaine ſincerely to ſerue him; and that a conſtant
courſe of a religious life will miniſter aboundance
of ſweet comfort in death.
            About the beginning of her laſt ſicknes, ſhe ſent
for me to her, whom (though the meaneſt of many
that reſorted vnto her) in regard of ſome bond of
alliance ſhe deſired to be, and made account ſhee
might be boldeſt withall; and before ſome few of
her familiar frends, made a worthy and pithy confeſſion
and profeſſion of her Faith, too long to relate;
laid open the grounds and notes of her aſſurance
fetched forth of Gods word, of Gods loue
vnto her, and of her owne vnto God; requeſting either
to be better informed, if in ought ſhe were
miſtaken, or to haue further confirmed by pregnant
proofes out of Gods booke, what ſhe rightly apprehended.
And this was the worke that by her good
will ſhee then deſired to be continually taken vp
with; forgetting her paines and weaknes when ſhe
was about it, and neglecting her naturall reſt to attend
it. So that ſhe might well ſay to God with Dauid,
               Pſal. 119 97. 
               Oh how loue I thy law? it is my continuall meditation.
And with Iob,
               Job. 23. 12. 
               I haue preferred the words of
thy mouth, not onely before my moſt deſired foode, but

before my moſt needfull and naturall reſt. Yea ſo eager
was ſhe vpon theſe things, that I was enforced
oft to perſwade her to forbeare, conſidering her
great weaknes, and to intermit the intention of her
meditation, by giuing ſome way to reſt and repoſe.
And here I cannot paſſe by one ſpeech vſed by her
vpou ſuch an occaſion, which the rather I relate, to
prouoke others by her example not to neglect the
meanes of mercy and grace that God vouchſafeth
them now, while they may follow them. After long
diſcourſe to and fro, perceiuing, as I thought, her
eyes to wax heauy, and her ſpirits fainty, and well
knowing what need ſhe had of ſome refreſhing, I
aduiſed her to compoſe her ſelf vnto reſt, which her
long want of it required, and her eyes ſeemed to incline
vnto, that it was beſt to take it while ſhe might,
leſt ſhe ſhould after, want it when ſhe would. Her
anſwer was that this was her beſt reſt, & that which
ſhe found beſt refreſhing & ſweeteſt repoſe in; and
that, ſaid ſhe, which you ſay of the one, may I much
better ſay of the other: if to giue way to reſt I forbeare
thoſe meanes of comfort that God by your
preſence now affordeth me, I may hereafter want
them when I would, and ſhall neede them.
            Some conflicts ſhe had the day before her departure;
but ſuch, through Gods goodnes, as laſted not
long, and ended in that comfort, that continued
with her to her end: which was ſo quiet and peaceable.
that her departure was ſcarce ſenſible to thoſe
that were neereſt about her.
            I will add but a word, and that I ſpeake vnfainedly:
I know Gods hand is not ſtraitned, neither is his

grace ſcanted: yet, conſidering mine owne obſeruation
& experience, but ſmall, I confeſs; as I haue not
hitherto in all points met with her match, ſo I wiſh
rather than hope to light oft on her like.
            But let vs leaue her with the Lord in happines, in
heauen: and apply our ſelues vnto that, that more
principally concerneth vs, attending to ſuch inſtructions
as ſhall (by Gods aſſiſtance) be deliuered,
not altogither vnagreable to the preſent occaſion,
out of that portion of Scripture, which I haue choſen
to intreat of, concerning
         
         
            
            PAVLES
DESIRE OF
DISSOLVTION,
AND
DEATHS ADƲANTAGE
the ground of that his
DESIRE.
         
         
            
            
               PHILIPP. cap. 1. verſ. 23.
               Deſiring to be diſſolued, and to be with Christ;
which is by much more the better.
            
            
               THE Apoſtle Paul was in a great ſtrait,
when hee wrote this Epiſtle; in
doubt, it ſeemeth, whether he ſhould
rather deſire life or death: affected
as a louing and loyall wife, ſaith one,
Zanchius in Philip. whoſe huſband in a far countrey
aduanced to great honor, writeth to her to come to
him, but to leaue her children behinde her, as deere
to her as her ſelfe; and in that regard diſtracted, on
the one ſide deſirous to enioy her huſband, and on
the other ſide loath to leaue her children behinde
her, eſpecially yet vnable to helpe themſelues; and
in that regard content yet to defer her owne honor
and ioy in her huſband, till ſhe ſee them better able
to ſhift for themſelues: Or, as a beggar-woman,
ſaithBernard. in Cant. 
               Bernard, who comming to a rich mans dore
with a childe on her hand, is offered to come in and
warme her and dine well, ſo ſhe leaue her childe, becauſe
it is vnquiet, without; whoſe bowels earning
with naturall affection toward the fruit of her

wombe, make her willing rather to accept of a ſmall
pittance without dores with her childe, then to dine
largely and liberally without it, within. In like manner
fared it with the bleſſed Apoſtle at this preſent.
He deſired to be with Chriſt his husband, his head
in happineſſe, in heauen. But the Philippians his litle
ones, whom he had newly1. Cor 4 15. Galat 4. 10. bred, and not throughly
yet1. Th
                     •
                  ſſ. 2. 7. nurſed vp, they hung on his hands, and had
neede ſtill of his helpe: whom being loath therefore
to leaue,Indalgenaū est houneſtis affectibus: & interdū, etiemſi premunt cauſſae, ſpiritus in honorē ſuorum vel cum tormento retinendus eſt; cum bono viro viuendum ſit, non quamdiu iuvat, ſed quamdiu oportet. Delicatus eſt, qui mori perſeuerat, qui 
                     〈◊〉
                   amicos tanti putat, vt diutius in vita commoretur. Etiā qui vult mori, qui cepit, vbi ſuorū vlilitas exigit, intermittat, & ſuis ſe cōmodet. Ingentis animi eſt aliena cauſa ad vitam reuerti. Sen. ep. 104. Vitam tibi ipſi ſi negas, multis negas. Sen. Theb. he was content for their gaine to defer
his owne good, and to continue yet ſome longer
time in this mortall and miſerable life, for the
helping of them forward on the way to eternall
lifeViſe Clem. Alex. ſtrom. l. 3. & Am broſ. ep. 12. qui & idem de Acholio epiſt. 49. de Martino Seuerus epiſt. 3. & Bern. de temp. 105..
            And this his diſtraction and doubtfulnes of reſolution
he propoundeth in the formerverſ. 22. verſe, and
in the former part of this verſe: whereunto are annexed
ſuch motiues as endeuoured to draw his deſires
either way; his owne felicitie on the one ſide,
which made him rather deſire deathverſ. 23.; their neceſſitie
on the other ſide, that moued him rather to
accept of then to affect life, to endure it than to deſire
itverſ. 24.. So that the haſtning of his owne eternall
good on the one ſide, and the furthering of their
ſpirituall gaine on the other ſide; wrought between
them a great diſtraction in him. Yet ſo, that the
things themſelues, Life and Death, ſimply conſidered;
if he ſhould reſpect, and as he reſpected his
owne good and gaine in either, his deſire was rather
to diſſolution and departure by deceaſe, that he
might be with Christ
               verſ. 23.. Whereof a reaſon is alſo
rendred, becauſe that ſimply conſidered, or in reſpect

of himſelfe, was without all queſtion or compariſon,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               the far greater good of the twaine.
            Now the maine point that hence we obſerue
then is this, thatDoctrine. 
               a Chriſtian man may lawfully and
iuſtly deſire death.
            
            Which point ſo conceiued,Branches 2. diuideth it ſelfe into
two branches, both of them ariſing neceſſarily
from the words of my text.
            The one concerning the lawfulnes or warrantableneſſe.
            The other concerning the equitie or reaſonableneſſe
of this deſire.
            For the former,Branch 1. that a Chriſtian man may lawfully
deſire death in ſome kinde and in ſome caſe, (as
did1. King. 19 4. 
               Elias, and Simeon
               Luk. 2. 29. vpon ſight of our Sauiour)
is apparent, in that the Apoſtle not onely profeſſeth
it here of himſelf, but writing by the Spirit of God,
approueth it alſo, as in himſelfe here, ſo in others as
well as himſelfe elſe-where2. Cor 5. 8..
            And it may be further confirmed vnto vs,Reaſon 1. if we
ſhall conſider;
            Firſt, that death and departure hence by death,
it is propounded as a bleſſingApoc. 14. 13., promiſed as a bleſing1. King. 14. 12, 13.,
and beſtowed as a bleſſingEſai. 57. 1.; and therefore
may as a bleſſing alſo lawfully be deſired.Reaſon 2.
            
            Secondly, that our deaths-day is our doomes-day
               Luk 16. 22, 23. Hebr. 9. 27.:
that our going to ChriſtEccleſ. 12. 7. 2 Cor. 5. 8., as that his comming to
vsJoh. 14. 3. 2. Theſſ. 1. 10. & 2. 1, 8.. Now a Chriſtian may loue, and long after the
one2. Tim. 4. 8. Hebr. 9. 28., and therefore may lawfully deſire alſo the
other.
            In a word,Reaſon 3. wee pray or ought to pray dailyMatth. 6. 20.,
that Chriſts kingdome may be fully erected in vs;

that Gods will may be prefectly fulfilled of vs:
which can not be either of them wholy effected, but
by diſſolution and deceaſe.
            But here may a queſtion or two be moued.
            Firſt,Queſtions 2. for what cauſe we may deſire death:
Secondly,Queſtion 1. with what caution.
            For the former, I anſwer; we may deſire death:
Firſt, to be freed from mortalitie and the miſeries
of this life1. King. 19. 4.; that we may rest from our labours
               Apoc. 14. 13.;
that mortalitie may be ſwallowed vp of life
               2. Cor. 5. 4.; which
can not be in ordinarie courſe but by death.
            Secondly, to be freed from ſpirituall euilsRom. 7. 24., that
will not leaue vs but by deathEccleſ 7. 22. Rom. 67..
            And laſtly,Queſtion 2. in regard of thoſe benefits, that death
further bringeth with it; that we may come home
to God2 Cor. 
                     •
                  . 8., and be for euer with Chriſt1. Theſſ 4. 7..
            To the latter queſtion, I anſwer, that firſt this deſire
it muſt be without impatience: (that was Ionas
his faultJona 4. 3.:) we may not deſire death as weary of
Gods worke,Ridiculum eſt ad mortem currere taedio vitae. Epicur. apud Sen. epiſt. 24. Vir. fortis ac ſapiens non fugere debet è vita, ſed exire. Et ante oīa ille quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   visetur affectꝰ qui multos occupauit, libido moriendi. Sē. ibid. of doing or enduring what he calleth
vs vnto.
            Secondly, it muſt be with ſubmitting of our wils
to Gods willMatth. 26. 39.; content to wait Gods leiſure, and to
abide Gods pleaſure for death or for life2 Sam. 15. 26..
            And thus,Confirmandus est anumꝰ. vel ad mortis, vel ad vitae patientiam, Sē. ep. 24. for theſe cauſes, with theſe cautions;
death may lawfully be deſired.
            Now for the latter Branch, that euery Chriſtian
man hath good cauſe & great cauſe to deſire death;
(beſides that the Apoſtle as he deſireth it,Branch 2. ſo he hath
good ground for his deſire in that kinde2. Cor. 5. 8. and in this place.;) it may
further more clearely appeare vnto vs, if we ſhall
conſiderademptionē malorum, & aleptionē bonorum. the euils that death freeth vs from, togither

with the benefits that it bringeth vs vnto.
            
               Mors nulliꝰ mali est materia, multorum finis. Sen de ben. l. 7. c. 1. Malorum omnium remedium eſt. Idē quaeſt. nat. l. 6. c. 32. The euils that Death freeth vs from are either
corporall or ſpirituall.Reaſon 1.
            
            The corporall euils may be referred to 4 heads:
Firſt,Euils thoſe iniuries and wrongs that Gods children
ſuſtaine at the hands of worldly men that here
oppugne and oppreſſe them.Corporall 1. For all that will liue,
godlily, while they liue here, muſt looke to ſuffer perſecution
               2. Tim. 3. 12. nunquā deerit perſecutio Chriſtiano, ſicut nec Chriſto, Si ergo pro Chriſto preſſuram nondum pateris, vide ne piè viuere in Chriſto nōdū ceperis. Aug. in Pſal. 55. Fidenter dico, quia minus piè viuis, ſi minus perſecutionem pertuleris. Greg. ep. 27. l. 6.; and the way to Gods kingdome is through
many tribulations
               Act. 14 23.: the world hateth them, becauſe
though they be in it, yet are they not of itJoh. 15. 19.: and
this hatred will laſt ſo long as the world laſtsLuk 21. 12, 16, 17.; ſo
long as the one is in it,Troa. 29. 17. and the other of it: neither
will it ceaſe to diſcouer it ſelfe in miſchieuous attemptsJoh. 16. 2. Pſal. 37. 12. 14.,
ſo oft as abilitie and opportunitie ſhall
meete. In regard whereof, Chriſtian men, ſaith our
Apoſtle, had they hope onely in this life, were of all men
the moſt miſerable
               1. Cor. 15. 19.. Chriſtian men therefore as they
haue no cauſe to loue life; ſo they haue no neede to
feare death: yea as they haue litle cauſe to loue this
life, conſidering the wrongs that here daily they
endure; ſo they haue great cauſe to deſire death,
that putteth an end to them all; that ſetteth them
and the wicked ſo far aſunder, that they can not one
come any more at the otherLuk. 16. 26., to vex or moleſt or
annoy one the other. In reſpect whereof it is well
ſaid by ſome of the Ancients, that Gods children are
neuer better deliuered, then when deliuered by death:
for that then they are deliuered not out of one, but out
of all troubles at once
               Aug. in Pſal. 34. 17, 19.; and ſo deliuered as they neede
no further deliuerance any more
               Bern. in Pſal. 91. 15, 16..
            Secondly,Corporall 2. thoſe temporall corrections and chaſtiſements,

that the corruptions of Gods children
by way
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Ariſt. of cure here require. For here God is oftentimes
cōſtrained to ſmite them with the wounds
of an enemie, in ſharpe and ſeuere manner,ethic. l. 2. c. 3. becauſe
their iniquities are many and their tranſgreſſions
great and grieuousJerem. 30. 14.; to iudge them in this world,
that they may not be condemned in the next1. Cor. 11. 32.. But
after this life, as there ſhall be no neede of naturall
foode or phyſicke for the bodie; ſo there ſhall be
no neede of ſuch ſpirituall phyſicke for the ſoule.
As we ſhall be rid of corruption, ſo we ſhall neede
no more correction. As there ſhall be no vſe of
preaching or ſacraments, ſo there ſhall be no neede
of ſuch ſharpe courſes, as God is now faine to take
with vs: for all griefe and paine ſhall be then done
awayEſai. 35. 10.; and all teares wiped away from our eyesEſai. 25. 8. Apoc. 21. 4. Mors omnium dolorū & ſolutio eſt, & finis; vltra quam mala noſtra non exeant. Sen. ad Marc. c. 19. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Aeſchyl.:
we ſhall neuer feare then to taſte of Gods anger againeEſal. 54. 9. Corporall 3.;
nor euer know what his diſpleaſure meaneth
any more.
            Thirdly, all laborious and painfull imployments:
they reſt then from their labours
               Apoc. 14. 13.; which though
the works themſelues are not euill; yet the paine
and toile accompanying them is of the puniſhment
of ſinneGen. 3. 19., and ſo euill in it ſelfe. Martha ſhall not
neede then to complaine of Marie
               Luk. 10. 40, 41.: nor the Prophet
neede by preaching to waſte his lights and his
lifeEſai. 49. 4.. As all miſery, ſo all mercy and works of
mercy ſhall then ceaſeIpſa ceſſabunt miſericordiae opera, vbi nulla erit indigentiae miſeria.. As there ſhall be then no
hunger nor thirſt, nor other neceſſities of natureApoc. 7. 16. & 21. 4.:
ſo we ſhall not neede there either to feede the hungry,
as we did hereMa
                     •
                  .25. 35, 36., or to haue a fellow-feeling of
their hunger;Aug. de 10. chord. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Sophal. that which maketh vs many times

as miſerable, as thoſe themſelues are to whom we
ſhew mercyHeb. 10. 33, 34. & 13. 3. miſ
                     •
                   ricordia nonnall is q
                     •
                  od miſerum cor faciat. Aug. contr. aduerſ. l. g.l 1. c. 20. & Iſidor. orig. l 10..
            Fourthly, all infirmities and bodily paines and
diſeaſes. Death is the beſt Phyſition
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Sophocl. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Aeſchyl. Vltimus & optimꝰ medicus morborum etiam immedicabilium mo
                     •
                  s., the beſt phyſick
for them
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Euripid. Mors omnibus finis, multis remedium, nonnullis votum. Sen. ad Marc. c. 20.: it cureth vs not of one but of all,
and of all at once; not for once onely, but for
euer
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Euripid..
            And what ſpeake I of diſeaſes, or of other diſeaſes?
Death cureth vs euen of death.
            
               Old age; ſaith one, is a diſeaſe euill enough of it
ſelfeIpſa ſenectꝰ morbus eſt. Terent.: yea our life it ſelfe is a diſeaſeIpſa vita morbus eſt. Aug de tēp. 74., and a deadly
diſeaſe, a diſeaſe vnto deathPſal. 89. 48.: and there is no
meanes to cure vs of this diſeaſe but by death. We

                  〈◊〉
                freed from death by death; as by death Chriſt
deſtroyed deathHebr. 2. 14.; while mortalitie is ſwallowed
vp of life2. Cor. 5. 4., and immortalitie, the only true healthIpſa immortalitas vera ſanitas eſt. Aug. ibid.,
is atchieued by death.
            The ſpirituall euils that death freeth vs from, are
alſo of 4. ſorts.
            The firſt of Satans temptations. The Chriſtian
ſoule, while it is in this world, is in fight euer with
SatanEpheſ. 6. 11, 12., who is continually labouring to worke our
euill1. Petr. 5. 8., and to worke vs vnto euill1. Chron. 21. 1.: and if he can
not draw vs out of Gods way, by beating and buffeting
vs to vex and annoy vs2. Cor. 1 2. 7., and ſo to make
Gods way as tedious and troubleſome, as he can
poſſibly, vnto vsApoc. 12. 4, 13, 15, 17.. And this courſe he continueth
with vs to our liues end, raging many times moſt
furiouſly when we draw neereſt to our end, becauſe
he knoweth his time then is but ſhortApoc. 12. 12.. But byEuils. Spirituall 1.
               
death we preuaile againſt him, and get full victorie
ouer himApoc. 15. 2. & 20. 4. & 12. 11.; when he is not onely ſo caſt out of vsIoh. 12. 31.,
that he can not ſway in vs, as before our conuerſion
ſometime he didEph
                     •
                  ſ. 2. 2.; but is ſo ſhaken off from vs,
that he can neuer once returne againe, as with our
Sauiour he did ſometimeLuk. 4 13., to tempt vs. For our
ſoules are out of his reach, when they are taken vp
into heauenApoc. 12. 5., whither that wicked one hath now
no acceſſeApoc. 12. 9, 10..
            The ſecond ſort is of worldly prouocations and
euill examples.Spirituall 2. The children of God while they
are in the world, can not but liue among, and conuerſe
with the wicked of the world1. Cor. 5. 10.: and liuing among
them, and conuerſing with them, they can
not but heare their blaſphemous ſpeechesPſal. 31. 13. Ier. 20. 10. Eſai. 36. 22. & 37. 23, 25., and ſee
their lewd courſesPſal. 55. 9. & 119. 158., whereby they abuſe and diſhonor
God: that which is a matter of no ſmall
griefe and vexation to Gods childrenPſal. 119. 136, 158. 2. Pet. 2. 7, 8.; yea ſo great
that it maketh them oft á-weary of their liuesGeneſ. 27. 46..
As indeed how can it be but a grieuous heart-ſore
to any faithfull ſubiect and well-affected to his Soueraigne,
to be conſtrained to abide in ſuch a place,Pſal. 120. 5, 6.
and among ſuch people,Ierem 9. 2, 3. where his Lord and maſter
is daily railed on and reuiled in his hearing, and
thoſe things done daily in his ſight, that tend to the
diſgrace and diſhonor of him, whom he deſeruedly
moſt reſpects? But we are freed from all theſe euils
alſo, when we go out of the world1. Cor. 5. 10.. For howſoeuer
here the graine and chaffe lye togither in one fieldMath. 13. 25, 26, 30.;
yet there the chaffe goeth one way, and the good
graine another wayMath. 13. 12. Luk. 3. 17., the tares are caſt one way,
and the good corne is caried another wayMath. 13. 30., euen

into Gods garner, to a place where there ſhall be
no matter of ſcandallMath. 13. 41., to make them ſtumble and
fallRom. 14. 21. 1. Cor. 8. 9. or to vex and grieueRom. 14. 15. them any more.
            The third ſort of ſpirituall euils is of ſinne and
corruption;Spirituall 3. then which nothing is more burdenſome
and comberſome to a Chriſtian ſouleRom. 7. 24., not
ſo much for feare of wrath,1. Cor. 8. 12. as for deſire to pleaſe
God, and for griefe that thereby he ſhould ſhew
himſelfe vnkinde and vnthankfull to him, whom he
hath euer found ſo gratious and good to himſelfe.
And if this be ſo heauy to a Chriſtian ſoule, that he
ſhould ſo diſpleaſe and diſhonor his heauenly father
by his errors and ouer-ſightsRom. 2. 23., whoſe honor
ought to be deerer to him than all the worlds
wealth,2. Sam. 12. 14. yea then his owne ſoule it ſelfeMath. 5. 16. & 6. 10.; how is
death then to be deſired of him,Exo. 32. 12, 32. that freeth him
from this burden; that giueth an vtter eaſe from it,
an eternall diſcharge of it? For he that is dead, is
freed from ſinne
               Rom. 6. 7.. Death, it ſtrippeth vs of our old
man, our old skin, all at once, not, as ſanctification
doth it here, by degrees: yea it placeth vs in far better
eſtate, then our firſt parents were in before their
fallAd
                     •
                  m acceper at poſſe quod veſſet, 
                     〈◊〉
                   velle quod poſſet: nos accipimus & poſſe quod volumus & velle quod poſſ
                     •
                  
                  mus. ille poſſe non peccare; nos non poſſe peccare. Aug. de corrept. & grat. c. 11.. For they were ſo free from ſinne, that yet
they might haue will to ſinne: we ſhall be ſo freed
by death from ſinne, that we ſhall neuer haue either
will or minde againe therevnto.
            The fourth ſort of euils ſpirituall is of diuine deſertion,
whereby God in this life,Spirituall 4. though he neuer
indeede leaue his childrenIoh. 16. 32. Hebr. 13. 5., yet ſometime ſeemeth
to forſake them
               Math. 26. 46. Pſal. 22. 1.; though he euer remember and regard
themEſai. 49. 14, 15., yet ſometime ſeemeth to forget them
               Pſal. 13. 1.:
he doth many times, for ſecret cauſes beſt knowne

to himſelfe, with-draw from them the ſight and
ſenſe of his gratious preſence and aſſiſtance, and
looke vpon them with a frowning and a lowring
countenance. Which thing how grieuous and heauy
it is to Gods ſaints for the preſent, may appeare
by thoſe mournefull plaints that they powre out in
ſuch caſesPſal. 6. 1, 2, 3. 6. & 13. 1, 2. & 27. 9, 13. & 30. 7. & 31. 16, 22. & 77. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10.: euen ſo grieuous, that (for the time)
they ſeeme to be in the very ſuburbs of hell. Whereas
by death they are freed from all ſuch dreadfull
deſertions; being placed in ſuch a ſtate thereby, that
as God ſhall neuer be againe diſpleaſed with them, ſo he
ſhall neuer in diſpleaſure againe turne his face away
from themEſai. 54. 7, 8, 9..
            And thus haue we ſeene the euils of all ſorts, that
death is a meanes to free vs from.
            Now in the next place,Reaſon 2. conſider we the Benefits
that death bringeth vs vnto: which may likewiſe
be reduced to 4. heads.
            The firſt is the full conſummation of Grace,Benefit 1. that
is here but imperfect and in part1. Cor. 13. 9, 11.: as first fruits
               Rom 8. 23.,
but an handfullLevit. 23. 10. to the whole crop; as an earneſtpenny
               Epheſ. 1. 14. 2. Cor. 1. 22. & 5. 5.
giuen in pledge of full payment. But if the
firſt-fruits be ſo pretious1. Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. 1. Pet. 1. 7. 2 Petr. 1. 4., thoſe ſmall beginnings
of Grace, that the true Chriſtian, the wiſe merchant,
would not take the world in exchange for themMath. 13. 46.;
that he counteth all the wealth of this world, but as
traſh, as dr
                     •
                  ſſe and dongue in regard of themPhilip. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10.; oh
what will the full crop be? if the earneſt-penny be
ſo pretious, what will the entire payment be? And
if we then thirſt and long after growth ofMath. 5. 6. grace,
how ſhould we deſire death that bringeth with it a
full conſummation of1. Cor. 13. 10. Viuere volunt vt perfecti ſ
                     •
                  nt. mori v
                     •
                  lint, & perfecti 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Aug. 
                     •
                  n Mat. ſig. 17. grace, that bringeth grace
to it full growth?
            
               
The ſecond Benefit is a perfection of gloryPſal. 84 11.;
ſuch an excellencie as ſhall make vs not onely gratiousBenefit 2.
in our ſelues,Rom. 2. 7, 10. & 5. 2. but moſt glorious alſo in the
eyes of all that behold vs:2. Tim. 2. 10. that which the Apoſtle
calleth2. Cor. 4. 17. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               an exceeding exceſsiue eternall weight of glory:
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Themiſt. apud St
                     ••
                  . c. 119.
and ſaith further,that all the afflictions of this
life, are not worthy once to be named with that glory,
that in the next life ſhall be manifeſted, not vnto vs
onely, but euen in vs
               Rom. 8. 18. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in nobis, Beza. neque enim erimus 
                     •
                  tioſi ſpectatores, ſed participes gloriae. Bern. de diuerſ. 1..
            When the ſunne of righteouſnes ſhall ſhine full
vpon vsMalac. 4. 2., and ſhining full vpon vs, ſhall make vs
like vnto himſelfeColoſſ. 3. 4.; ſo that we ſhall alſo ſhine as
the ſunne in the kingdome of heauen
               Math. 13. 43.. This we are
not able to conceiue what it is.1. Ioh. 3. 2. We can gueſſe ſomewhat
at the former,2. Cor. 3. 18. becauſe we haue the firſt-fruits
of it here:2. Theſſ. 1. 10. but this we are not able to giue almoſt
any gueſſe at. But the Apoſtle Peter, in Chriſts tranſfiguration,
ſeeing a glimpſe of it (oh it is good being
here, ſaith he) would faine haue ſtayed there ſtillMath. 17. 4..
And the Apoſtle Paul that had ſeene it,bonum eſt nobis eſſe hîc. could not
vtter what he had ſeene2. Cor. 12. 4., but longed exceedingly
after it, as one neuer well till he were there2. Cor. 5. 2.. And
vndoubtedly, enlarge we our mindes all that may
be, we ſhall ſay, when we ſhall come to ſee and enioy
it, as the Queene of the South, when ſhee came
and ſaw Salomons royaltie1. King. 10. 6, 7., the one halfe, nay the
hundreth part of that we ſhall finde there, was neuer
either reported vnto vs, or conceiued of vs here.
            The third Benefit,Benefit 3. is the inſeparable company of
Chriſt. They ſhall follow the Lambe there, whitherſoeuer
he goeth
               Apoc. 14. 4.. In this world is Chriſt ſaid to be
with vs
               Pſal. 91. 15.: after this life are we
               Math. 28. 19. ſaid to he with him
               Iob. 14. 3. & 12. 26. & 17. 24..
            
               
Here he is ſaid to be with vs, while we ſoiourne from
him
               2. Cor. 5. 6.: there are we ſaid to goe to him, and to be at his
home with him
               2. Cor. 5. 8.. And if it be matter of much joy
to haue Chriſt with vs here, what will it be to abide
for euer with him there1. Theſſ. 4. 17.? If Chriſts preſence by
his ſpiritIoh. 14. 16, 17, 18. be ſo comfortable here, that it is able to
cheere vs vp in all our greateſt afflictionsRom. 5. 3. & 14 17.: what
ſhall his glorious preſence be eternally there?
            Conceiue we it by ſome compariſons.Pſal. 23. 4. It were a
great grace,Philip. 4 4. and ſuch as would miniſter much comfort
to a Courtier lying ſicke at home of the gowt,1. Theſſ. 5. 16.
to haue the Prince not onely to ſend to him,2. Cor 1. 3, 4, 5. but in
perſon alſo to viſit him:Eſſe Chriſtum cum Paulomagna ſecuritas: Eſſe Paulum cum Chriſto ſumma felicitas. Bern. in Pſal. Qui hab. but much more comfort
and joy would it be to him, to be able, being recouered,
to repaire to the Court, and there enjoy his
Princes preſence, with ſuch fauors and pleaſures, as
that place may afford. How much more then, in
this caſe, is it a great grace and a comfort, that God
vouchſafeth to viſit vs here by his ſpiritIoh. 14. 23., ſometime
more familiarly and feelingly, but euer ſo effectually,Apoc. 3. 20
as thereby to ſupport vs euen in our heauieſt
afflictions? but yet how much more exceedingly
ſhall our ioy and comfort be increaſed, when being
freed from all infirmities, we ſhall be taken home to
him, that we may liue in ioy and bliſſe for euer with
him? As that Courtier hauing aſſurance giuen him
of recouery by ſuch a time, would exceedingly reioyce
to thinke of the ioy of that day, and count
euery day a weeke, if not a yeere, to it, wherein he
ſhould being recoured returne againe to the Court,
and be welcommed thither in ſolemne manner by
all his frends there, the Prince himſelfe principally:

ſo well may the faithfull ſoule not a litle ioy to forethinke
with it ſelfe, what a ioyfull howre that ſhall
be vnto it, wherein by death parted from the body,
it ſhall be ſolemnly preſented before the face of
Chriſt, and entring into the heauenly palace, ſhall be
welcomed thither by the whole court of heauen, by
all the bleſſed ſpirits that there abideHebr. 12. 22, 23, 24..
            Againe; this life is the time of our contract with
ChriſtHoſh. 2. 19, 20.deſponſabo te mihi. after this life commeth our mariage-dayApoc. 19. 7. & 21. 2..
Now as a virgin eſpouſed to one that is trauailed to
the Eaſt-Indies, if ſhe do indeed faithfully and vnfainedly
affect him, though ſhe ioy to read a letter,
or to ſee ſome token from him, yet it is nothing in
that kinde that can giue her contentmentNil mihi reſcribas: attamen ipſe veni. Penelope Vlyſſi. Ovid. ep. 1., but ſhee
longeth for his preſence, deſireth to heare of his
returne, and joyeth to thinke on that day, when
meeting againe they ſhall be ſo matched, as they
ſhall neuer more againe be ſo ſeuered. So here,
though the Chriſtian ſoule contracted to Chriſt, during
the time of this contract, in his abſence from
herLuk. 19. 12., receiue many fauors and loue-tokens from
himEpheſ. 4. 7, 8., as are all the bleſſings ſhe enioyeth here, be
they ſpirituall or temporall1. Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23.; yet they can not all of
them giue full contentment vnto her,1. Cor. 12. 4, 8, 9, 10, 11. but helpe rather
to enflame her affection towards him, and make
her,Rom. 8. 32. if ſhe ſincerely loue him, as ſhe profeſſeth and
pretendeth to do, the more earneſtly and ardently to
long for that day, wherein ſhe ſhall come inſeparably
to be lincked vnto him, and euerlaſtingly to enioy
his perſonall preſence, which aboue all things
ſhe moſt deſireth.
            The fourth and laſt,Benefit 4. but not the leaſt Benefit that

death bringeth vs vnto, is immediate communion
with God: when God ſhall be all in all and vnto all
               1 Cor. 15. 28.:
when we ſhall draw our delights from the fountaine
of allJam. 1. 17., from the well-headPſal. 36. 8, 9.: when God ſhall conueigh
and miniſter vnto vs immediately by himſelf,Apoc. 7. 17.
whatſoeuer he now communicateth vnto vs by
meanesApoc. 21, 22, 23.. This (though it be the greateſt benefit
of all,Eſai.58.13.Pſal. 122. 1. & 63. 3, 4, 5. yet we can ſay the leaſt of all of it. Onely
thus much: If the meanes whereby God now imparteth
his mercies vnto vs, be ſo ſweet to Gods
ſaints, (the miniſterie of his word, his holy myſteries,
and religious offices) that they earneſtly thirſt
after them when they want themPſal. 42. 1, 2, & 63. 1, 2. & 119. 20., delight exceedingly
in them when they haue them, ſeeme to be
euen rauiſhed and enamoured with themPſal. 84 per totū. & 119. 97., prefer1 Petr. 2. 2, 3.
the ſweetnes of them before the ſweeteſt ſweetsPſal. 19. 10. & 119. 103. Iob. 23. 12.,
yea ſeeme to doate ſo vpon them, that they haue neuer
enough of themPſal. 27. 4. & 63. 5, 6. & 119. 62, 57, 147, 148, 164.  if the dimme beames, I
ſay, of Gods face and fauor ſhining through theſe
thick clouds and veiles be ſo comfortable to them,
that they eſteeme all worldly ioyes and delights, as
nothing in regard of themb: oh what ſhall God
himſelf be, when we ſhall ſee him fully face to faceEſai. 33. 14, 15, 16, 27.  1. Cor. 13. 12.  1. Ioh. 3. 2. Quis oculis glorietur, qui ſuſpicentur diem? quibus Sol per caliginē ſplendet? licet contentus interim ſat effugiſſe tenebras, adhuc non fruitur bon
                        •
                      lucis. Tunc animꝰ noſter habebit quod gratuletur ſibi, cum emiſſus his tenebris, in quibus volutatur, non tenui viſu clara perſpexerit, ſed totum diem admiſerit, & redditꝰ cælo (Deo) ſuo fuerit.
                  
                     Sen. ep. 79. Quid tibi videbitur divina lux, cum illam ſuo loco videris? Tunc in tenebris vixiſſe dices, cum totam lucem totus aſpexeris, quem nunc, per anguſtiſſimas oculorum vias, obſcurè intueris, & tamen 
                        〈◊〉
                      tam procul. ep. 102.
               ,
when we ſhall finde all togither in him, draw all immediately
from him, and enioy whatſoeuer our
heart can deſire or minde imagine, yea far more
than either of them can poſſibly now reach toEpheſ. 3. 20.,
in him.
            And thus we haue ſeene the benefit of death,

both in regard of the euils from which it freeth vs;Concluſion.
as alſo in regard of thoſe good things that thereby
accrew vnto vs: whence we may well conclude,
that as Gods children may lawfully deſire it, ſo they
haue iuſt cauſe and great cauſe earneſtly to long after
it.
            Now the Vſe then of this point is firſt to ouerthrow
the opinion of thoſe that thinke it not lawfull
in any caſe to wiſh or deſire death,2 King. 22. 20. yea in regard of
freedome from outward euils;Eſai. 57. 1, 2. ſithence it is promiſed,Apoc. 14. 13.
as we haue ſhewed,
                  Ʋſe 1. by God as a bleſſing, and as
a bleſſing in that very kinde1 King. 14. 12, 13..
            Yea but, may ſome ſay, if we may deſire it, we
may do it: we may then haſten our owne end.
            It followeth not. A man may deſire many things
to be done,Tuſcul. lib. 1. which yet he himſelfe may not doe. A
man may deſire the miniſterie1 Tim. 3. 1.: yet he may notQu
                     •
                  ntots mperator terrae huius in peregrinis l
                     ••
                  is aut honoris ſpecie aut muneris alicuius cauſa iubet degere? nunquid hinc inconſulto Imperator
                     •
                   diſcedunt? & quāto amplius eſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   parere quàm h
                     •
                  
                  manis? Ambroſ. de bon. mort. c. 2.
make himſelfe a miniſterHabr. 5. 4, 5.. He may deſire to haue
ſome malefactors taken away by the ſword of iuſtice:
yet, being a priuate perſon, he may not do it
himſelfe. So a man may deſire death, and ſeeke it at
Gods hands; but not procure it or haſten it by any
meanes of his owneVetat ille dominans in nobis Deus iniuſſu hinc not ſuo demigrare, Ci
                     •
                  ..
            Secondly, it ſerueth to ſhame and condemne
ſuch as are ſo loth to dye, that they can not endure
to heare of death and diſſolution:
                  Ʋſe 2. ſo far from deſiring
that which they haue ſo great cauſe to deſire,
that they can not brooke or abide any mention or
motion of it, can worſt of any thing away with it:
in ſo much that ſome forbeare the doing of ſome
things, ſome matters of conueniencie, yea ſome
neceſſarie duties, as making of their Wils, out of a

friuolous and ſuperſtitious conceit, that they ſhall
dye ſhortly, if they do them.
            Yea many though they can not liue, yet are vnwilling
to dye
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Epictet. apud Stob. cap. 120. Inter mortis m
                     •
                   tum & vitae tormenta miſeri fluctuant: & viuere nolunt, & mori neſciunt. Sen. ep. 4. Patinon vultis, exire timetis; qui
                     •
                   faciam vobis? Cyprian, de mortal.. Though they liue in that miſerie,
that they can haue no ioy of their liues, that their life
is rather a lingring death than a lifeHerodicum 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Plato apud Plut. de ſera vind. Quid huius viuere eſt? diu mori. Sen., yet would
they rather continue ſtill in ſuch miſerable plight,epiſt. 101.
then be content to haue an end put to their intolerable
torments, much more bitter than many
deaths, by an eaſie diſſolution, by a ſpeedy diſpatch.
No paine, no torment, no pangs of death, can preuaile
ſo with them, as to make them willing to vndergo
what they can not auoide
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Homer. Odyſſ. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Eurip. Iphigen. Debilem facito manu, Debil
                     •
                  m pede, coxa: Tuber adſtruegibberum; Lubricos quatedentes. Vita du
                     ••
                   ſupereſt, benè eſt. Mecaenas: Qued miſerrimum erat, ft incidiſſet, optatur; & tanquam vita petitur, ſupplicij mora. Invenitur qui malit inter ſupplicia tabeſcere, & perire membratim, & toties per ſtillicidia amittere animam quam ſemel exhalare? Invenitur, qui velit trahere animam tot tormenta tracturam? Vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adeò ne mori miſerum eſt? Eſt tanti, habere animā, vt agam. Sen. epiſt. 101. Interdū obnixè petimus, quod oblatnm re uſar. mus. Mulia videri volumus velle, ſed nolumus. Saepe aliud volumus, aliud optamus. & verum ne Dijs quid
                     •
                  m dicimus. Sen. epiſt. 95.?, or content to goe
to God.
            Now for Heathen, or ſuch as haue no hope but
herePſal. 17. 14. 1. Theſſ. 4. 13., to be thus affected, were not greatly to be
wondred at. But for Chriſtians, that profeſſe themſelues
to be but pilgrims and ſtrangers herePſal. 39. 12. 1. Pet. 2. 11., this
world a ſtrange country to them, and heauen their
owne countreyPhil. 3. 20., their home, their fathers houſe;
for them to be ſo vnwilling to leaue this world, to
depart hence, to returne to their owne home, as if
their fathers houſe were not an heauen but an hell,
it is a foule ſhame, it is no ſmall blemiſh to their
Chriſtian profeſſion.
            Yea it ſheweth ſuch perſons to be poſſeſſed ſtill
with a great meaſure of hypocriſie. For what is it

but hypocriſie, when our prayers and our practiſe
concur not, when the one is directly contrary vnto
the other, when we are moſt vnwilling to that, that
daily we would ſeeme to deſire Or how do not
our prayers and our practiſe the one directly croſſe
the other, when we pray daily to haue, not our will,
but Gods will to be done
               Matth. 6. 10.; and yet when it commeth
to the point,Meminiſſe debem
                     •
                   voluntatem not nō noſtrā, ſed Dei facere debere, ſecundū quod nos Deus iuſſit quotidiè orare. Cyprtan. de mortal. that God calleth vs to come to him, we
hang back, and are vnwilling to do what he willeth
vsQuam prepoſterum eſt, quamque peruerſum, vt cum Dei voluntatē fieri poſtulemus, quando evocat nos & aecerſit de hoc mundo, non ſtatim voluntatis eius imperio pareamus? Hoc nitimur & reluctamur, & pervicaciū more ſeruorum ad conſpectū Domini, cū triſtitia & maerore perducimur, nō obſequio voluntatis; & volumus ab eo praemijs caele ſtib
                     •
                   honorari, ad quē venim
                     •
                   inviti. Idē ib., would rather writh Gods will to ours, than conforme
our will to his, would rather haue our owne
will done againſt Gods will to our owne euill, then
the will of our louing father wrought on vs for our
good? How do not our tongues and our hearts
apparently and exceedingly jarre, when we pray
daily to God, that his kingdome may come
               Matth. 6 10., and yet
we wiſh and deſire rather to ſtay here ſtill, where Satans
throne
               Apoc. 2. 13. and kingdome2. Cor. 4. 4. Joh. 12. 31. & 16. 11. 
               is; and where we our
ſelues are in ſome degree ſtill of thraldomeRom. 7. 14, 23, 24., then to
be tranſlated hence vnto that eternall kingdomeQuid rogamus & petimus vt adveniat regnum coelorum, ſi captiuit as nos terrena delectat
                     •
                   quid precibus frequenter iteratis rogamus & poſcimus, vt acceleret dies regni, ſo maiora deſideria, & vota potiora ſunt ſeruire iſthic diabolo, quàm regnare cum Chriſto? Cyprian. de mortal.;
where we ſhall be abſolutely free from all ſpirituall
ſeruitude, and ſhall reigne in glory for euer with
Chriſt Ieſus our head?
            And ſurely ſtrange it is to ſee here, as
                  Mornay of Life and Death. one
well obſerueth, how contrariwiſe we are in this
kinde affected to our owne courſes otherwiſe.
For the labourer haſteth to repoſe himſelfeJob. 7. 1, 2.;
the mariner roweth with all might to gaine his

port, and is glad at the heart when he is once
come within kenning of it; the trauailer is neuer
quiet till he be at his wayes end. And yet we
tied in this world to a perpetuall taske, toſſed as on
the ſea, with continuall tempeſt, toyled and tyred
out with a tedious and comberſome paſſage, can
not ſee the end of our paines but with griefe, view
our port but with teares, thinke on our home but
with horror and dread: Seeme weary of our
worke, of our waues, and our way; and yet when
death commeth to rid vs of them, to ſet vs at an
end of them, and to put vs into our port,ad Polyb. cap. 28. Iuſto mors ſalut is portus. Ambroſ. de bon. mori. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Plut. de tranquill. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Sotades. In hoc tam procelloſo & in oēs tempeſt ates expoſito marl narigantibus, nullus portus niſi mortis eſt. Sen. we ſhun
it as a rocke, and cannot endure the ſight of itNemo ſine querela moritur: quis non recuſans, quis non gemens exit? Morney ibid. Sen. de benef. lib. 5. c. 17. Quis non, vbi mors prope acceſſerit, tergiverſatur, tremit, plorat? Idē epiſt. 78.: do
as litle children, that go crying out of ſome maladie
all day, and at night when the medicine commeth
that ſhould heale and helpe them of their paine, or
the Barber-Surgion that ſhould pluck out the akingtooth,
haue no griefe more now, but are wel enough
without it; feare the meanes of eaſe more than the
diſeaſe,: the medicine more than the maladie it ſelf
ſo we feare what we ſhould wiſh for,
and wiſ what we ſhould feare; yea feare moſt and abhorre what
we haue moſt cauſe to deſire
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Plato apolog..
            Oh but life is ſweet, will ſome ſay: and man is a
creature that loueth life
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Aeſop. fabul..
            Do we loue life? let vs loue true life, loue eternall
life, loue that life that is life indeed2. Tim. 6. 19. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . vel vt 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .. For this life is
no life, but a death rather than life
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Eurip. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Plato Gorg.. It is no true life
that yeeldeth to death, that tendeth to death, that

endeth in deathGen. 5. 27.: that is true life, that is eternall:
that is true life,Pſal. 88. 48. that cannot be diſſolued by deathHebr. 7. 16. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               .
If we deſire ſuch life then, let vs deſire death: for
there is no way to ſuch life but by death2 Cor. 5. 1, 4. Quod interim morimur, ad immorialitatē morte transgredimur: nec poteſt vita aeterna ſuccedere, niſi hi
                     •
                  c contigerit excire: 
                     〈◊〉
                   eſt exitus, ſed trā
                  ſitus, & temporali itinere decurſo ad aterna trāſgreſſus. Cytrian. de mortal.
            
            As a Chriſtian man therefore hath no cauſe to
feare or abhorre deathQuid ni non timeat, qui mori ſperat? Sen. ep. 102., becauſe it can neither bereaue
him of ſpirituallMath. 22. 32., nor debarre him of eternall
lifeApoc. 20. 6.: (he dieth not, though he dyeIoh. 8. 51, 52. & 11. 25, 26.: his death is no
death:) ſo he hath great cauſe to loue and deſire
death, becauſe it bringeth him to perfection of ſpirituall
life1 Cor. 13. 10., it placeth him in poſſeſſion of eternall
lifeMath. 25. 46.. As he hath no cauſe to dread death, becauſe
it cannot ſeuer him from ChriſtRom. 8. 38, 39.: ſo he hath good
cauſe to deſire death, becauſe it bringeth him home
vnto Chriſt2. Cor. 5. 8.. And it is no death, but life, to be
joyned vnto him; as it is no life, but death, to be
ſeuered from himNon eſt mors ſed vita, quae morientem Chriſto ſociat: non eſt vita, ſed mors, quae viuentē Chriſto ſeparat. Ambr. 1. Tim. 5. 6. 
            
            
               
                  Ʋse 3 Thirdly, this ſerueth to ſhew the efficacie and excellencie
of faith: it maketh thoſe things moſt
cheerefull, moſt comfortable, moſt deſirable, that
are moſt dreadfull, & diſcomfortable, and terrible
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Ariſt. ethic. l. 3. c. 6. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Epicur. ad Menaec. apud Laert.
in themſelues: it altereth cleane the nature of
things: it maketh the world irkeſome to Paul
               Galat. 6. 14.,
which all men naturally deſire and delight in: it
maketh death and diſſolution deſirable and delightſome
vnto him, which all men naturally abhorre;
inſomuch that though they be weary of life, yet
they are vnwilling to dye; though they haue no
pleaſure of their life, yet loath are they to leaue life,
and to dye once, that they may liue euer. It is cleane
contrary with Paul. His life is not deere to himAct. 20. 24.:
and death is deſired of him2. Cor. 5. 10.: yea ſo much deſired,

that he can hardly, but for others, induce himſelf to
liue longerPhilip. 1. 22, 23, 24 Quod viuit, liberalitas eſt. Sē. ep.: it is as hard a matter to make him patient
of life, as it is to make other men patient of
deathPatienter viuit; delectabilitur moritur. Aug. in 1. Ioā. tract. 9.: it is a maſtery with them to make them willing
to dye; it is a maſterie with him to make himſelfe
willing to liue. And ſurely a great matter it
muſt needs be, that maketh a man dye cheerefully,
not as one weary of life2. Cor. 5. 4., but as deſirous of deathNet ſpe mortis patienter dolet, nec taedio doloris libenter moritur. hunc fert, illam expectat. Sen. epiſt. 98. Tam turpe putat mortem fugere, quàm ad mortem confugere. Ibid.;
as deſirous of death, as other men are of life, becauſe
in death and by death he looketh for lifeProv. 14. 32. Ʋſe 4..
            Fourthly, this ſhould incite vs to the loue and
deſire of that, which we haue ſo good, ſo great cauſe
to deſireSapientis eſt totum in mortē prominere, hoc velle, hoc meditari, hac ſempercupidine ferri. Plato apud Sen. ad Marc. cap. 23. Oi 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Plato Phaed.; For what ſhould we deſire rather than
to be at reſt, at an end of all our troubles and trauels;
to be freed from the burden and bondage of
ſinne, from Satans aſſaults, from the preſent wicked
world; to be rid of infirmitie; to be ſtript of our
mortalitie; to be made perfectly gratious, and vnſpeakably
glorious; to be in ioy vnconceiuable, and
in happineſſe eternall; to be preſent with Chriſt, and
for euer with God? This was the end of Chriſts
deſcending, that we might aſcendDeſcendit altiſſimus, & ſuo nobis deſcenſu ſis 
                     •
                  uem ac ſa!ubrem dedicauit aſcenſum. Bern. de temp. 66.: of his deſcending
to vs, that we might aſcend vnto him: he to
miſery, we to glory; he to be crucified, we to be
crowned; he to be crucified for vs, we to be crowned
with him. And if he were content to do the
one, how much more we the other? If he counted
it meat and drinke to do that for our goodIoh. 4. 34. Luk 12. 50. & 22. 15., how
much more ſhould we deſire to do this for our own
good? And indeed his deſcending cannot be beneficiall
vnto vs, vnleſſe we aſcend vnto himAſcendit qui deſcendit. deſcendit, vt ſanaret te: aſcē
                  dit, vt leuaret te. Aug. de dinerſ. 12.. That
was the end of his deſcending: and that is the end

of his aſcending. As he deſcended, ſo he aſcended
that we might aſcendEpheſ. 4. 9, 10.: he went into heauen before
vs, to prepare a place for vsIoh. 14. 3., and to draw vs vp to
himIoh. 12. 32., that we might reigne for euer with himApoc. 20. 6.. And
ſhall we then be vnwilling to follow him to our
eternall glory, to our endles good? Certainely with
an euill will would wee accompanie him to the
croſſe, if we be ſo vnwilling to come after him to
the crowne. Oh let vs rouſe vp therefore our dull
and drowſie ſpirits; let vs ſharpen and whet on our
affections and deſires herevnto, that we may be willing
to dye, that we may euen deſire death. For, He
liueth but euill, that cannot dye well
               Malè viuit, quiſquis neſcit bene mori. Sen. de tranquill. c. 11.. And, It is one
point of well-dying, to be willing to dye
               Benè mori eſt libenter mori. Sen. epiſt. 61.. And no man
dieth more willingly, than he that deſireth death.
            Now that we may (with this bleſſed ſeruant and
Apoſtle of Chriſt) loue death and deſire death, let
vs ſo liue as we may not feare death. For how can
a man deſire what he feareth1. Ioh. 4. 18.? Wouldeſt thou
therefore haue death to be not terrible and horrible,
but deſirable and delectable; not lamentable, but
comfortable; not dreadfull, but cheerefull and delightfull
vnto thee? (For it is not, neither can it ſo
be vnto all, but vnto ſome onelyAd refrigerium iuſti vocantur, ad ſupplicium rapiuntur iniuſti. datur mors tutela fidentibus, perfidis poena. Cyprian. de mortal.; to thoſe alone
that are qualified ſo,Meanes 1. as our Apoſtle here was.)
            Then firſt ſuffer not thy ſoule to be glewed to
this world. For it is the loue of this life that maketh
death bitterVna eſt catena quae nos alligatos tenet, amor vitae. Sen. ep. 26.. Therefore are ſo few content to be
diſſolued, beeauſe they are ſo wedded to the worldSic veteres inquilinos indulgentia loci & conſuetudo; etiam inter iniurias detinet, Idē ep. 70.;
whereas to a minde that loatheth and miſliketh the
world, nothing is ſo welcome as death, that taketh
him out of the world.
            
               
Yea take heede that the good bleſſings that God
here vouchſafeth thee, cleaue not too cloſe to thee.
For euen they are often vnto vs, as Abſolom to Dauid
               2. Sam. 15. 6., a meanes priuily to filch our affections from
God, and to make vs more vnwilling to go hence
vnto God. Let vs remember that theſe things,
though good things, are but as rings and louetokens
that God wooeth vs here withall. And as
it were but an harlotry loue in vs, to affect the preſent
more than the party that ſendeth itMeretricius amor plus annulum quàm ſponſum diligere. Aug. medit.; ſo an abſurd
and a prepoſterous thing, that Gods louetokens
ſent to vs, ſhould leſſen our loue to him, and
make vs leſſe deſirous of the fruition of him. Which
that therefore they may not do, we muſt take heede
that our hearts be not ſet too much on them
               Pſal. 62. 10.; that we
vſe them ſo that we do not abuſe them
               1. Cor. 7. 30, 31.; that we be
not ſo deſirous ſtill to retaine them, that they make
vs more vnwilling, parting with them, to depart to
him that ſent them, when he ſhall call vs to come to
him. Let vs ſo poſſeſſe them, that they hang looſe
about vs: then when death commeth to ſtrip vs of
them, they will go off with eaſe, as we ſlip off our
garments, when we lay vs downe to ſleep. Otherwiſe
if they cleaue to vs, we ſhall not part but with
paine; as the ſhirt that ſticketh faſt to the vlcerous
body, and pulleth skin and fleſh away withall: as
the tooth, that ſtandeth faſt in the head, commeth
not out but with much difficultie, teareth the gum,
or bringeth a peece of the jaw away with it; when
the tooth that is looſe, commeth out with eaſe.
            Secondly,Meanes 2. hate ſinne, and death will be delightfull
vnto thee. It is the loue of their corruptions,

that maketh men loth to leaue themJob. 20. 12, 13., and loath to
appeare there,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Clem. 
                     •
                  l. ſtrom. l. 5. where they muſt be called to account
for them. The loue of ſinne maketh men feare
death: and the hatred of ſinne would make men
loue and deſire death. For he that hateth ſinne in
himſelfeRom. 7. 16, 17., cannot but deſire to haue the bodie of
ſinne wholy aboliſhed in his ſouleRom. 6. 6.: which, becauſe
it will laſt with him as long as he liuethEccleſ 7. 22., and will
not be vtterly abandoned till death;1. Joh. 1. 8. therefore the
more he hateth it,1. Knig. 8. 46. the leſſe he loueth life; the more
he abhorreth it, the more he deſireth death. As the
more impatient of ſicknes, ſo the more impatient
of ſinne, the more deſirous of deathRom. 7. 24..
            Thirdly,Meanes 3. 
               lay a good foundation for life eternall
               1. Tim. 6. 19..
Labour to keepe a good conſcience, and the comfort
of a good conſcience2. Cor. 1. 12. & 5. 8, 9., and death ſhall not be
dreadfull but cheerefull vnto thee. For the godly
hath hope euen in death
               Prou. 14. 32.. The worldly man hath his
hope, as his happineſſe, in this life
               Pſal. 17. 14. alone. And therefore
ſo long as life laſteth, ſome ſory hope he may
haueDum ſpirat ſperat. Eccleſ. 9. 4. Aegroto dum aīa eſt, ſpes eſſe dicitur. Cic ad Attic. lib. 9. ep. 12. But when he dieth, his hope dieth with him
               Prou. 11.7. & 10.18. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Theocr. idyll. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Eurip. Troad..
And therefore iuſtly feareth he death, that putteth
a finall end, as to his happineſſe, ſo to his hopes.
Whereas the godly man retaineth his hopes, euen
when life decayethProv. 14. 32. Dū expirat, ſperat. therefore iuſtly rifeſt then
with him, becauſe he approcheth then neereſt to
the accompliſhment of them. And therefore litle
reaſon hath he to feare or abhor death, much cauſe
to affect it, and cheerefully to expect it? For he that
is in the ſtate of grace and life, cannot be put beſide
it, or depriued of it by deathIoh 5. 24.. And he may well
cheerefully expect,Rom. 8. 37, 38. and euen with triumph entertaine

death1. Cor. 15. 55, 57. 2. Tim. 4. 7., that is to receiue and enioy a crowne
of eternall life after death2. Tim. 4. 8. Apoc. 2. 10.. That therefore we may
be confident in theſe our deſires, in coueting to remoue
hence, that we may goe vnto God; let vs ſtudie ſo to
carry our ſelues, that both ſtaying here, and remouing
hence, we may be acceptable vnto him
               2. Cor. 3. 8, 9..
            Labour then for this:Meanes 4. yea labour not onely for
it; but labour further, in the fourth place, to get aſſurance
of it to thine owne ſoule2. Petr. 1. 10.. Labour (I ſay)
to get aſſurance of Gods fauour in thy life, and thou
ſhalt not neede to feare death1. Ioh. 3. 14, 19, 20, 21.. A man will neuer
be afraid to go to God, if he know that in Chriſt he
is reconciled vnto God2. Cor. 5.5.. He will neuer be afraid
to lay downe this cotage of clay, if he be aſſured that
he hath an eternall houſing, not made with hands, reſerued
for him in the heauens
               2. Cor. 5. 1, 2.. The want of the former,
of the thing it ſelfe, maketh the vnfaithfull
feare death; and not without cauſe; becauſe they
haue laid no foundation for life after death; and
therefore when they dye, they dye irrecouerably,
they dye eternally, they paſſe not from death to life,
but from death to deathApoc. 20. 14, 15. & 20. 6., or from death to ſuch a
life, as is worſe than any death, a dying life and a liuing
deathMors ſine morte: mors ſemper viuit: ſemper occidit, nanquam peroccidit. Greg. mor. l. 9. c. 38. & Beru. de cōſider. lib. 5.. The want of the latter, to wit, of the
aſſurance of it, maketh euen many faithfull feare
death; (though that without iuſt cauſe;) becauſe,
though they haue laid a ſure foundation for life,
and therefore cannot miſcary, but muſt needs doe
well in death; yet they want the comfort of it, becauſe
they do not apprehend it, becauſe they are not
aſſured of itMiſer eſt beatitatcm qui neſcit ſuam.: which maketh them therefore with
feare to expect death, as a ſergeant that came to

arreſt them, and to carry them away to hell;
which, if they could conſider of things aright,
they had cauſe rather with great ioy to welcome,
as Gods meſſenger,Meanes 5. ſent to conueigh them hence to
heauen.
            Fiftly, learne to dye whiles thou liueſt; learne to
dye before death1. Cor. 15. 31. Mortē, dum adbnc viueres, imitatus, Ambr d: bon. mort. Egrogia res eſt mortem condiſcere. Sen. epiſt. 26.. Forecaſt thine endDeut. 32 19. Nulla res magis proderit, quàm cogitatio mortalitatis. Sen. de
                     •
                  ra. l. 3. c 42. Nullius rei melitatio tam neceſſaria eſt. L
                     •
                  em ep. 70. thinke oft
on itMeditare mortem. Qui hoc d
                     •
                  cit, medi
                     •
                  ari libertalē iubet. Idē. ep. 26.; fit thy ſelfe for it; that though it come neuer
ſo ſoone, neuer ſo ſodainly, it may not ſurpriſe thee
vnawares, it may not finde thee vnfitted. He can
not dye with alacritie, he can not in holy manner
deſire death, that hath not fitted himſelf for death,
that hath not before hand ſeriouſly thought on his
end, and addreſſed himſelfe thereuntoMortē nemo hilaris excipit, niſi qui ſe ad ill
                     •
                  m di
                     •
                   compuſuerat. Sen. epiſt. 10.. Therefore
men feare it, becauſe they are not prepared for it:
therefore they dread it, becauſe it commeth ere
they expected itI
                     •••
                  pectata plus aggrauant. no vitas adijcst calamitatibus pondus. noc quiſquam mor: aliū non magis, qu
                     •
                  d etiam miratus est, doluit. Ideò nihil nobis im; r
                     •
                  uiſum eſſe debet. In 
                     〈◊〉
                   p emittendus est animus. Sen. ep. 91.. As thou art wont therefore ere
ſleepe come vpon thee, to compoſe thy ſelfe vnto
reſt, by ſtripping thy ſelfe, lying downe in or on thy
bed, drawing the curtaines about thee, cloſing thine
eyes, acting ſleepe as it were, before thou ſleepeſt:
So endeuor daily, before death ſeize on thee, to
compoſe and addreſſe thy ſelfe vnto deathCompo
                     •
                  e te ad diem illū. 
                     〈◊〉
                   ep. 26., by the
ſerious meditation of thine vnauoydable end, as
moſt certainely not farre ofDehemus animo pr
                     •
                  meditari, qu d aliquand
                     •
                   ſut
                     •
                  ri ſum
                     •••
                  , & quod, velimus nelimus, abeſſe longius non poteſt. Hierō. cpitaph Nepo
                     •
                  ., ſo vncertaine how
neere, by labouring to work out of thy minde ſuch
ſecular, carnall, or ſatanicall conceits, as may bring
thee out of loue with it, and by ſtriuing to bring
thy ſelfe acquainted with it, yea to worke thine
heart to a loue and a liking of it, that when it commeth,

thou maiſt entertaine it, neither as a foe, nor
as a meere ſtranger, but as a wonted gueſt, as an
ancient acquaintance, as a familiar frendEffice mortē tibi cogitatione familiarem, vt poſſis, vbi fors tulerit, illi (laetus & alacer) obuiam exire. Sē. ep. It is a
matter, as of much conſequence, for the furtherance
of a cheerefull departure, ſo of great difficultie, not
ſo ſoone atchieued, not ſo eaſily learned,Magna res eſt, & diu diſcenda, cum adventat hora illa inevitabilis, aequ
                     •
                   animo exire. Sen. epiſt. 30. as many
men imagine: yea it is that, that we may well all
our life long be a learning;Viuere totae vita diſcendum eſt; & quod magis fortaſſe miraberis, tota vita diſcendū eſt mori. Sen. de brev. vitae. cap. 7. ſince it is, or ought to
be the maine ayme of euery mans whole life, to prepare
and fit him for deathPrimus Pythagoras dixit Philoſophiam eſſe meditationē mortis, quotidie de carcere corporis nitentem edu
                  
                     •
                  er
                     •
                   animae libertatem. Hi
                     •
                  ron. c
                     •
                  nt. Ruffi
                     •
                  . Philoſophiā eſſe. Socrates apud Clem. ſtrom. l. 5. Plato apud Plut. de plac. philoſ. Oi 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Plato Phaedon. Platonis ſententia eſt, omnem ſapientum vitam meditationem eſſe mortis. Hieron. epit. Nep
                     •
                  t. Plato Philoſophiam meditationem mortis eſſe dixit: Idem epit. Marcel. Philoſophum nihil op
                     •
                  rtet ſic agere, quam vt animum ſemper ſtudeat conſortio corporis ſeparare, & ideò e
                     •
                  iſtimandum, philoſophiam eſſe mortis affectum, (conatum Hieron.) conſuetudinem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   moriendi. Apul. de philoſ..
            Sixtly and laſtly, when thou lookeſt towards
death, looke withall euer further than it. When
thou meditateſt on death, meditate withall on thoſe
benefits that ſhall accrue vnto thee by death. Oh
could we ſee them, as Paul did, when he was rapt
into the third heauen2. Cor. 12. 4.: we would neuer be well, vntill
we were there. Nay, could we ſee but ſome
glimpſe, as thoſe three Diſciples didMatth. 17. 3., of that glory;
we would neuer lin longing till we were entred
or entring into it. But this ſince we cannot hope
for, till we come there; let vs labour with Moſes
the meane while, with the ſpirituall eye of the
ſoule, with the eye of faith and meditation, to ſee
him that cannot be ſeene
               Hebr. 11. 27.; yea to ſee that, that cannot
be ſeene
               Hebr. 11. 26.; to ſee that with the ſpirituall eye,
that cannot be ſeene with the naturall eye: with
our Apoſtle, to looke not on the things that are ſeene,

but on the things that are not ſeene
               2. Cor. 4. 18.: not conſider
death as it ſheweth it ſelfe to the eye of fleſh
and blood, and as it is in it owne nature, as an enemie
to man, as a puniſhment of ſinneGen. 2. 17. Rom. 5 12. & 6. 23.; but as it is
manifeſted to the eye of faith out of Gods word,
as it is now altred and changed through Gods
mercy in Chriſt, as a great benefit, as a bleſſing, as
the meſſenger of GodLex eſt, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   poena perire. Sen. epigr. 7. Vltimum diem, nō quaſi poenam, ſ
                     •
                  d naturae legem aſpicis. Idem ad Helv. Mors naturae finis eſt, non poena. Cic. pr
                     •
                   Milon. & Sen. ſuaſor. 7. imò nec finis, nec poena bonis.; as Gods meſſenger, I ſay,
for the good, yea for the endleſſe good of all
thoſe that belong vnto God. Open the eye of thy
ſoule to looke not vpon it, but beyond it. Muſe
oft vpon the happineſſe that ſhall enſue vpon it,
and cannot be attained but by it. That will make
thee deſire death, though not for it ſelfe, yet for it
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Plato in Phaedon.;
yea it will make thee euen in loue with death, if
thou beeſt in loue with it; ſince thou canſt not but
by death attaine vnto it.
            Fiftly, this helpeth to confute certaine erroneous
conceits.
            Firſt, the popiſh opinion of Purgatorie. For
what cauſe or reaſon ſhould Chriſtian men haue
to deſire death, if they were to goe to ſuch a place
after death? to paſſe not from paine to eaſe and
reſt, but from paine to paine, from leſſer paines to
greater paines;
                  Ʋſe 5. to greater torments after death,
then euer they did or could endure in this lifeConſtat enim poenas Purgatorij eſſe atr
                     •
                   ciſſimas, & eti illes nullas poenas huius vitae comparandas. Bellarm. de purg l. 2. c. 14.:
not to goe vnto Chriſt, bnt to goe further from
Chriſt; not to conuerſe with him immediatly after
death, but to be depriued of thoſe meanes, whereby
they had ſpirituall ſociety with him, and did comfortably
enioy him by his ſpirit here vpon earth.
A meere dotage of mans idle braine, hauing no ſhadow

of ground or warrant out of Gods word,
teaching the Saints of God to expect after death wo
and paine and hell, where the Spirit promiſeth nothing
but life
               2. Tim. 4. 8., rest
               Luk. 16. 25., ioy
               Math. 25. 23., and heauen
               Luk 16. 22. & 23. 43. 2. Cor. 12. 2, 4..
            Secondly,Apoc. 2. 10. it confuteth likewiſe another vnſound
aſſertion,Ioh. 5. 24. & 11. 25. to wit, of thoſe that denie vnto the
ſoules of the Saints deceaſſed entrance into heau'n,Apoc. 14. 13.
and acceſſe vnto the preſence of Chriſt,Eſai. 35. 10. vntill the
laſt day. This erroneous conceit was of old broached
by Irenaeus
               In lib. 5. aduerſ., and was of late againe reviued
by Pope Iohn 22Guil. Ockam in oper. 93. dierum. & Adrian. in 4. dist.. But was then oppoſed by the
moſt of his Cardinals,
               Valent. cap. vl
                     •
                  . Sed & Tertull. idē habet adv. Marc. l. 4. & in lib. de anim
                     •
                   prope finem. and confuted by the Diuines
of the Uniuerſitie of Paris, and the Pope himſelfe
(as ſome write) conſtrained by Philip the Faire,
then King of France, publikely to recant itEraſm. in prefat. ad Iren. Gillius Annal. Franc. tom. 2. & Gag
                     •
                  in. l. 8.; as
alſo Benedict 12. his next ſucceſſor, ſolemnly condemned itIn Extra. Bened. Deus. Viſe Al
                     ••
                  nſ. de Caſtr
                     •
                   cont. haereſ. l. 3. Beatitud
                     •
                  ..
            And it is a point indeede directly contrary to
the promiſe of Chriſt,7. & Io.. Gerſon in ſerm de Paſch. and to the Deſires of the
Saints.
            To the promiſe of Chriſt made to the Theife
on the Croſſe; This day ſhalt thou be with me in Paradiſe
               Luk. 23. 43.:
which Paradiſe this our Apoſtle expoundeth
to be the third Heauen
               2. Cor. 12. 2, 4., the preſent place of
Chriſts reſidence and abodeAct. 5. 21..
            To the Deſires of Gods Saints; this our Apopoſtle,
and others, as well here, as elſe-where, who
deſire to remoue hence, that they may goe thither
to Chriſt2. Cor. 5. 6, 8.. But in vaine ſhould they deſire for that
end to remoue hence, if when hence they departed,
they ſhould not go to chriſt, but wait without, I wot
not where, ſecluded from all acceſſe to him, and

from the ſight of him. So that of neceſſitie either
we muſt ſhut Chriſt himſelfe out of heauen, or elſe
we muſt admit the ſoules of the Saints, who by
direction of the Spirit of God (which cannot
miſ-informe them, either delude or deceiue them,)
deſire therefore to be diſſolued, that they may
goe immediately to be and abide with him where
he is.
            Laſtly, it teacheth vs not to mourne exceſſiuely
for the deceaſſed1. Theſſ. 4. 13.. For how can we deſire to goe
after them, if we mourne for them, as if ſome euill
had befallen them? or what cauſe haue we to bewaile
them, that are therefore happier than vs, becauſe
they are gone thither before vsPremiſſi, non amiſſi: praeceſſerunt, nō deceſſerūt. Aug. epiſt. 6. & 120. & de diuerſ. 43. abijt, non obijt. Ambr. de Theodoſ. Quem putas periſſe, pramiſſus eſt. Quid autem dementius, quàm cum idem tibi iter emetiendū ſit, flere cum qui anteceſſie? Sē ep. 99. dimiſimꝰ illos, imò cōſecuturi praemiſimus. Idem ad Marc. c. 19. Cogitemus cito n
                     •
                  s eb perventuros, quo illum per veniſſe moeremus. quem patamus periſſe, praemiſſus eſt. Idem. ep. 
                     •
                   3. Non eſt lugendus qui antecedit, ſed deſiderandus. id quique deſiderium patientia temperā
                  dum. cur enim imm
                     •
                  deratè feras abiſſe, quē mox ſubſequeris? Tertul
                     ••
                   de patient. Nō ſunt lugendi fratres noſtri accerſione dominiea deſeculo liberati, cum ſciamus eos non amitii ſed praemitti, recedentes praecedere: vt proficiſ
                     •
                  ētes & nauigā
                  tes deſiderari 
                     〈◊〉
                   deberi non plangi. Cyprian. de mortal., whither we
muſt once follow them, and can neuer be fully
happy here, vntill we be there with them? Rather;
are they gone before vs, that were neere and deere
vnto vs? Let their departure from vs, that were ſo
much affected of vs, be a meanes to draw our affections
more to the place whither they are gone before
vs; and to thoſe courſes, whereby we may
be partakers with them, as in the
grace of God here, ſo in
glory hereafter.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               
               Praeclarè Antiphanes apud Stobaeum
tom. 2. cap. 124.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
            
               Quae Lipſius ſic vertit.
               Lugere amicos mortuos minimè decet.
               Non mortui etenim ſunt: ſed illam ipſam viam,
               Quam mox neceſſum inire nobis 
                     •
                  mnibus,
               Illi praiuerunt: & ecc
                     •
                   poſtmodù̄m
               Tranſgreſsi in vnum idem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   diverſorium
               Coniuncti agemus quicquid eui relliquum eſt.
            
            
         
      
   