
      
         
            
            
            A
DECLARATION
OF THE TRVE
CAVSES OF THE
GREAT TROVBLES, PRESVPPOSED
TO BE INTENded
againſt the realme of
England.
            VVherein the indifferent reader ſhall manifeſtly perceaue,
by whome, and by what meanes, the realme
is broughte into theſe pretented perills.
            
               
                  
                     
                        Seene and allowed.
                        
                           Anno, M.D.LXXXXII.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE INDIFFERENT READER.
            
               THE preſent eſtate, that the realme of
England is in a fewe yeares come vnto,
and the ſundry aduerſites ſuſtayned
by the inhabitāts of the ſame, are ſuch,
and ſomany, as the lamentable and generall
cries and complaintes of the oppreſſed
multytude, cā declare them to exceede all thoſe
of all ages paſt, in the memorie of man.
            And yet of the redreſſe of theſe calamities, ſo litle
hope is giuen, that nought els, but the terrors of farr
greater trobles, are daily ſounded in the eares of the afflicted
people: which can be to no other end, then to enduce
them to beare ſuch further extreame miſery, and
pouertie, as by the newe intended exactions, preſſures,
& pillages, they are lyke to be broughte vnto. But ſtrā
               ge
it is to conſider, that the auoydance of ſuch great
daungers, as are pretended vnto the realme (and expected;
as is inſinuated, by a ſpanish inuaſion) is neither
ſoughte nor deſyred, by geuing that king ſatisfaction
of the manifeſte iniuries don vnto him, nor in
the reſtitution of his townes and cities wrongfully
poſſeſſed by the Engliſh: But falſly ſuppoſed to conſist
in the perſecuting and killing of a fewe poore priests
and Ieſuytes within the realme, that there do ſecretly
practize their prieſtly functions, to the conſolation of
ſuch afflicted Catholikes as liue within the ſame, or to
the conuerſion of ſuch well mynded protestants, as
will not obſtinately refuſe to vnderſtand their owne

errors, when they are made manifeſt vnto them, by
which meanes many are confirmed in Catholike religion,
and ſome numbers brought from hereſy to embrace
the truthe. which albeit the malice of the aduerſary
hath not letted to withſtād, euen with the effuſiō
of bloud, yet cōſidering that the force of truthe is great
and dothe preuaile, the violence of the enemy is alſo
mightely encreaſed, who directly ſeeking the lyues
and goods of Catholikes, for their conſcyence and religiō,
laboreth by all meanes poſsible, to make the cauſe
of their ſufferance to ſome to be for treaſon. Vnder
pretext whereof, by a late proclamation publiſhed in
London in Nouember last 1592. in the name of the
Queene, theire are yet more exquiſite meanes of inquiſition
deuyſed, to bring them vnto the ſlaughter, then
were euer vſed afore.
            And becauſe all men can not without ſome demonſtration
ſo rightly diſcerne the truthe of this caſe,
and the cauſes of the ſuppoſed perills, as it is requiſyte
for euery man to know, and the ſway of the tyme
not permitting the ſame otherwiſe to be vttered, they
are in the enſuing treatiſe briefly ſet downe.
            In the which, albeit that euery fryuolous point
of the aforeſaid proclamation be not expreſly anſwered,
yet is the intention of the inuētor thereof directly
impugned, and the iuſt blame imputed where it
is iustly deſerued. It may therefore pleaſe the diſcreet
reader (laying a ſyde all partialitie) with an in
different eye, to behold the manifeſt truth, that ſhal (in
this treatiſe) be laid open vnto him, the which for his
owne ſafty he muſt vſe with ſecreeſie, and ſylence,
becauſe of the great a-do, that the great Lord Threcherer
will kepe, to depreſſe and conceile it from the
ſight and knowlege of the world, the which may ſerue

for one eſpecial motiue, to prooue that he knoweth
himſelfe to be guilty in conſcience, yf he haue any
at al. And thus leauing the reader out of the
matter enſuing (with ſome addition of
ſomthing here omitted) to make a
commentarie vpon Chaucers
propheſie, I wiſh him
well to fare from
Colen the 26.
of Marche
1592.
         
         
            
            Of the fained happineſſe of England.
            
               The vaunt of the pretended Goſpel.
               NO triumphes of the Goſpells lighte,
               But truthe that ſhyneth cleere.
               Not vvordes, but actions iust and righte
               Makes vertue to apeere.
               See then vvhat force this faith hath found,
               More then of elder dayes.
               And let the vices that abound,
               Confirme the preſent praiſe.
            
            
               The boaſt of continual peace.
               The tokens of continued peace,
               By plenty beſt are ſhovven.
               But ſignes of vvarr that dothe not ceaſſe,
               By comon vvants are knovven.
               Such is the peace vve then preferr,
               And eke our plenty ſo:
               That thovvſands hath conſumde in vvarr,
               And millions left in vvo.
            
            
               The preſent feare of troubles.
               And all expyred dayes and yeares.
               And fained pleaſures paſt:
               Conuerted are to ſundry feares,
               Of dangers at the laſt.
               VVould God no former cauſe had beene,
               Reuenges to attend.
               Since happyneſſe is euer ſeene,
               Beſt by the happy end.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               WHen Queene Marie, that lately
poſſeſſed the crovvne and
kingdome of England, had reſigned
her ſoule vnto God,
and her bodie to nature: the
lordes ſpirituall and tēporall,
& the comons of the realme receaued
into that crovvne and dignitie, the lady
Elizabeth her ſiſter, à Princeſſe yonge and beautifull,
and aboundantly adorned with the giftes
of nature, and princely education. The King
of Spaine, albeit he had bene maried vnto the deceaſed
Queene, yet did he neuer ſeke to poſſeſſe
himſelf of the crowne, nor to appropriate vnto
him, any Cities, Caſtels, Portes or other places
within the realme, nor in any ſorte to oppugne
the entrance of the newe Queene, but in all loue
and actes of amitie, he did manifeſt his well lyking
of her highe aduauncement: aſwell in the
geuing vnto her all his late wyves Iewels, which
were of great value, as in his earneſtly labouring
with the French for the reſtitution of Calis,
to the encreaſe of her dominions.
            A litle before the death of the aforeſaid Queene,
there was à treaty of peace begun, betwene
England, Spaine, and Fraunce, including by conſequēce
Scotlād, & Flaunders, the which peace
notwithſtanding the aforeſaid Queenes deceaſſe,
went forward, and was fully concluded.
            
               
Thus ſtood the realme of England ſhortly after
this Queenes coming to the crowne, in perfect
peace and amitie with all the countries next
adioyning, and thoſe alſo, neither in ciuil broyles
among themſelues, nor in diſſention with
their neighbours abrode. The Moores of Granada,
liued in obedience to the king of Spaine, the
names of Huguenots and Gheuſes, were in Fraūce
and Flaunders vtterly vnknowne and vnhard

                  〈◊〉
               , and in Scotland was no contention for gouernement.
            But as the Serpent, being ſubtiler then all
the beaſts of the feild, did ſomtyme ſeduce the
firſt woman and Queene of the world, to breake
the cōmaundemēt of God, wherby herſelf was
forced to exile, and her poſteritie made ſubiect
for euer after to ſuch infinite calamities: So
wanted there not now a fly Sicophant, to ſuggeſt
this princeſſe to breake the vnitie of Gods
Churche, and eft-ſoones to proſecute ſuch violent
attempts againſt other princes, the old allies
of her predeceſſors, as thereby herſelf and realme
is brought vnto theſe preſent feares, and to
expect ſuch inſuing daungers, as God may permit
to fall vpon them.
            Very probable it is, that the Queene, ſo ſhe
might haue enioyed the kingdome, could aſwell
haue bene contented to haue cōtinued the faith
of her auncetours, as to be brought vnto her coronation
with ſolemne proceſsion of the Catholyke
clergie, and at a maſſe by a Catholike Biſhop
to be bothe crowned & anointed: at what tyme,
ſhe vowed by othe to defend and maintayne
that Catholyke faith and religion▪ the which

point I do only here alleage, for proof of her meaning
not to chaunge religion, wherein yf ſhe
had firmly remained, ſhe ſhould haue left vnto
the world a farr greater memorie of her giftes of
nature and educatiō. But hauing once repoſed cō
               fidence
in this ſuggeſter, he ſhadowed his ſiniſter
practiſes vnder her aucthoritie, and lefte the obloquie
of his owne vniuſt actions, to redound
vnto her, and her eſtate. For this perſon, vnto
whoſe wylineſſe was ioyned a wōderfull ambition,
who beeing by birth but of meane degree,
& thereby denied to be ſet in equalitie, with the
nobilitie and peeres of the realme, for the better
ſatisfying of his inſatiable deſire of greatneſſe, reſolued
that the beſt way for his aduancement,
muſt be by innouation, and that in no leſſe matter,
then in points of faith, and religion, for that
by experience late before in the other Queenes
dayes, he could neither by the greatneſſe of his
beades, creeping to the croſſe, nor exterior ſhew
of deuotiō before the highe altar, fynde his entrāce
into highe dignitie, to be ſo ſpeedie as by
this meanes he deemed it. And therefore among
other his fraudulent reaſons, he ſiniſterly perſwaded
the Queene, that ſhe could not ſtand permanent
in her crowne and kingdome, vnleſſe ſhe
did condeſcend vnto the alteration of religion▪
and hereby he ſo farr abuſed the ſexe and capacitie
of his Princeſſe, that the gate vnto all enſuiug
iniquitie was ſpedely opened. He then promoted
vnto authoritie one Nicolas Bacon, with
whome before he was lyncked in bādes of affinitie,
vvho being alſo of meane birth, but of an exceding
craftie witt, was the more fit to be ioyned

with himſelf in the menaging of the nevv
gouernement.
            I do not here deny, but that any man hovv
meane ſoeuer, may by iuſt prerogatiue obtaine
credit, & honor, by his vertuous endeuours: neither
cā any honor be more due, thē that which
is atchiued by deſert. But how this perſon with
his compagnion haue vſurped their reputation,
their actions haue ſince manifeſted to all the
world, as hereafter ſhalbe ſhewed: eſpetially
in the ſuruiuer, being the beginer, proſecutor,
and continuer of the ruyne of England, and the
diſturbāce almoſt of euery Chriſtiā regiō. And he
that (as is ſaid before) was farr inferior to be matched
in ranck, with the nobilite of the realme,
hath in a fewe yeares ſo ouermatched them al,
& either by fained crimes cut them of, or by one
meanes or other, ſo maimed them of their due
honor and aucthoritie, that he hathe now made
himſelf Dictator perpetuꝰ. The Queene now being
broughte, to condeſcend vnto the chaunge of
the old religion, he broughte alſo the election of
the new, to lie in his owne choiſe: and neither followed
the doctrine of the Lutherans of Germanie,
nor that of the Caluiniſts of Geneua, but
preſcribed a compoſition of his owne inuention.
Almoſt all the old Biſhops and clergie he thruſt
into priſon, and there conſumed them, and forced
the others in exile to end the reſt of their
dayes: and to ſupply their places, he ſhufled together
the very rif raf, and refuſe of the world. A
wedded miniſtry he would haue (albeit the
Queene neuer lyked it) becauſe the fugitiue Apoſtataes
that were novv returned into Englād, &

fitteſt for this nevv function, were for the moſt
parte coopled with yoke fellowes, & had vnited
the fleſh vnto the world, & the deuill: & the defects
that wāted to make vp tale, of this miniſteriall
multytude, were takē vp without partialitie,
frō tapſters, tīckers, & ſuch depe diuynes, & theſe
were ſent abrode to preache, & ſtarve the cures
throughout the whole coūtrie. Some veſtures of
the old clergie he left in the churches, whereby
the bearded miniſters, his trāsformed apes, might
ſomuch the better imitate the outward apparence
of Catholike prieſts: & the more to diminiſh
this great conceit, of mutation in faith amōg
the people, and to make them wene, that the old
ſeruice was but turned out of Latin into Engliſh,
and ſome ceremonies only altered: the Goſpels,
Epiſtles, ꝑte of the Letany, & the very Collects vſed
before at Maſſe, were ordayned by a booke of In
iūctiōs to be daily red in the churches. The name
of this new profeſsion was borrowed from Germany,
for the profeſſors would be called Proteſtants
(a name vnknovvne vnto all our Catholike
auncetors, in all ages, ſince firſt they receyued
Chriſtianitie) but the chiefeſt ſubſtance of dotrine,
was taken frō Geneua, whereunto the compoſitor,
added of himſelf, an Eccleſiaſticall ſuperioritie
to the Queene, vvhich Iohn Caluine
vvhoſe doctrine they lyked neereſt to follovv,
dothe terme to be Antichriſtian in any tēporall
prince,Much more in a vvoomā. and it was neuer chalenged by any prince
Chriſtian, before king H. the eighte: nor neuer
atributed to any heathen potentate, except by
one only people of Perſia called the Aſaſynes: for
they in the yeare of our Lord 1253. admited

their religion to depend wholy vpon the will
of their Prince.
            Thus was the proteſtanticall congregation of
Englād created, & erected, moſt repugnāt to the
old Catholike faith, participant of ſome newe he
reſies, and yet not conſonant to any one religion
els: but different and diſagreeing from all
ſectes and religions, paſt & preſent vnder heauē:
and what confuſion it hathe ſince declyned vnto
in it ſelf, ſhal here after be declared. The apologie
of this Church was written in Latin, & trāſlated
into Engliſh by A.B. with the comendatiō. of
M.C. which twaine were ſiſters, & wiues vnto
Cecill, and Bacon, and gaue their aſsiſtance and
helping hands, in the plot and fortification of
this newe erected ſynagog.
            But becauſe ſo ſtrange and extraordinarie a
doctrine, being in an antipathia to all, and in
vnitie with none, was vnlykely to haue lōg endurance:
eſpetially wanting ſuch deepe roote of
ſucceſsion from Chriſt and his Apoſtles, as hathe
theſe many hundred yeares preſerued in vigeur
one only entire faith▪ and religion, againſt all hereſies,
ſchiſmes, & diſſētions whatſoeuer, & the
author fearing leaſt with the decay of this late
erected Churche, the creator with the creature
might fall: he then as impudently reiecting all
ſhewe of moral honeſty, as late before he had
don his hipocriticall cloke of deuotion, ſtudied
to put all countries in garbroiles round about
him. And for the effectuating of this his heroical
intention, he begā to vſe the excercize of a newe
ſkill, & that was alwaies to ꝑſwade the Queene,
that other princes ment to inuade her dominions,

when himſelf ment to drawe her to any
violent attempt againſt them. It is a world to ſee
how his experience hathe ſince encreaſed in this
practize, & how well he hathe made this deuice
to extend, to the encreaſe of Englands enmitie
with all the world: and how for his labor, he
hathe purchaſed among fooles the reputation of
wiſdome, albeit he hathe loſt among wiſemen
the eſteeme of honeſtie.
            The firſt proof of this deuice, to ſtirr vp tumults
in other princes dominiōs, he put in practize
with Scotland the countrie next adioyning,
where-vpon ſone after folowed the warres of
Lythe, the ſucceſſe whereof, becauſe it fel not out
ſo well as to his purpoſe he wiſhed, himſelf
went thether to patche vp a peace, the which he
ſo well diſpoſed of, that they were neuer ſince out
of cōtinuall warres. And for the better & more
aſſured maintenance of diſcord, he hathe not
letted euer ſince, to hyre ſome principall perſons
for yearely wages, to nowriſh and continew rebellions,
quarrells, & factions, by which meanes,
the treaſure of the realme hathe not only bene
infinitely waſted, but at ſundry tymes, diuers
gre
                  ••…
                troopes of Engliſh forces haue bene ſent

                  ••
               ether, conducted by the Earle of Suſſex and others,
whereof hathe enſued very great effuſion
of bloud of either nation, diuers horrible
murthers, the exyle of the Scottiſh Queene,
and the tranſpoſing of the realme, to the rule of
an infant, vnder the gouernment of a baſtard. But
what infortunate endes, this vſurper and ſundrie
others there ſett vp for regentes haue come vnto,
is manifeſt to the world, and the great murthers

that haue ſprong, throughe the ſeede of
diſſention firſt ſowen by this pacifier, haue not
ceaſed euē with the ſlaughter of that queene, but
wil end the lyues of many before they be ended.
            Now, as one that of hatred vnto idleneſſe,
would rather chooſe to be occupied in iniquitie,
then to offend in ſlothe, in the meane whyle, that
theſe diſſentions were entretained in Scotlād,
cōſidering that by the mariage of the French king
vnto the Scotiſh queene, their two realmes were
lynked together, and that the French king was
but an orphane, he neglected not his oportunitie,
to bring France, to ſtād in as good termes as
Scotland, & therefore he ſent ouer Sir Nicolas
Throgmortō, to perſwade ſuch French vnto rebelliō
as he founde to be mutinous, & diſcōtented:
and for furtherance thereof, he promiſed them aſſiſtāce
of mony, and munitiō, out of Englād. The
vvhich promiſſe, was accordingly performed.
For M. Cecill ſeldome failed, to kepe his woord
in any ſuch couuenant, & the ſeduced French, ſo
wel kept tutch on the other ſyde, that they proceded
vnto a very flatt rebellion, and ſo purchaſed
the nevv name of Huguenots.
               Hugenotes. But this aſsiſtance
not being found ſufficient, the more to engage
the realme of England in that cauſe, the Huguenots
were wrought to deliuer vnto the Queenes
hādes, the tovvnes of Newhauen, Diepe, & diuers
others: the acceptāce whereof, ſome of the auncient
nobilitie of the realme (that yet remained of
the councel) vtterly miſliked, and aleaged, that it
was an ill preſident to aſsiſt the rebels of other
princes, leaſt the lyke might be offred vnto the
Queene: which conſiderate councell auailed

litle with him, that mēt to make this, no more but
an introduction to greater miſchieues. For Vaughan,
Pellam, and one Portinato, an Italian, were
ſent ouer to take the view of Newhauen, and theſe
returned with relation, that the Engliſh were
able with 2000. to defēd it againſt all the world:
and here upon the matter was reſolued, notwithſtanding
all former alleagations: and forward it
went, but not without a vizard: for their was a
booke written in iuſtification of that action, to
ſignify to the world, that the intentiō of the Engliſh,
was but to kepe the poſſeſsiō of that towne
vntill the king came to age: as thoughe the
maſter of the wardes in England,Cecill. had had the
wardſhip of the French king alſo. And another
reaſon was, for that the other party (to wit the
princes and peeres of the realme, that were of
the kings councell) did meane to bring ſtrangers
into the countrie, from whome (of all other places)
they had great care to preſerue this towne:
whereupon a very difficill queſtion might be
moued, to wit, whether the Engliſh in thoſe dayes
were more naturall Frenchmen then other ſtrangers.
But leauing the reſolutiō of this doubt, certaine
it is, that there were ſent ouer vnto Newhauen
4000. men, which were but 2000. more then
were nedefull to withſtand all the world: perhaps
to remaine in prouiſion againſt Nouus orbis,
which peraduenture might come againſt it alſo,
but how this tovvne was defended frō Fraūce
only, by the ſhame-full abandoning thereof it
did appeere. And this loſſe was not vnaccompagned
with a greater euill, for the ſoldiers that returned
back againe into England, brought with

them ſuch a plague of peſtilence, as generally infected
the moſt partes of the realme, and in
the citie of London, and the ſuburbes, there died
in 12. monethes, 20000. perſons. And the very Huguenotes
themſelues, abhorring the fraudulēt dealinges
of the Engliſh, hauing obtayned a peace
and perdon of their king, became the very firſt,
that bent their forces to expulſe them, wherein
may be noted, with what firme amitie the Engliſh
& French are vnited, in the diſcordant vnitie
of the new Goſpell. It is further to be obſerued,
that the French king fynding the Engliſh
(whoſe name among the french people is ſo odious)
to haue gotten footing in Normandie, to the
end that he might be deliuered of them in that
prouince, offred to deliuer the towne of Calis preſently
back againe, into the Queenes poſſeſsion:
The which he was not bound to do, vntill certaine
yeares were expyred, & this offer by the only
perſwaſion of Cecill was refuſed, who told
the Queene, that ſhe might well kepe the one,
and recouer the other: but in fyne all was loſt.
For the Engliſh, as is alredy touched, diſhonorablye
forſoke Normandie, & the French hoſtages
that lay in Englād for the rendring of Calis, were
priuily let go againe into Fraunce (and as it is
very probable) by the only deuice and woorking
of M. Cecill. The matter of Newhauen, being thus
begun with iniuſtice and ended with ſhame, the
authors practizes for the maintenance of the
French rebelliōs, there withall ended not. But he
had gained the ſkill, better to contriue the execution
of his owne plots, vnder the aucthoritie of
the ſtate, and to be leaſt ſeene, in thoſe thinges,

that moſt he proſecuted. And there fore procured,
that with diuers great ſommes of mony frō
England, diuers troopes of Germaines were leuyed
frō tyme to tyme, and brought into Fraūce,
for the aſsiſtance of the Huguenots: by which
meanes, the confederatie betwene the Engliſh
and them, was now growen ſo ſtrong, that they
would neuer in any treaty with their king, conclude
any conditions without the counſell and
conſent of their Engliſh confederates (as it was
alwaies manifeſtly fonnde, and prooued) By
whoſe crafty direction they were ſo gouerned,
that they euer obtayned more by making their
peace, then by the ſucceſſe of their warr. And at
ſuch tyme as the oportunitie ſerued not to ſtirr
vp the Huguenotes againſt the king, they letted
not to ſtir vp his owne brother, and the houſe
of Montmorancie againſt him, for the proſecuting
whereof, the brother of the ſaid Montmorancie,
and the Prince of Condie came into England, and
there receyued the ſomme of 50. thowſand poū
               des:
which was paſt ouer by exchange, by way
of Antwerp, and Colen, for the firſt leuy of
men, and bringing in of Caſimire. By meanes of
which forces, the king was conſtrained to giue
vnto his brother, Aniow, Main, Towrain, & Tours,
whereby his partage was made greater, thē any
brother to any king of Frannce before him.
            Now when by this meanes the French king
was thus-much feebled, then was the ſaid Duke
of Aniow broughte into England, to be made the
make-fyre betweene the two moſt potent realmes
of Chriſtendome, Spaine, and Fraunce: but
vnder the colour and countenance of matrimony:

which being in the end conuerted into a
mock-mariage: Monſieur receyued his errand to
go into the low countries of the king of Spaine,
& there was he made, Antiduke of Brabant, the
which laudable deuice, yf any in Englād had cōtriued
except M. Cecill, or yf it had euer bene practized
in any other princes tyme thē in this, it could
haue bene no leſſe then highe treaſon. For that,
to put an heire apparent of Fraunce in poſſeſsiō
of Flaunders, is a matter of no leſſe moment, thē
to giue dooble ſtrengthe vnto an auncient enemy,
and to leaue England, for a future breakfaſt,
vnto a French king. But it pleaſed God ſoone to
quench the fire, that mōſieur was ſent to kindle.
For the new duke of Brabant, being ſubdued by
his ſubiectes, was in the nonage of his raigne, forced
with much diſhonor, to returne into France.
VVhere the remembrance of the deceatful
dealinges of England, and the ſhame that lately
he had ſuſtained in the low countries, did make
his owne indiſcretions apparent vnto himſelf:
and ſo aggrauated his ſickneſſe, that the reuenge
which he threatned vnto Englād, he was faine
to leaue vnto God, and his duchie of Brabant,
vnto the right owner: For ſoone after his arryuall
in Fraunce, with very much grief of mynde
he died.
            
               Monſieur being thus departed this world, it
was neceſſarie, that ſome nevv occaſion were
ſoughte out, for the continuance of M. Cecill
his eternall reſolution,To ſovv ſedition. which the ſiniſter practizes
paſt, and the iniquities of the tyme preſent,
ſuffred not to be ōg ſought for. For he foorwith
diſcouered, that the French king had entretained

an il opiniō, of the princes of the houſe of Guyſe,
vnto the which houſe, albeit that the King and
his bretheren, the late kinges before him, had
bene as much beholding,D. Eſpernon. as a king could be vnto
his ſubiectes: yet by the ſuggeſtion of a leud mignion,
all their manifold deſertes were vngratefully
forgotten.
            And then for the better now riſhing of theſe
diſlikes, an extraordinarie league of amitie was
concluded with the french King, who ſoone after,
became ſo attentiue vnto good inſtructions,
that he cōmitted moſt horrible murthers, vpon
tvvo of the princes of the ſaid houſe: and what
end himſelf ſhortly after came vnto, is manifeſt
enough.
            But to leaue Scotland and Fraunce in thoſe
termes, vvherunto they are novv led: vve vvill
come vnto Spaine, as to the matter of greateſt
momēt, & the ſubiect of this diſcours. The King
vvhereof, hauing left the Q. of England, preſently
vppon Q. Maries deceaſſe, in full poſſeſsiō
of that kingdome, and by ſundry demonſtratiōs
giuen proof of his entire loue and amitie vnto
her: and alſo of his firme intention to continevv
the old concord, that had ſo long endured betweene
the kinges of England, and the houſe of
Burgundie, being alſo at peace with the French
king, & hauing placed for the gouernmēt of the
Netherlandes, the Ducheſſe of Parma, he departed
into Spaine.
            And albeit (as it is wel knowne) he hath euer
bene a prince, that by nature is diſpoſed vnto
peace, yet cōſidering the greatneſſe of the Turk,
and his inceſſant attemptes in the inuading of

Chriſtendome, whereof ſome vniuerſall danger
mighte be feared to enſue, he determined to employ
ſuch meanes as God had giuē him, to withſtand 
the intention of this comon enemy. The
which ſoone after, he began to put in practize,
as hereafter ſhalbe declared.
            But this cours of proceeding lyked not him,
that had deſigned his plots vnto other purpoſes,
and that rather ſought to woork ſome ſpeciall
domage to the king of Spaine, then to haue the
potēcie of the Turck diminiſhed. And therefore
for an introduction thereunto, to make him
odious vnto the people, certaine players were permitted
to ſcof and ieſt at him, vpon their comō ſtages.
And the lyke was vſed in contempr of his
religiō: firſt, to make it no better thē Turkiſhe,
by annexing vnto the very pſalmes of Dauid (as
thoughe the prophet himſelf had bene the author
thereof) this enſuing meeter.
            
               Preſerue vs lord by thy deere woord,
               From Turck and Pope defend vs lord,
               That bothe, would thruſt out of his throne,
               Our lord Ieſus Chriſt, thy deere ſonne.
            
            And after, by making it farr more odious and
woors, then was the religion of Mahomet. As
diuers miniſters, did at diuers tymes inſinuate
vnto the people. And one of them in a ſermon
at Paules croſſe, affirmed that it was a more better
acte to aſsiſt Turks, then Papiſtes. For the
which woordes, the L. Buckhurſt the ſame day
reproued him, at the ſhirif of Londons table: but
M. miniſter ſtoode vnto his tacling, and had (as
it ſeemed) learned his leſſon, of the ſuperintēdent
of VVincheſter,Horne. who publiſhed in a printed

booke, that it was better to ſweare vnto the
Turk and turkery, then vnto the Pope and popery,
and that the Pope is a more perillous enemy
to Chriſt, then the Turk. But in the meanewhyle
it is a good Goſpell, that maketh him
that tearheth vs to beleeve that Chriſt is the
ſonne of God, and ſauior of the world, and him
by whoſe meanes, our forefathers were baptiſed
in the name of the Father, Sonne, & holy Ghoſt,
to be woors then he, that denyeth Chriſt to be
the ſonne of God, and conſtreyneth Chriſtians
to renounce their chriſtendome.
            Theſe preparatiues being thus made, the Moores
that inhabited the kingdome of Granada, were
excited to rebellion. Vnto whome, althoughe
the Engliſh would not openly ſend forces of
men, yet they ſent them ſuccors of powder,
ſhot, artillery, & other munition of warr. There
were alſo,Iane d Albret. certaine French pirates, that vnder
colour of authoritie from the Q of Nauar
                  •
                (that
then was) the prince of Condie, the Shatillion, and
others, were ſent foorth to robbe and endomage
the king of Spaine, and his ſubiects & all theſe:
had free paſſage and entrance, to and from the
portes and hauens of England. And ſoone after,
one Kirkham, and diuers other Engliſh of the
weſtcountrey, were permitted to go foorthe to
robbe and ſpoile the Spaniardes, wherof the
Spaniſh Ambaſſador then reſident in England,
inſtantly demaunding redreſſe and reſtitution,
was denied of either. And the goodes thus taken
by piracie, were brought into diuers townes
weſt ward, and there openly ſold.
            But in the meane whyle, that theſe leſſe iniuries

were continued, a matter of farr greater miſchief
was practized, to witt, the rebellion of
the kinges naturall ſubiectes of his Netherlandes.
VVhere the people, by reaſon of their great
welth, were brought vnto pride, & the nobillitie
throughe ouer-lauiſh expences, declyned vnto
pouerty, and the newneſſe & libertie of hereſy,
redy to fynde acceptance with either party, they
were the ſooner and more eaſely ſeduced by the
Engliſh. The firſt attēpt, being begū by certaine
rogues & vagabōdes, appointed to the ſpoiling
of Churches, lefte the name of Gheuſes, to thoſe
rebelles euer after:Name of Cheuſes. and theſe Gheuſes being
thus ſtirred vp, there was (to begin withall) 60,
thouſād poūd ſterling, ſent ouer vnto the prince
of Orange, for the leuying of thoſe Ryters, that
he broughte againſt the duke of Alua. The which
ſomme of mony, was paide by sir Thomas Greſſam
in Antwerp.
            By theſe attemptes and practizes, the king
was cōſtreyned to withdrawe the forces that he
had intended & bent againſt infidells, to employ
them in his owne countries againſt his owne
ſubiects. VVith whome, being nowe enbranled
in warres, there was ſent by ſea from Spaine for
the paymēt of his ſoldiers aboute the ſomme of
600.Some vvrite 800000. thovvſand ducats, the which mony, was ceaſed
vpō in the weſt partes of Englād, notwithſtā
               ding
the Q. had giuen her paſporte for the ſaf
paſſage thereof: by which meanes, the kinges affaires
were greatly let and hindred, and thereupon
followed, a generall arreſt of all marchants
ſhippes, and goodes, in the lowe countries. And
this action tending to ſome further great inconueniēce,

the councell aſſembled at Hampton court,
and conſulted at ſundries tymes in the Queenes
preſence, whether it were beſt openly to breake
with the king of Spaine or not, and after long
deliberation, the whole bodie of the councell
concluded, not to breake with him in any vviſe.
But to make preſent reſtitution of the ſaid
mony, for diuers cauſes: and the rather, for that
they had but late before diſpleaſed the French
king, in aſsiſting his Huguenotes, and taking his
townes, and might not vvithout imminent perill,
incurr the enmitie of two ſuch potēt princes.
But notvvithſtanding this their generall reſolution,
being alſo conſented vnto by the Queene,
M. Cecill did aftervvardes ſecretly perſvvade
her vnto the cōtrarie, whereby the decree made
by the vvhole body of the councell, was brokē:
contrarie to the prerogatiue of the councell of
Englād, which is knovvne to be greater, thē the
auctoritie of any kinges councell els in Europe.
And hereupon was the arreſt of marchants
goodes continued, and a ſtay of trafyke, betwene
Spaine, England and the lovv countries, for three
yeares together, to the vndoing and detriment,
aſvvell of many of the ſubiects of England, as of
ſundrie the marchantes of the other countries.
But in the meane vvhile, al ſuch fugitiues and
traitors, as had in the lovve countries cōmitted
any enormious crimes, or could pilfer, or violētly
robbe or take away, any thing from the king, or
his other ſubiects, were receyued and harbored
in England, which vvas novv become the open
receptacle of churchrobbers, and prieſt-kilers.
            Yea the very belles of the ſteeples of Churches,

vvere caried into England, and there caſt
into artillery. And one called Monſieur de Lumay,
being alſo fled thether, receyued there ſuch inſtructions,
that he came ouer into Holland & ſurpriſed
the tovvne of Briell, vvhich vvas the firſt
tovvne in all thoſe partes, rhat vvas poſſeſſed by
manifeſt rebelliō, and the preſidēt that Fluſhing,
and diuers other townes ſhortly after followed.
And to aſsiſt them in theſe proceedinges, there
were ſent ouer with troopes of Engliſh forces,
Morgan, Sir Humfrey Gilbert, and Cheſter. And
then followed North, Cotton, Candiſh, and Norris,
all being Coronells, & coming the therwith
whole regiments. And albeit theſe ſupplies
were ſtill continued, and men muſtred and preſſed
perforce to go ouer vnto this ſeruice, yet was
it colourably ſhadowed to be don without cō
               ſent
of ſuperior aucthoritie, and the ſending of
thē thereby diſ-auowed. But on the other ſyde,
when any Engliſh for their encreaſſe of knowlege
in military affaires did come ouer, or did intēd
to come ouet to ſerue the king of Spaine, they
were either before their departure, or vpon their
returne, impriſoned and puniſhed. I may not
heere omitt, that after the warres of Barbarie,
made by Sebaſtian king of Portugall (wherein
the Mahometaines were aſsiſted with munitiō
againſt the Chriſtians by the Engliſh, and theſaid
King was ſlaine) the nobillitie and people of
the realme of Portugall, hauing according to
their lawes and cuſtomes, receyued the Cardinall
(as the eldeſt of the blood royal) to be their
king, and he being very aged, and not lykely to
marry and haue iſſue, were entred into conſultation

about the ſucceſsion of the crowne,
which being vnderſtood in England, and alſo
that the Cardinall was enclyned vnto the king of
Spaine, as his next heire, there was an Embaſſador
forth-vvith ſent ouer from England, to offer
the Portugales aſsiſtance, for the excluſion of the
king of Spaine.
            
            But this and the former practizes, being cloked
vvith much conning, vvere either deemed
able to paſſe vneſpied, or els theſe kyndes of moleſtatiōs
vvere not thought ſufficient▪ And therefore
it vvas held neceſſary, to attēpt the robbing
of the kinges treaſure els vvhere, the better therevvith
to maintaine his rebelles againſt him in
the lovve countries. And albeit M. Haukins and
ſome others, had had but ill ſucceſſe in ſuch attemptes
before, there vvas novv one Franncis
Drake ſent foorthe vnto the VVeſt Indies,
vvhere in the ſtreight of Darien, vnderſtanding
of certaine mules, that vvere to paſſe laden vvith
gold and ſiluer, from Panama to Nombre de Dios,
he put himſelf in ambuſcade vvith an hundred
ſhot, and ſett vppon tvvo vvhole companies of
mules, vvhich came only vvith their driuers:
and there very reſolutely tooke avvay their
gold,A terrible encounter. not being able to cary the ſiluer vvith
him throughe the mountaines. And coming
tvvo dayes after to the houſe of Croſſes, he ſlevv
6. or. 7. marchantes, and valiantly ſett the houſe
on fyre, vvherin vvas burnt the value of 200.
thovvſand ducats in marchandize. And ſo he
retyred home againe tovvardes England, vvhere
(not longe after for that he had giuē ſuch good
proof of his dexteritie) it vvas determyned that

he ſhould be employed againe, as being the fiteſt
man to atchiue an enterprize of ſtealing. And
therefore vvith ſhippes vvel furniſhed and prouided
for his purpoſe, he vvas ſent foorth to attēd
& lie in vvaite, for more of the Kinges, & his
ſubiects treaſure. And in the ſouthe ſeas, on the
back-ſyde of America, vvhere no pirates had
bene before him, and therefore the leſſe prouiſion
made to vvithſtand them, there he and his
company, met vvith a ſhip in the porte of Valparizo,
vvherin vvere but 8. Spaniardes, vvho taking
the Engliſh for freindes, receyued them on
boord, vvhere being once entred, they couragiouſly
tooke out of it 37. thouſand ducats in
gold. And at another place called Taurapaza, they
boldly ventred on ſhore vnto a Spaniard that
lay a ſleepe, and had lying beſyde him the value
of 4. thouſand ducats in 13. vvedges of ſiluer:
all vvhich they ouercame & caried vavay, curteouſly
leauing the Spaniard as thei found him.
They ryfled alſo 12. ſhipes that lay at ancker, in
the hauen of Lyma, and cutting all the ropes &
cables, let thē driue vnto the ſeas. And in another
ſhip called the Cagafuego, they found precious
ſtones, ievvels, 80 poūd vvaight of gold, & 20.
tonne of ſiluer: vvhere of hauing put themſelues
in poſſeſsion, after ſome ſmaller pilferies, and
ſacking of the tovvne of Gnatulca, M. Drake and
his company, returned from this very hot and
hardy ſeruice, & in the end, brought all this treaſure
into Englād. VVhere he vvas ſo vvell vvelcome,
and ſo liberall in the deuiſion of ſhares to
ſome Courtiers, that notvvithſtanding the gallovves
claimed his intereſt, it neuer gat ſo great a

brauado, for in very deſpight of wapping, he was
at De
                     •
                  ford rewarded with the honor of knighthoode,
and in the ſame ſhip, wherewith he had
bene abrode a ro
                  •
               ing.
            And albeit that now and then, ſome poore pirate
or other (rhroughe the importunate ſute of
the parties endomaged) haue bene caſt away vpon
wapping ſhore, yet was their ſildome or neuer,
any reſtitution made of the ſtolne goodes.
Neither ſhould ſuch great miſ-hap haue betyded
thoſe pirates, had not their chiefeſt offence bene,
in ſtealing to litle. For M. Drake himſelf, and diuers
other principal Captaines, haue bene much
diſgraced, at ſuch tymes, as they returned home
with ſmall booties.
            But this good ſucceſſe of an il enterprize, gaue
great deſyre to the lyke attempt againe. And the
new knight of the order of theuīg, by the inequal
deuiſiō of ſhares, hauing, had perhaps the leaſt
parte alloted vnto himſelf, was redy enoughe to
vndertake it. And not longe after, he was ſent
forth with a greater number of men and ſhippes,
wherewith he arryued at the Ile of Spagnola, and
there ſacked the towne of S. Domingo, and other
places: where he cōmitted many barbarous cruelties,
vpon religious men and women, and returning
from Carth agena, tooke in his way ſundry
ſhippes, the people wher-of, he caſt into the
ſeas.
            Theſe continuall robberies, & ſpoiles made
by the Engliſh, vpon the King of Spaine, & his
ſubiects, in & about his Indies, grewe in the end
to be ſo many and ſo ordinary, that euen the very
remembrance that it was iniuſtice, and the euery▪
               
forgottē. And for their greater ſhame & cōfuſiō,
they haue not letted to put downe many of their
actions them ſelues in print, to the view of the
world. And among others which for breuitie I
muſt omitt, M. Thomas Candiſh in his letter to
the lord Chamberlaine writeth, that he had nauigated
all alongſt the coaſt of Chili, Peru, and
Nouaſpagna. VVhere he made great ſpoiles, and
burnt and ſunck 19. ſaile of Shippes, ſmall and
great, and burnt and ſpoiled all the villages and
townes, that euer he landed at: and that he tooke
a ſhip of the Kinges at Califorma, wherein was
the ſomme ofthe ſome is omitted in the printed copie. in treaſure, and ſomuch other
coſtly wares as he was not able to carie away: &
therefore tooke all the treaſure, and ſett the ſhip
with the other goodes on fyre. But I will here
end theſe matters, & to auoyde prolixitie omitt
ſundry of theſame kynde, which by very many
haue bene put in practize. And albeit that euery
one of thē, hathe not returned with lyke ſpoile,
yet certaine it is, that there vvere neuer any weſterne
voyages made from England, theſe many
yeares paſt, but (howſoeuer they were in outward
ſhewe diuulged) the very meere meaning
& intention of thē all, was to robbe the king of
Spaine or his ſubiects, of their Indian treaſure. In
the continuāce whereof for ſo-many yeares together,
as the king neuer, attēpted any act of hoſtilitie,
either againſt the Queene her dominions, or
ſubiects, which no prince in the world could
haue forborne to do, after ſo great prouocatiō: ſo
the Engliſh on the otherſyde, did contrariwiſe
deeme, that the to-many iniuries vvhich they
had donne him, vvere al to fevv. And therefore

they reſolued to offend him much more, and in
a farr more apparent and inexcuſable manner, in
the ſight of all the world, then in any their former
actions, hovv manifeſt ſoeuer.
            For vvhen the Archtraitor to his King, & deſtroyer
of his country (the P. of Orange) was takē
out of the world, and the head-leſſe rebels of the
Netherlādes, firſt ſeeking patronage of the K. of
Denmarck, after of the French king, & being by
both thoſe iuſtly denied and reiected, the Engliſh,
diſmaſking themſelues of all former vizardes
and ſhadowes, did ouertly receyue them
into their protection, to defend them in all open
hoſtillitie, againſt their naturall and lawful ſoueraigne,
the king of Spaine. And thereupon
they reſolued, to put themſelues in poſſeſsion of
ſundry the principall porte townes, and other
places of thoſe partes. And by a printed declaration,
went about by diuers weake and indirect
reaſons, to iuſtifie that action: vvhereof amonge
others, one was, in reſpect of the aunciēt league
betvvene the kinges of England, and the houſe of
Burgundie, and the people of either of thoſe princes:
as thoughe the Q. of England mighte by
prerogatiue of that league, maintaine the ſubiects
of the Netherlandes, againſt the King of
Spaine, their ſoueraigne, & the chief Prince of
the houſe of Burgundie.
            An-other reaſon vvas, to the end the naturall
people of the countrie, ſhould not be oppreſſed
by ſtraungers, as thoughe the Engliſh▪ Scotiſh,
Germaines, & others brought in by the States,
were leſſe ſtraungers, then the Spaniſh.
            But to confirme and make theſe reaſons more

ſufficient, M. Norris vvas firſt ſent ouer to take
poſſeſsion of certaine porte townes, fortes, and
other places in Holland, and Zealand, and ſoone
after the Earle of Leicester (whoſe experience in
chamber woorck exceeded his practize in warr,
and the L. Audley, the L. VVilloughbie, and the L.
Northe & ſundrie other of name▪ came ouer with
an army of 10. thowſand men, aſwell for the garniſons
of the places now in their poſſeſsion, as
alſo to come vnto the feild againſt the forces of
the king of Spaine. And in what ſorte, the ſupplies
of the garniſons in Holland, Zealand, Brabant,
and Flaunders, haue ſince frō tyme to tyme
bene continually maintained from England, as
alſo the Engliſh troopes for the feild being
pre
                  •
               ently in our view and memorie, I will omitt
the recytall.
            And thus at the laſt, by this ouert entrance of
the Engliſh into hoſtilitie, there was more manifeſt
occaſion giuen vnto the king, to vſe the
lyke againe, and to attempt that, whereunto no
former iniuries could prouoke him. And the matter
now coming to an opē warr on either ſyde,
either party was to vſe his aduantage as he beſt
could. Che piglia piglia, & che non puo, ſuo danno.
And therefore omitting that which ſince hathe
bene donne in thoſe partes, I will briefly touch
the Portugall voyage, not in comparing it with
the double faced actiōs before rehearſed, but as
an ordinary expedition of warr.
            It ſhalbe nedeleſſe to examine the righte, that
Don Anthonio pretendeth to the crowne of that
country, ſince it is ſoone anſwered in his illegitimation.
VVhich being by M. Cecill diſpenſed

withall, albeit he be but vicar generall, and not
the ſupreme head himſelf, requireth no further
queſtion. Don Anthonio then, accompaigned
with Sir Iohn Norrice, and Sir Frauncis Drake,
departed from Englād with aboue 20. thouſand
ſoldiers, and mariners: Don Anthonio with full
reſolution to take poſſeſsion of Portugall, but
M. Drake, with a farr other ſecret deſignement,
which being vttred by him ſelf vnto the queene,
I would be lothe here to repeat, were it not for
feare, of leauing the reader in erronius ſuſpitiōs.
M. Drake forſoothe, did promiſſe the Q. very cō
               fidently,
to bring the king of Spaine to kiſſe her
pantofle, or els to bring him, I know not to
what woful lamentation But ſuch was the diſaſtrous
effect of that iorney, that neither Don Anthonio
obtained his expected kingdome, nor Captaine
Drake would once enter on ſhore in Portugall
to take the king of Spaine with him.
            VVhereof two mighty inconueniences haue
enſued, the one is, that the realme of Portugall is
ſtill poſſeſſed by the right owner: and the other,
that the Queenes pantofle is yet vnkiſt, by the
kinge of Spaine.
            Neuertheleſſe, excepting ſome 2. or 3. thowſād,
all the reſt of the ſoldiers and mariners, ſhewed
more valour thē their leaders, for that they neuer
returned back againe, but either remained ſtill in
Portugall, or aboute that coaſt. It is further to be
noted, that albeit in that voyage, they could not
effectuate their deſyre againſt their enemyes,
they did yet without partialitie ſo ſet vpon
their freindes, that they ſeazed vpon 50. ſhippes
of the Eaſterlinges which were bound to Spaine

with marchandize, and caried thoſe away with
them, and ſo returned home vnto Plimouthe.
VVhere enen at their very landing, there hapned
a more ſtrāg encounter, thē before in the whole
iorney they had found. For the women of
Plimouth, whoſe huſbandes by ill vſage were
loſt in that voyage, being armed with diſtaues
& other vnuſuall weapōs, without any reſpect
vnto kingſhip, or knighthoode, began ſo fierſly
to aſſault Dō Anthonio, & Drake, that they were
faine to defend them ſelues by force of legges.
This voyage being thus ended, the progreſſe
thereof was printed and publiſhed, both in
Latin, and Engliſh. But the author thereof (in
myne opinion) mighte well haue ſpared his
paines, becauſe all mē manifeſtly knew without
booke, what ſucceſſe the ſaid voyage had had.
VVhat ſithence hathe bene dōne, in the ſending
of Shippes and forces towardes the Terceraes
and els where, and the ſucceſſes thereof being
ryf in our memorie, I will here omitt: and
proceed to giue the reader ſuch ſatisfactiō as the
ſcope of the premiſſes haue directed me vnto.
            Not withſtanding the manifold iniuries,
donne by the Engliſh vnto the king of Spaine,
where-of many haue here bene recyted, & the
moſt of thē do lie opē to the view of the whole
world, it is ſtrange, that they cannot yet conteyne
their malice againſt him, within the limites
of ciuill ſpeeches, who not only permitting
euery hedgeminiſter, and cōtemptible perſon, to
raile vpon him at his pleaſure, to make this baſe
kynde of dealing more authenticall, haue not
letted in the very preambles, and fore frontes of

ſundrie late proclamations, to note him to be
ambitious,
               Of Nouē
                  ber 1591. an vſurper, and a Tyrant: and in this
later to call him, the only diſturber of the vniuerſall
peace of Chriſtēdome. VVhich vnſeemely &
diſordered ſpeeches, dothe il beſeme the publike
writinges of Princes, which ought to haue no affinitie
with defamatorie libells. A thing which the
King of Spaine, hathe euer deteſted to do againſt
thē, or other his enemyes: who leaveth the directnes
of his cauſe to ſuſtaine it ſelf, without the
credit, which mighte be giuen thereunto by
railing.
            Let vs therefore now conſider, whether theſaid
King hathe ſoughte the diſturbance of the
ſtate of England, or of any other potentate or
ſtate Chriſtian: or whether any may iuſtly complaine,
that euer he hathe endeuored to patronize
himſelf of, their crownes or countries, or to
encroache or incorporate oughte of theirs vnto
his, conſidering his incomparable greatneſſe, &
the neere ſituation of his, and their dominions.
            Let vs looke firſt into Italy, whether the territories
of the Church, Venice, Piemont, Florence,
Genua, or any other prince or ſtate els, have cauſe
to cōplaine. Looke whether he hathe bene offenſiue
to Lorraine, Treuers, Cleue, Colē, Liege, or to the
Eſterlinges. Did not the realme of Portugall
(next vnto him) ſtand in it ſelf, with all the iles
and remote places, belonging to theſame, in all
peace and ſecuritie, til by iuſt diſcent the tytle of
all fell vnto him? and do not the people now liue
vnder him (excepting the trooble they ſuſtaine
by the Engliſh) in as great felicitie as euer they
did vnder any their former princes? vvhat great

impudēcie is it then, for any ſo palpably to be-lie
him, in whome the cleane contrary (to their
ſlaunderous reproches) is moſt euydēt? & to the
end, that the vniuſt calumnies of the aduerſary
may be more apparent: let vs alſo conſider the
Kinges procedinges, aſwell towardes ſome
other Chriſtian princes, as to the Queene and
realme of England in particular.
            Firſt it is very manifeſt,Anno. 1559. that after his departure
from the lowe countries, at which tyme he
peaceably poſſeſſed thoſe, & the reſt of his kingdomes,
and dominions: his firme reſolutiō was,
for the generall defence of Chriſtendome, to
make warr againſt the Turk, and other Mahomertaines.
And to that end, he firſt vpon his peace
made with Fraunce, called all his forces of Spaniardes
and others, oute of Flaunders, and ſent
them into Italy: and thence employed them,
againſt the enemies of Chriſtianitie. Firſt at
Pinion de velis, then to Zerbi, then to La Racha,
and other places of Africa. And the Iſle of Malta
being ſtrongly beſieged, & in very great perill to
be loſt, he ſent thether a great army to ſuccor it,
and defeated the forces of the Turk. He alſo
prouided ſuch troopes, for the yeare enſuing
(which he ſent thether vnder the conduct of the
Marquis of Piſcara) that the Turk was forced to
giue ouer, & leave his ſecond enterprize: albeit
he came very ſtrongly prouided, for the taking
thereof, & therein to recouer his honor, loſt the
yeare before. And after all this, the king of Spaine
for the more repoſe and tranquilitie of Chriſtendome,
ioyned in league againſt the Turk with
the Pope, & the Venetians, whereof followed the

great victory, obtained by Don Iohn de Auſtria
his generall, at Lepanto. Theſe pointes albeit
but briefly touched may ſerue for a demonſtration
of his princely reſolution, to maintaine the
concord of Chriſtians, and to offend their comō
enemy. Yea the king of Tunis, being by the Turk
expulſed, he reſtored him again vnto his kingdome.
            But moſte redy he was to giue aid and aſsiſtance,
to Chriſtian princes. VVhen being oppreſſed
by the inſolencie of their rebells, they deſired
his help: and amonge others, to the French
king. Vnto whoſe ayd, he ſent in the firſt troobles,
3. thowſand Spaniardes, who were preſent
at the battaile of Dreux.
            And afterward from the lowe countries, he
ſent the Counte of Mansfeild at two ſeuerall
tymes, both with horſe, and foote. He ſent alſo,
the Counte of Arenberg, the Baron of Erge, and
diuets others, to aſsiſt theſaid king, at ſundry
tymes. All which forces, ſent by the King of
Spaine, from tyme to tyme into Fraunce, himſelf
of his princely and liberall mynde, euer maintayned
& payed at his owne charges. And there
is nothing that more declareth his moderation,
iuſtice, and equitie, towardes his Chriſtian neighbours,
then his ſweete and Chriſtianlyke demeanour,
towardes the realme of Fraunce. VVhere
neither, by the minorites of the late kinges, nor
ciuill diſcentions of the ſubiects, he would take
aduantage, to chalenge or encroache, any parte
of that countrie. VVhereas yf he had bene ſo
greedy and ambitious, as his aduerſaries do bely
him to bee, he would not haue omitted in ſo

many oportunities, to have chalenged all Fraūce
to hymſelf. VVho hathe at this preſent, theſame
right by his daughter, and farr more cleere, then
had ſomtyme the noble prince, King Edward the
third of England, thereunto. And yet as the
world ſeeth, he neither thē, nor now, hath chalē
               ged
any ſuch thīg at all: & this is a ſingular praiſe
and an eternall glory, to this moſt puiſſant prince
of all ages, and in this tyme eſpecially to be maruayled
at, that he attēpteth nothing, nor wageth
any warres, that are not iuſt, honorable, and
allowed bothe by the lawes of God and man.
And as touching the Queene of England, I will
omitt ſome great and eſpeciall acts of amitie,
ſhewed by himſelf vnto her, whē he was maried
vnto her ſiſter, whereof her ſelf is not ignorant,
but dothe beſt know them: And I will briefly relate
ſome points before touched.
            Firſt vpon the deceaſſe of Queene Mary his
wyf, he gaue vnto this Queene al her Iewelles,
which rightly appertayned vnto himſelf. And
being aboute the concluſion of a peace with the
Frēch king, after the taking of S. Quintynes, he
delt very inſtantly for the rendring of Calis vnto
the Engliſh, inſomuch as vvithout the reſtoring
thereof, he refuſed the accord, & ſtode ſo reſolute
vpon this point, that in the end the French vvere
faine to tell him, that albeit the Engliſh did ſolicite
him to include the deliuery of Calis in his
peace, yet had they ſecretly alredy cōcluded their
peace with them, without that condition. And
this was donne by a cloſe practize of M. Cecill,
who ſent ouer one Guido Caualcante an Italian,
to conclude it vvithoute the knowlege of the

Queenes Ambaſſadors, vvho vvere there appointed
to ſolicite it. VVhich extreme duble dealing,
could not yet brede any auerſion in his mynde
againſt the Engliſh, inſomuch, that after they
began to fall from the doing vnto him, one iniurie
in the neck of another, which ſtill encreaſed
from a fewe to many, and from leſſer to greater:
yet would he neuer begin any attempt againſt
them, nor neuer make ſomuch as any ſhewe of
any one acte of hoſtilitie whatſoeuer, vntill ſuch
tyme as they came ſo farr, as to the very taking
of his townes into their owne poſſeſsions, as is
aforeſaid. VVhich is a moſt great and ſufficient
argument, of his grounded affection vnto that
Queene and countrie. For moſte rarely is it foūd,
that any King or Prince could ſo continually
diſgeſt and ouerſee, ſuch great vvronges and
iniuries, as he hathe receyued from England: and
much leſſe himſelf, that hathe greater meanes to
reuenge them, then any other potentate lyuing
in the world. And had doubtleſſe lōg ſince dōne
it, had it not proceeded of a moſt ſingular affectiō
vnto that Prince and people, & hope of redreſſe
and amendment.
            Thus much may ſerue to ſhewe, whether the
King of Spaine hathe ſoughte ſo many yeares to
trooble the ſtate of England. But contrariwiſe,
vvhether the ſtate of England hathe ſo long
ſoughte the diſturbance of him, and almoſt of all
other their neighbours, I leaue the reader to iudge
by the premiſſes, & the cōfirmation of thoſe,
I referr to the teſtimony of all the nations of
Europe, to the end there may be a ſufficiēt number
of witneſſes, to check the extreme impudenof

the malitious aduerſary,In the late proclamatiō. who is not aſhamed
to ſay, that the repoſe of Chriſtendom, by the
king of Spaines vvarres, & by no other meanes,
is nowdiſturbed: which otherwiſe mighte come
to an vniuerſall peace. But as touching the vniuerſall
peace, yf it were to be ſuch as this pacifier
would preſcribe it vnto him, I muſt needes
confeſſe, that I do greatly doubte vvhether the
king of Spaine would thereunto be perſwaded:
becauſe in al-lykelyhode, it muſt be in this
manner.Conditiōs of an vniuerſall peace. Firſt, that he ſhould recall ſuch forces,
as of great compaſsion vnto the naturall people
of Fraūce, he hathe ſent thether to defend them,
againſt a relapſed Huguenote, that vvould make
them renegates from the faith, as himſelf is.
            Secondly, that he ſhould ſuffer his rebells of
Holland and Zealand, quietly to poſſeſſe the
places they do hold, and to take vnto them all
the reſt of the low countries alſo: conditionally,
that the Engliſh mighte ſtill kepe the poſſeſsion
of ſuch porte townes as they haue, & haue ſome
half a doſen more annexed vnto them, Thirdly
that the Engliſh rouers, might peaceably go to
his Indies, and there take away his treaſure, and
his Indies alſo. And theſe fewe aricles being
thus accorded, then might England Fraunce,
the Netherlandes, and Germany, be in farr better
poſsibilitie, to extirpate the Catholyke religion
in Italy, to bring the Moores into Spaine, & then
to conclude that vniuerſall peace, which paſſeth
all vnderſtanding: And include in the-ſame, the
great Turk the king of Feſſe, and Marrocco, and
other infidells, with whome England is alredy
leagued.
            
               
And thus hauing declared ſundrie of the iniuries,
dōne by the Engliſh, vnto other princes and
people, & eſpetially vnto the King of Spaine &
his ſubiects, & alſo in what laudable, & moſt honorable
manner, the ſaid King hathe demeaned
himſelf vnto thē, and other his Chriſtian neighbours:
It ſhall now be neceſſary, to touch the preſēt
eſtate, wherein the realme of Englād ſtādeth.
The which for the better intelligēce of the reader
I will reduce into fower pointes, and in concluſion,
it ſhall manifeſtly appeere, vvhether
ſome fewe perſons accuſed, or their chiefeſt
accuſer, are or is the cauſe, of the preſent and
expected calamities of England.
            The firſt ſhalbe, touching matters of faith and religiō.
wherein there was neuer ſuch great and wonderfull
confuſion.
            The ſecond, touching exterior enemyes, whereof the
realme had neuer ſomany nor none ſo puiſant.
            The third, of the ſundry competitors for the crowne,
and the vncertainty of the ſucceſſor.
            The fourth and laſt ſhall concerne the ouerthrow of
the Nobilitie, and the generall oppreſsion of the
people.
            THE realme of Englād hathe at ſūdry tymes
bene ſubiect, to diuers great moleſtations,
aſwell throughe ciuill diſſentiō, as inuaſions, and
forreyne warres. And howſoeuer the vviſdome
of the vvriter of the late Proclamatiō, hath ouermuch
preſumed vpō the readers ignorance, in extoling
the cōtinuall peace & trāquillitie of Englād,
yet yf the preſent ſtate thereof be rightly looked
into, it wilbe foūde to exceede all former afflictiōs
what ſoeuer. And firſt for matters of religion,

let vs conſider what they are come vnto.
The Proteſtantized Caluiniſme being but of 33.
yeares antiquitie, and peculiarly choſen and
compounded of many, and fully agreeing with
none, is now growen vnto ſuch diuiſion in it
ſelf, as is very wonderful: and being eſtabliſhed
by aucthoritie of a Parlamentall ſynode, and aduanced
vnto the highe tytle, of the glorious
Goſpell of Chriſt, hathe not yet bene able ſo
fewe yeares, to retaine that credit and eſteeme,
but is growen cōtemptible, detected of Idolatry
hereſy, and many ſuperſtitious abuſes, by a purified
ſorte of profeſſors of the ſame Goſpell. And
this contention is yet become more intricate, by
reaſō of a third kynde of Goſpellers called Browniſtes.
VVho being directed by greater feruor of
the vnholy ghoſte, do expreſſly affirme, that the
Proteſtanticall Church of Englād,In the cō
                  futation of Brovvniſme. is not gathered
in the name of Chriſt, but of Antichriſt, & that
it woorſhipeth not God truly, but after a fals &
idolatrous manner: and that yf the Prince or magiſtrate
vnder her, do refuſe or defer to reforme
the Churche, the people may without her conſent,
take the reformatiō into their owne hādes.
Yea, and that the miniſtry yf their enſue not reformation,
may for ſome cauſes excomunicate
the Queene. And one VVillam Hacket, affirming 
that he had within him the very ſoule of our
Sauior, did ſend his two prophets to depoſe her.
Into ſuch termes, is the vnitie of the Goſpell
now come, inſomuch, that there was neuer more
bitter, and vehement writing, betwene any Catholikes
& Heretykes, then of late there hathe bene
betwene the profeſſors of one ſame Goſpell,

VVhoſe falſe faith is not only detected in their
owne woordes and writings, ſcoffed at, and
turned by themſelues into a fooles cote: but confirmed
in the euill lyues and conuerſations, of
theire very miniſters. And yet notwithſtanding
their manifeſt treaſonable attēpts, diſſention in
religion, & practize of euill lyf, the whole force
and rigor of perſecution is bent againſt the Catholykes,
whoſe great vertue, modeſty, and
patience, dothe manifeſte in them a farr differēt
ſpirite from the others. They neuer diſcharged
piſtoles, nor yet threwe daggers at preachers in
there ſermons in this Queens tyme, as did the
others in the dayes of Queene Mary.
               At Paules croſſe. Neither
haue they entred into Churches and wounded
Ministers at Seruice,
               At vveſt minſter. as one of them did a Priest at
Maſſe in the tyme of the ſaid Queene. Nor yet
during the raigne of the Queene that now is,
haue they cōmitted any violent actes in Churches,
as Puritaines haue not letted to do in her
owne chapell, by ouerthrowing, & caſting downe
the ornamēts thereof, euen in diſpight of her.
Neither haue they attempted to murther any
principall perſon of her Court, as did Burchewe,
in wounding a Gentleman in ſtede of Sir Christopher
Hatton:
               M. Haukins. but haue ſuffred with exceding patience,
the greateſt iniuries, vexations, & barbarous
vſage, that fleſh and bloudis able to endure.
Only puritaines are tolerated to ſay, do, & write
what they liſt: be it either in flat deniall of the
Supremacie, or other rebellious actions: & theſe
they can excuſe by ſome deuice or other, or els
they can call with full exclamation, Dimitte nobis
Barabam, but againſt Catholykes only they

cry, Nos legem habemus, and Crucifige Crucifige
Neither had VVilliā Hacket bene excuted for his
blaſphemy or treaſon, yf he had not opēly before
ſo many people, pronounced the Queens depoſition.
And ſeeing that ſo many barbarous lawes,
as with great diligence and all extremitie, haue
theſe many yeares bene vſed, could nether extinguiſh
the Catholyke partie at home, nor ruyne
the Semenaries abrode which more & more haue
encreaſed, not by force of armes, but by euydent
truthe: To giue the more colour vnto a more
cruell perſecution, the very author of all preſent
and future miſchiues, dothe ſeeke by imaginarie
feares, to drawe mennes conſiderations from
greater calamities and miſeries, and to turne the
hatred which himſelf hathe deſerued, vpon a
fewe poore Prieſtes and Ieſuites, by publiſhing
that they are ſent into the realme, to perſwade
men to aſsiſt the King of Spaine in an intended
inuaſion, whereas they are not otherwiſe ſent,
but to exerciſe their prieſtly office and function,
as they go vnto the Indies, & other places where
the exerciſe of their religion is alſo prohibited.
            Neither are they in their Seminaries otherwiſe
exerciſed, then in other Scooles and Colleges: as
are alſo the Germaines & other nations, in their
Seminaries in Roome and els where: which is not
of their countrymē falſely and malitiouſly ſaid
to be in treaſon and ſedition, as England only, &
no place els dothe proclame.
            And it is wounderfull to conſider, that notwithſtāding
the odious clamours of treaſonable
practizes daily raiſed againſt theſe men: it is

well knowne,Cecill & other his inſtruments. that ſome of their greateſt perſecutors
haue not letted, to offer free libertie and
ſecret protections vnto prieſtes, to reroncyle Catholykes,
to ſay Maſſe, to heare Confeſsions, and to
do ſuch lyke offices appertaining to their function,
where, and to whome they liſted: conditionally,
that they ſhould afterward diſcouer
vnto thē in what places, & with what perſons
they had bene. Yea they haue not letted to appoint
ſome of their ſpies to go to confeſsion, of
purpoſe to apprehend and betray their ghoſtly
fathers. Such is the impious treacherie of the aduerſaries,
that will not lett to vrge men to the
breach of their owne lawes: which argueth, that
it is not ſinceritie and zeale of religion that they
ſtand vpon, when they will directly apoint the
contrary vnto theirs to be exercyſed, as alſo, that
themſelues do litle feare ſuch treaſons, as they
pretend to be wrought by prieſtes, when they
ſeke to lycence them, and not to prohibite them:
which proueth alſo, that themſelues do well
know, that Catholikes are exercyſed in the offices
of their religiō, & not in practizes of treaſon
as they vntruly reporte.
            And yet for confirmation of the ill opiniō they
do labor to make the people to haue of them, the
Archpolitike hathe fraudulently prouyded, that
when any Catholike or Prieſt is araigned, the enditemēt
is euer farced with many odious matters,
as of conſpiratie, killing the Queene, ſtiring the
ſubiects to rebellion, drawing them from their
obedience, & the lyke: & yet when they come to
proofes, they can proue nothing in the world,
but only that he is Prieſt, or hathe relieued prieſts

and nothing els being witneſſed, and ſomtymes
that not knowne neither, but by the prieſtes, or
other parties owne confeſsion, the Iury crieth
guilty to all the endytement, and the whole enditement
is enroled, as yf the party had bene iuſtly
conuicted of all that therin is conteyned. And
vpon this do they ſo impudently reporte, that
none haue beene condēned but for treaſō, as they
ſay their enditementes do ſhew in the recordes.
VVhereas yf they had recorded no more then
had beene prooued, as in all law and iuſtice they
were bound, they ſhould not finde any one
prieſt (Ballard only excepted) that euer had any
imagination of treaſon prooued againſt him.
And notwithſtanding all the aforeſaid enfarced
treaſons & conſpiracies, it is cōmonly ſeene, that
almoſt at euery araignment and execution, Catholikes
are offred their liues & liberties, yf they
will but go to the Churche: which doubtleſſe
can-be no ſatisfactiō for any temporall treaſon,
but only for matters of religiō. VVhereofno mā
of any vnderſtanding can remaine ignorant, except
ſuch as was the wiſe gentleman, that told a
freind of his that he had ſeene a Prieſt executed,
that letted not at the very tyme of his death, to
cōmitt Highe treaſon: and being aſked what it
was, anſwered that he began to ſay his Pater noſter
in Latin. Is it poſsible quoth the other? I aſſure
you quoth this partie, it is out of all doute, for
he begā to ſay it before a multitude of witneſſes
and would haue ſaid it vnto the end, but that as
hap was, the hangman was redy to diſpatche
him, before he had half donne. This diepe conceited
perſon, and ſuch as was his compagnion, will

without any great ſcruple belieue the proclamation,
in ſaying that none are put to death for
religion, but for treaſon. And the aduerſary in
ſomuch labouring to detaine from Catholikes,
the deſerued honor and glory of the cauſe for
which they ſuffer, dothe thereby proclame his
owne iniquitie and iniuſtice, to all the world,
making that to be new Treaſon, which is nothing
els but old faith and religiō. A thing as repugnāt
vnto common ſence, as yf the Pope ſhould make
murther, thefte, or extorſion to be Hereſy. Yet
ſuch is his great and abſurd impudēce, that there
is no treaſon that ſeemeth greater, nor no crime
more vnpardonable in England, then there to be
a Catholike, nor yet any offence ſo ſeuerely puniſhed.
There was neuer Scythian, nor ſauage
Tartar, that could vſe more inhumaine cruelty
then to rip vp the bodies of innocent men, being
perfectly aliue, to teare out their entrailes, to be
conſumed with fyre. There was neuer Turk, nor
Barbarian, that impoſed vpon Chriſtians ſo great
and continuall a tribute,The yeare deuyded into 13. monethes. as twenty poundes, for
euery eight-and-twentie dayes abſence, from
their Moſkeyes. Nor there were neuer Arrians, or
other ennemyes, ſince the generall perſecutions
of the Romaine Emperors, that more vexed, ſpoiled
impriſoned, and tortured Catholikes, then dothe
now the ſtate of England. And thus haue I abreuiated
vnto the reader, a huge volume of the
preſent lamentable ſtate of religion.
            TOuching rhe ſecond point, concerning the
nūber of exterior enemyes, how mighte the
caſe be other with England, then now it is, ſeeing
that during the continuance of thirtie and three

yeares, they neuer ſent foorth any one ſoldier,
nor neuer drew ſwoord in any iuſt quarrel, or
honorable action. They neuer ſought to endomage
the Turk, the comon enemy of Chriſtendome,
nor neuer defended any lawful prince or
King in all the world: But haue inuented, & proſecuted,
the moſt diſhonorable, inglorious, vniuſt,
and tyranicall actions, that euer were practized
by any Chriſtian ſtate.
            VVhen the Queene of Scotland was in her
owne realme, and they acknowleged her for the
lawful prince of that countrie, did they giue aid
vnto her, or vnto her rebells? In the tymes of
Frauncis, Charles, and Henry, the late Kinges of
Fraunce, was their aſsiſtance giuē to thē whome
they knew to be lawful Kinges, or to their rebells?
and as for the ſuccour they do now giue
vnto Nauarr & his Huguenotes, it is no otherwiſe
then it was before, when they acknowledged thē
to be rebells. In this long rebellion in the low
countries, whether haue they taken parte with
the King their old cōfederate, or with Orange &
the other rebells? whē 
               Sebastian king of Portugal
warred with the Mahometaines of Africa, gaue
they ayd vnto the Chriſtiās, or vnto the infidells?
            And ſince in the realme of Portugall, gaue they
help vnto the lawfull prince, or to the baſtard his
rebell? In the warres of Colen, did the Engliſh
ſuccur the lawfull Biſhop, or the vnlawfull depoſed
apoſtata? And yf we ſhal looke into ſea matters,
ſee who it is, that hathe ſet vp a publike piracie,
to ſpare neither freind, nor foe. Aſke the Spaniſh,
the Frēch, the Scottiſh, the Flemiſh, the Haūce
townes, yea the Indies, and further partes of the

               earth, who they are, that do ſo cōtinually robbe
and ſpoile thē. Yf the Engliſh had but only procured
the king of Spaine to be their enemy, they
needed not to haue ſoughte any others: for neither
England, nor any other Chriſtian country
els, hathe euer had any ſo great. And as they haue
made eſpetiall choiſe of the enmitie of the greateſt,
ſo haue they employed the tyme of 33▪ yeares
to deſerue it.
            And as for the King of Scotland, albeit he do
diſſemble amōg many leſſe iniuries, one ſo great,
as the cutting of of his owne mothers head, yet
ſome of his owne nation, being of good intelligence,
haue ſaid vnto ſtraungers in defence of
their Kinges honor: that albeit they of England
haue cut of the head of his mother, he muſt not
therefore by vn-tymely reuenge, cut him-ſelf
from the poſsibilitie of that crowne▪ But hauing
once obtained theſame, he will then fall to the
cutting of of the heades of thoſe, that aſſented to
that action: and to the confiſcatiō of their landes
and goodes, therewith to reward his freindes &
followers: and ſo demonſtrate vnto the world,
that he could politikely chuſe a tyme conueniēt
to diſcharge ſuch duty, as is incident vnto the honor
and reputation of a King.
            And touching Fraunce, albeit that by the
death of the three late Kinges, the iniuries dōne
vnto them cannot be by them remembred, yet
the people of the realme, that were participāt of
the wrōges, are ſtill lyuing: in whome the deſyre
of reuenge, is of late newly reuyued, throughe
the aſsiſting of the Huguenote of Nauarr, their
capitall enemy, but not their lawfull King.
            
               
And laſt of all, which of al other is the greateſt,
there extreme enmitie with the chief Biſhop, &
paſtor of Gods Churche. VVhereof enſueth their
general diſcord with all the Catholike Chriſtiās
of the world.
            Thus the realme of England, being brought
into breach of amitie, not only with the Churche
of God, but with all their old alies and freindes,
yf we now conſider with whome they are ioyned
in true freindſhip, we ſhal fynde them to be
ſo fewe as none at all, ſince they haue neither
ſpared, to offend freind nor foe. But yf we looke
what new confederates they haue choſen, in ſtede
of the old, we ſhall ſee them to be the great
Turk, the kinges of Feſſe, Marocco, and Algiers, or
other Mahometains and Moores of Barbarie, all
profeſſed enemies to Christ. Againſt whome,
ſome of the moſt noble and famous kinges of England,
went in perſon with great armies, & obtained
ſuch victories, as will for euer recomend
their glorie to all poſterities. They are alſo in league
with a fewe Bere-bruers, and Baſketmakers of
Holland,
               The States. and Zealand, with a company of Apoſtataes,
and Huguenotes of Fraunce, & with their feed
pēſioner, the Chaūcelor of Scotlād, who by abuſing
of the King, hathe gottē credit to woork his ruyne.
And the Engliſh thus leagued with infidells,
heretikes, and rebells, cannot yet preſume of any
true frindſhip of them in their hartes. For the
French albeit they be Huguenotes, yet are they ſtill
French vnto the Engliſh, and as heretofore, ſo
euen of late they have ſhewed themſelues vnto
ſuch, as were ſent from England to aſsiſt them.
The ſtates of Holland, and Zealand, yf they could

poſsibly thurſt out the Engliſhe, they would
not let to do it. And it is well knowne, that
ſome of them of chiefeſt auctoritie haue ſecretly
concluded and reſolued, either preſently vpon
the Queenes deceaſſe, or ſo ſoone as any oportunitie
ſerueth, to bring all their forces together
to attempt it.
            The freindſhip of Scotland, although it haue
coſt many Engliſhe angels, yet will it prove
Scotiſh in the end. And the great Turk and his
conſorts, may be by the Engliſh excited to inuade
ſome partes of Chriſtendome, neere vnto
them adioyning (as alredy vpon ſuch perſwaſiō
they haue attempted) but good vnto England
they can do none, albeit the Engliſh would exchāge
their Geneua Bible, for the Turkiſh Alcorā,
becauſe their ſituations are to farr diſtant. But
how ſo euer their new freindes may congratulate
with them, their old alies may rather reioyce
in hauing their enmitie, then their amitie. For
that by the vnhappy and miſchieuous endes, of
ſomany of their late confederates, it is obſerued
that to be in league with Englād, is malū omē. Et
for proof thereof, I will aleadge ſome examples.
            Firſt the Earle of Arren in Scotland, after
that he had by the eſpetiall ſuggeſtion of the
Engliſh, proſecuted the rebellions and diſſentions
in his countrie, became diſtracted of the
vſe of reaſon, and hathe theſe 30. yeares remayned
madd.
            The Earle of Murray, baſtard brother to the
Scotiſh Queene, was ſlaine with an harquebuſhe,
in the towne of Lythquo.
            
            The Earle of Lenox was ſtabbed with daggers,
            
               
The Earle of Marr was poyſoned.
            The Earle of Murton behedded: All which
were regents and gouernours of the realme, and
ſett vp by the Engliſh. For I will omit recytall
of diuers other Lordes, and gentlemen, that folowed
their factions, whoſe endes alſo were violēt:
Beſydes the great nūbers that haue periſhed
in diuers battailes.
            In Fraunce, the Prince of Coundie was ſlaine at
the battaile of Iarnac.
            
            The Admirall Shatilian, maſſacred at Parris,
with mumbers of his conſorts.
            The Cardinall of Shatilian his brother, was poyſoned
in England.
            
            The Counte of Mountgomery, behedded.
            Monſieur the Duke of Aniow, brother to the
late King, died of an extraordinary ſickneſſe, ſuppoſed
to be poyſoned.
            And what end the laſt French King came vnto
is manifeſt enough. As alſo that Lanowe,
being ioyned with the Engliſh forces in Britany,
was there ſlaine.
            And to what end Nauarr ſhall come (being as
firmly leagued with the Engliſh as were the
others) is yet to be expected.
            In the low Countries, the Counte of Lumay
before mentioned, that ſurpriſed the towne of
Briel, and had bene the murtherer of ſome hundteths
of Prieſts, being bitten in the arme by an
Engliſh dogg of his owne, died mad & raging,
in the towne of Liege.
            
            The Prince of Orange, that could neither be
warned by the infortunate endes, of three of his
owne bretheren, Henry, Adolf, & Lodowick, nor by

one or two attēpts made vpon his owne perſon,
was laſtly ſlaine with a piſtol in the towne of
Delf, in Holland.
            THe third calamitie whereunto England is
brought, is of the vulgar multytude vnſene,
becauſe it is yet of them vnfelt. And that is, the
great confuſion, of ſomany competitors to the
crowne, bothe within, & without the realme.
VVhich muſt nedes prognoſticate ſuch ſlaughter
& cruell murthers, as neuer were in that, nor in
any other country, for ſuch quarrell. VVhen the
crowne of England was in contention only, betweene
the two howſes of Yorck, and Lancaſter,
how lōg it laſted, how many of the bloud Royal
& Nobilitie loſt their lyues, and what great nū
               bers
of thowſandes were ſlaine, the hiſtories of
thoſe dayes can declare. But farr greater extremities
are we now to expect, among ſomany do
meſticall, and ſome externe competitors. Euery
one of which, thinking himſelf to be iuſtly the
firſt, cā aleage many cauſes for the excluſion
of the others. And therefore in all lykely hoode,
each one of thoſe, that liue within the realme &
Ile, will not forbeare hereafter to attempt by
what meanes he may, to preferr himſelf, and to
depreſſe the others. For the crowne remayning
among ſo many in equall ballance, and each almoſt
in lyke poſsibilitie, who of them is it, that
will not dare to aduenture the vttermoſt of his
meanes, for the gayning of no leſſe a thing, then
is the kingdome of England? And what aucthoritie
of any diſſolued councel ſhal prohibite any
of the competitors to attempt the ſame vpō, the
dereaſſe of the Queene? VVhat great apparēce is

there then, of the effuſion of the blood of many
thowſands, & to what deſolation is the realme
lyke to be brought? how fayned will then this
preſent ſeeming peace be foūde, whē it ſhall conclude
in ſuch intricate mortall warres?
            And how infinite wilbe the curſinges, and maledictions
of all ſortes of people, vpon him that
hathe cauſed it, whē it ſhall appere vnto thē, that
as he neuer ſought to cōſerue thē in peace during
the Queenes lyf, ſo he neuer mēt but to leave thē
in warres after her death? At what tyme he may
reioyce as once did the tyrāt Nero, to ſee the citie
burne, which himſelf had, ſet on fyre. And how
ſoone this great quarrel ſhalbe begun, is as vncertaine,
as the thing that each howre is to be expected.
Seeing it dependeth vpō the only lyf of the
Queene, wherof there is as litle aſſurance, as of
the lyf of any other mortall creature: and her deceaſſe
ſo-much the nearer, in that ſhe is now declyning
in age.
            TO come vnto the fourth & laſt parte, cōcerning
the ouer-throwe of the Nobilitie, and
the great and generall oppreſsion of the people:
it is firſt to be conſidered, that albeit the vniuſt
moleſtations of other comon-wealths, and the
oppreſsions and cruelties vſed within the realme,
were bothe by M. Cecill begū & proſecuted,
yet hathe he ſo cuningly diſpoſed very many of
his affaires, into the handes of other principall
actors (eſpetially ſince the death of his brother
Bacon) that very oftē tymes, his owne plottes &
inuentions have ſeemed the practizes of others.
Of theſe his actors, the late Earle of Leiceſter, &
the ſecretary VValſingham, were the chiefeſt. The

former of the twaine, for that he had in his
youth, by ouermuch attending his pleaſures, neglected
the obſeruation of many ſecretes, which
M. Cecill practized out of Machiauill: yet in the
end, he did in fewe yeares profit ſomuch, and ſo
recouer his negligences paſt, as that he ſoone
grewe old in iniquitie: and lefte no miſchief vnattempted
how abhominable ſo euer. And at the
laſt (as it ſeemeth) euen by the iuſt iudgement
of God, the ſame day ſeuē night, that he had cauſed
diuers Prieſtes and other Catholikes, to be cruelly
murthered in diuers places, within and with
out the citie of London, he ſickned: and as it is
thoughte was poiſoned, and preuented by one,
whome himſelf had thought by ſuch meanes to
have diſpatched, he died without any ſignes of a
Chriſtian, more lyke a dogg then a man, & being
dead, was as vgly a corſe, as he was filthy in manners
in his lyf: and in his ſtomack, were great
holes eaten throughe with the poyſon. His lādes
were preſently ceaſed vpon, for his debtes vnto
the Queene, whereby he was as much diſgraced,
as yf he had rather bene hated, then fauoured of
her.
            And he that but late before, ſeemed to cary in
himſelf the very glory of the realme, and that in
his lyf tyme was feared of many, thoughe loued
of none: was no ſooner dead, but iuſtly condēned
of all. Yea exclamed on, curſed and banned to all
miſchief, by all the people of the land: who generally
reioyſed, that ſo wicked a monſter was
dead.
            And albeit that toward his later dayes, hee became
the only patrone of the pureſt profeſſors of

the Goſpell: yet immediatly after his death, a
freind of his beſtowed vpon him this Epitaphe.
            
            
               Heere lies the woorthy warrier,
               That neuer bloodied ſwoord:
               Heere lies the loyall courtier,
               That neuer kept his woord.
               Heere lies his noble excellence,
               That ruled all the ſtates.
               Heere lies the Earle of Leiceſter,
               VVhome earth, and heauen hates.
            
            The Secretary Walſingham, a moſt violent
perſecutor of Catholikes, died almoſt in lyke
manner, neuer ſomuch as naming God in his laſt
extremities, and yet he had bothe ſpeech and memorie,
as he ſhewed by telling the preacher that
he heard him, and therefore hee needed not to
crie ſo loude, and theſe were his laſt woordes:
and in the end, his vryne came foorth at his
mouth, and noſe, with ſo odious a ſtench, that
none could endure to come neere him. And not
withſtanding his great credit and aucthoritie,
he died a begger, and more indebted, then his
landes could ſatisfy, and hathe lefte no fame of
vertue behynde him.
            Theſe twaine, and ſundry other inferior inſtrumentes,
being gon to render an accompt of
their infynite euills, & the ſame impious courſe
of proceeding ſtil continued, & daily encreaſing
from ill to woors, dothe plainly manifeſt vnto
the world, who it is, that hathe bene the author
and ſupporter of all miſchief, & conſequētly the
direct occaſioner, of whatſoeuer inconueniēces,
the realme of England dothe preſently ſuſtaine,
and what diſtreſſes, miſeries, perills, or, dangers,

it is threatned hereafter to ſuffer. VVhereunto
it ſeemerh, he is bent with a very full reſolution,
to hazard and bring it.
            And touching the preſent eſtate of the Nobilitie,
wherewith the ſtately courtes of former
princes were adorned, their armies in the feild
conducted, the comons of the countrie by their
great hoſpitalitie relieued, look whether they
are not brought vnto that ſeruilitie, that yf they
apply not themſelues to Cecils humour, they
muſt not liue in their countries, but be tyed vnto
the courte, or alotted their dwelling, as yf they
were his perpetuall wardes? yea rather as pupils,
that are kept vnder with roddes, not daring to
ſpeake what they think and know: but are ſet
to be ayme-giuers, while others do hitt their
marckes. Some of them, he hathe vnde ſeruedly
brought into the disfauor of the prince. Sundry
he hathe drawne vpon fained fauours of the
courte, to conſume themſelues to beggery.
Others he hathe ſent foorth, to become pirates
and ſea-rouers. And the lyues of ſome of the principall,
by guylefull pretended crymes he hathe
taken away, & by one meanes or other, he hathe
brought ſuch as be yet lyuing into thoſe termes,
that none may be permitted to cary any
credit in the comon-welth, except it be ſome
very fewe, whoſe wiſdomes he can eaſely ouerrule.
By which meanes, there is no ſubiect in England
of more opulence, none of more aucthoritie,
nor none of more power, then himſelf: and
therefore none to withſtand his entended matche,
betweene the Lady Arbella, and his grandchild.
VVhereby England may happen to

haue a King Cecill the firſt, that is ſuddainly meta
morphoſed frō a grome of the wardrobe, to the
wearing of the beſt robe within the wardrobe.
            Concerning the generall oppreſsion of the
people, it is no leſſe, but rather more lamentable
thē the ouerthrowe of the nobilitie: in aſmuch,
as it tendeth to an vniuerſall diſtruction of the
whole body of the realme.As the E. of Darby & others The Lyftenantes and
Iuſtices of ſhires, who are reputed to liue in beſt
credit in their countries, are no more but the ſubiects
of purſuiuants, catchpoles, & promoters,
and muſt night and day be redy, to waite and attend
at euery call, of this vile and abiect ſorte of
people. But the meaner gentlemen and comons,
are brought vnto the greateſt ſlauiſhneſſe, and
miſery, that euer any free borne people haue liued
in. VVhich whoſo ſhall rightly cōſider, ſhall
eaſely perceaue, whether England hathe theſe
33. yeares enioyed peace and tranquillitie, as it is
impudently reported to haue dō For yf we firſt
look what often & generall muſters haue bene
made, what preſsinges, and ſending foorthe
of men, what prouiſion, chopping, changing, &
conſuming, of armour, munitiō, artillery, & pouder,
ſince the firſt yeare of the Queenes raigne:
we ſhall fynde it to giue ſmall proof of a continuall
peace.
            Let vs call to remembrance what troopes of
men haue at ſundry tymes beene ſent into Scotland,
what forces almoſt yearely into Ireland,
what infynite numbers into the low countries,
and continued with dayly ſupplies, how many
thouſandes into Fraunce and Britany, what an
huge army into Portugall, beſydes all the braue

men and mariners conſumed in ſundry voyages
or piracies by ſea, ſent foorth to ſeeke new habitations
in Virginia, and by one ſuch meanes or
other made away: and we ſhall fynde the number
to be farr greater, then any King of England
hathe employed within or without the realme
in any his honorable watres. And yf any man
ſhould think, that al theſe troopes haue bene but
ſet forthe in May-games he may call to memorie
that their coming home againe declared it not.
            Let vs alſo cōſider, what great numbers of pore
women are often tymes lefte in miſery, & with
their childrē to pyne at home in famyne, whyle
their huſbandes are ſent foorth in forreyne
warres: & how-many by this meanes are become
widowes, and their childeren fatherleſſe.
And further, what great trooble and vexatiō generally
all artificers, farmers, and huſbandmen
are put vnto by attending and following ſo many
generall muſters: wherein are alſo, diuers
great and foule abuſes comitted. VVhat infinite
numbers of freholders, yeomen, and others (diuers
of thē being charged with wyf and familie)
are preſſed & ſent foorth of the realme vnto
the warres of forein parts, contrary to the lawes
of the coūtrie, by the which it is prouyded that
none ought to be preſſed, but only to defend the
realme, or to recouer ſome loſt patrimony of the
crowne: whereof it is not knowne that either
Spaine, Portugall, the lowe countries, or the Indies
euer were. And yet ſo exceeding great haue bene
the multytudes of men, that by compulſiō haue
theſe late yeares bene ſent vnto thoſe partes, that
(being well employed) they might haue conquered

whole kingdome: and not withſtāding this
great iniuſtice and iniury donne vnto them, whē
in theſe ſeruices and euill actions they haue loſt
their lyues, they are rewarded with infamy after
their deaths, euen by thoſe, that conſtrained
them thereunto, and moſt contemptibly called
the ſcum & raſcallitie of the countrie, whereof it
is happely deliuered. And ſuch as after the great
miſeries (which comonly they do ſuſtaine) do returne
home againe into England, they haue by
the very report of being Soldiers, purchaſed the
hatefull names of rogues & vagabondes: & being
for want of payment, brought vnto pouertie &
nakedneſſe, are made ſubiect vnto the conductiō
and puniſhement, of euery beadle & catchpole:
and laſtly euen for very trifles, to the fynall diſpatch
of the hangman. VVhat a moſt vile and hatefull
vſage is this, to men of any valor? and how
intolerable to be borne by any that beareth in
his breſt the harte and courage of a ſoldier, or
hathe euer bene conducted by a captaine in the
feild? what wrong and iniury can be greater to
any one that retayneth the ſhape of a man? or
how is it poſsible for any Engliſh ſoldier to endure
it, or for any other to extend it vnto him except
this only naturall enemy to all men of armes?
that could neuer abyde that euer any man
of ſeruice, capitaine, ſoldier, or perſon of braue
ſpirite, ſhould be rewarded but with reproche &
miſery: whoſe condition and ſtate of lyf is in all
countries in the world moſt honorable, and was
neuer made ſlauiſh in England before England
came vnto a Cecilian gouernment.
            Thus rewardeth he thoſe whome himſelf employeth

to his owne purpoſe, in the loſſe and hazarding
of their lyues. And yf we ſhall now conſider,
what infynite numbers of the inhabitants
of the land he hathe by one meanes or other cō
               ſumed,
& dayly entendeth to cōſume, we might
iuſtly feare, that this his courſe continuing, he
would in tyme bring the realme to be a Republike
of Amaſones, yf he had not alredy drawne
into it treble as many ſtrangers, as King VVilliam
the cōqueror planted therein after his ſubduing
theſame, wherewith himſelf (as it ſeemeth) doth
meane to erect and fortify his new imagyned
kingdome.
            Let vs alſo conſider the great decay of Trafike,
that of late yeares the countrie is brought vnto,
whereby not only many principall marchantes,
which were wont to tranſport great riches and
comodities to the realme, are become banckruptes,
and ſundry of them enforced to turne their
trade of marchandize into meere piracie, but alſo
diuers whole townes are decayed, & the people
compelled to beg, that before were honeſtly
ſuſtained by the trade of clothing.
            VVhat ſhould I ſpeake of the generall abuſes
of the realme, ſince they are ſo great, and ſo
infynite.
            There were neuer ſomany ſutes in lawe, nor
there was neuer leſſe redreſſe of wronges.
            The lawe is exempt from Iuſtice, and all cauſes
are gouerned by bribes and partialitie.
            Conſcyence is leaſt accompted of, and cooſinage
is in ſummo gradu.
            
            The priſons were neuer in any princes daies
ſo full of debtors, and malefactors.
            
               
The highe wayes were neuer ſo repleniſhed
with thieues & robbers, & yet were there neuer
ſo many executed for ſtealing.
            There were neuer ſuch numbers of beggers
in all partes of the realme, and except lawyers &
vſurers, very fewe mē are furniſhed with mony.
            But it is a woonder to conſider, what great &
grieueous exactions, haue from tyme to tyme
bene generally empoſed vpon the people, as all
the Lones, the Lottery, gathering for the ſteeple of
Paules, newe impostes and cuſtomes of wynes, clothes,
and other marchandize, forfaictures, and confiſcations
of the goodes of Catholikes, forced bene
uolences for the ſucouring of rebellious bretherē,
huge maſſes of mony raiſed by priuy ſeales, and
laſt of all, the great number of ſubſidies, which
haue bene more in the tyme of this Queene, thē
thoſe that haue beene leuyed by diuers of her predeceſſors,
and do amount to many millions of
poundes: & yfall theſe do not lie hoorded vp in
the Queenes cofers, the Lord Trecherer I truſt cā
               giue
her maieſtie and the realme good accomptes
of them in books and papers. But in the meane
while, the comons are brought vnto comon
beggery, and by the continued and intended exactions,
they are lykely to be daily more oppreſſed
then other. Infynite are the domeſticall miſeries
that he hathe deliuered the realme vnto, &
moſt infamous hath he made the Engliſh name
and nation abrode, for vice, for cruelty, for vnfaithfulneſſe
and breach of all lawes with their
freindes and confederates. In Fraunce, they are
counted Churche-robbers, bloody, and vnmerciful,
in Portugall, diſordered and foole hardie, of

all nations in generall, the pyrates of euery ſea
the ſowers of ſedition in all countries, the maintainers
of all rebellions, and the only Butchers &
perſecutors of innocent prieſtes, and Catholikes,
that peaceably liue vnder their ſubiection.
            Behold then good reader into what condition,
the late ſo goodly and flowriſhing eſtate
of England in a fewe yeares is brought, & how
iuſtly it may be ſaid to be bleſſed with peace and
tranquillitie in regard of former ages.
            Call to remēbrance, in what amitie that realme
was with other countries, at the Queenes entrāce
to the crowne, & thoſe likewiſe at the ſame tyme
one with another: which mighte happely haue
continued for many yeares together, yf the vnhappy enemy of Chriſtian cōcord had not bene
the only let and hindrance, & as neither the princes
of Fraunce or Scotland, notwithſtanding
their great moleſtatiōs by the Engliſh, did neuer
attempt any reuenge: no more did the King of
Spaine make any ſhewe of hoſtillitie againſt
them, albeit the iniuries don by them vnto him,
without intermiſsiō haue bene lōgeſt cōtynued:
inſomuch, that the Engliſh haue ſcarſly left
him or his ſubiects, any countrie of quiet habitation,
but diſturbed thē in Spaine, in Portugall, in
Italy, and in the Indies, & letted not to robbe &
ſpoile them, in all partes of the occean and mediteraneā
ſeas. And hauing for the ſpace of twēty
yeares together aſsiſted the rebelles of the lowe
countries, and laſtly in the open viewe of the
world, put thē ſelues in poſſeſsiō of diuers of the
kinges townes and cities, being parte of his patrimony:
he was in the end euē drawne by extreme

violence to ſome attempt, for the recouery of
his right, hauing before ſomany yeares together,
for borne the reuenge of all former wronges: and
now (as it ſeemeth) becauſe he will not giue thē
aſſurance to remit all iniuries paſt, and to put vp
as many as hereafter they may do vnto him, and
quietly lett them continew their wrongfull poſſeſsion
of his righte, M. Cecill is become ſo mad
and angry with him, that he raileth vpon him
in open proclamation (wherein I ſuppoſe I miſtake
not the perſon) for albeit the proclamatiō
be publiſhed in the name of the Queene, yet
muſt it needes be written by the directiō of him
which is Domine fac totum, who as it ſeemeth,
being in ſome great choler, was ouer haſty in the
choiſe of his Scribe, or ſomuch ouer-weened in
his owne wiſdome, that he thought no one of
his fond impertinēt and friuolous reaſons could
be controled. And therefore with much impudē
               cie
he ſaith, that the king of Spaine hathe continually
diſturbed the ſtate of England 33. yeares
together, and he greatly laboreth to make the
world belieue, that either the king did neuer
know, or els had vtterly forgotten, whether the
Engliſh had euer don vnto him any iniuries at
all, and therefore could neuer think vpon any
meanes of remedy or reuenge, yf he were not vrged
forward and put in memorie of them, by a
fewe prieſtes and Ieſuites.
            He accuſeth the Pope, of exhauſting the treaſure
of the Churche, without conſent of the
college of Cardinalles. VVherein he ſeemeth as
thoughe he pitied the waſting of the Churches
treaſure, who could wiſh in his harte that the.

Pope and all his Cardinalles, were as poore as
euer was Iobe.
            
            He would make it ſeeme an iniury, that this
treaſure is employed in the warres of Fraunce,
becauſe that realme hathe bene a defender of the
Romaine Churche in all their oppreſsiōs: where
as it rather might ſeeme an iniury, yf the Pope
ſhould not now relieue them, that had aſsiſted
the Church in former oppreſsions, who I think
he cannot meane to haue bene Nauarr and his
Huguenotes.
            
            And verely it ſeemeth, that this mannes great
proſperitie do the make him to forget himſelf, &
dothe bereaue him of his iudgement. For who
may els imagyne that his vanitie ſhould be ſo
great, or his lack of wiſer matter ſo litle, as to ſet
foorth in proclamation that the King of Spaine
did practize with men of baſe birth of the Engliſh
nation, who giueth credit vnto none, but
vnto ſuch as to whome all Chriſtēdome yeildeth
honor, for their knowne vertue and wiſdome,
being alſo of honorable, or very honeſt parētage
and therefore not baſe of birth. Neither ſeemeth
he to remēber with what woorſhipful ſquyres
he practizeth withall againſt the King,The States. in Holland
and Zealand: nor yet what Sir walter Rawleghe
dreamed of himſelf,M. Rauleghes dreame. how King Henry the
eighte told him, that he did very much woōder,
that one Cecill was now come to beare ſo great
ſway in the courte, whoſe name in his tyme was
ſo obſcure in the countri. Neither cōſidereth he,
that albeit by his owne parētage he is but meane,
that he hath litle betred himſelf by his matches,
his firſt wyf being but the ſiſter of a Pedāte,
               
and his later ſo lately come out of the kitchin,
that her poſteritie for ſome diſcents, muſt nedes
ſmell of the fat of the frying pan: which were nedeleſſe
here to be aleaged, were it not to manifeſt
his Lordſhipes inſolent vanitie, in ſtanding
vpon ſuch toyes, as with wiſemen are eſteemed
as fethers in the ayre: who in reſpect of meane parentage
do neuer accompt the leſſe of wiſe or
woorthy mennes qualities.
            It is alſo a lyke matter of moment, that he
ſpeaketh of the Kinges charges for the maintenāce
of ſtudents, vnleſſe it be to inſinuate cōpaſſion,
aſwell of his as of the Popes expences: but
his ſaying that they are a number of diſſolute
yong men, is an exceeding ſhamefull & malitious
flaunder.
            He would proue that none are put to deathe
for religion, becauſe as he ſaith numbers of men,
of welth of contrary religion, are not touched in
their lyves, landes, goodes, or liberties, but with
the paymēt of a pecuniary ſomme (which being
but a trifle of 20. pounde the moneth he nameth
not) and yet many haue ſcarſly the libertie of
their priſons, while theire landes, and goodes
are ſeazed on, for this pecuniary trifle. And yf
any fewe for ſome colour of clemencie be ſet at
liberty, their licence comonly excedeth not aboue
20. dayes, and it is bothe vnder bondes &
ſureti
                  •
               es, with limitation of their reſidence. And
becauſe theſe numbers are not put to death for
religion, he ſeeketh to proue that none are put to
death for religion: which he thinketh he may
the rather auouch, for that neither Ieſuites, Seminary
prieſtes, nor other Catholikes, are expreſly

cōdemned to death for ſaying or hearing
Maſſe or the lyke, but the one is condemned and
put to death becauſe he is a prieſt, and the other
for receyuing him. VVhereby the world may
vnderſtand, that no Catholike ſhould be put
death for any exerciſe of his religion, ſo
he would not come in the company of prieſtes:
nor prieſtes, yf they would remaine and vſe
their functins in Italy or other countries,
ſhould not be put to death for treaſon in England.
            
            It is no leſſe ridiculous, to call the Lord Cardinall
a ſcholer, who being now threeſcore yeares
of age, hathe bene choſen to be a head and
gouernour of colleges and ſchollers, bothe in
England & in other countries, aboue 36. yeares
paſt. And hathe profeſſed in diuers famous vniuerſities,
and written ſo many excellent bookes,
as the aduerſarie will neuer be able to anſwere:
and in the opinion of the beſt and wiſeſt of Chriſtendome,
was woorthely choſen vnto his preſent
dignitie, & was of late in very neere electiō
to haue bene preferred vnto the higheſt eſtate of
all others in the world. And it is a parſonall ly, to
ſay that F. Parſons dothe arrogate vnto himſelf
the name of the King Catholikes confeſſor:
whoſe iuſt credit and reputatiō, for his knowne
wiſdome and vertue bothe with this King, and
many other noble princes, no Engliſh proclamation
can be able to diminiſh.
            If M. Cecill himſelf, had obtayned his eſtemation
for vertue and honeſt endeuours, & ſo had
bene the beginer of his houſe, it had bene far
greater honor and comendation for him, then

by the ruyne of ſomany bothe honorable & vertuous,
the conſuming and oppreſsing of the people,
& the hazard of the deſtructiō of the realme
ſo arrogantly to aduaunce himſelf, and to extole
his owne glory in painted pedegrees, borrowed
and farr fetched: and his poſteritie might then
more longer haue retained their honor and renowne,
then perhappes they are now lyke to do,
becauſe great treaſure heaped together by rapyne
wrong, and violēce, is neuer enioyed with
long felicitie. For De male quaeſitis, vix gaudet
tertius haeres. And yf the feares that he dothe faine
be true, it is not impoſsible but his houſe as it
hathe begun, ſo it may end with himſelf. And
this perhaps he ſomwhat ſuſpecteth and therefore
as all tyrantes are woont, dothe ſeeke to fortify
himſelf by the effuſion of innocent blood: as
thoughe that were the only way to auoyde all
reuenges of iniuries, donne to the king of Spaine.
And that his vniuſt accuſing of innocent mē
of treaſon, could colour his owne exceeding treaſons,
that hathe broughte the realme into ſuch
preſent miſery, and deliuered it vnto ſo-many
enſuing perills and dangers, as it now dothe attend.
            For it is he, that neither of conſcyence, nor
any other cauſe, but meerly for his owne ambitiō,
hathe wrought the mutation and change of
religion, where of ſuch wonderfull inconueniē
               ces
haue followed.
            It is he, that hathe procured the enmytie,
which Englād hathe at this preſent with ſo-many
Chriſtian Princes and ſtates, & chiefly with
the moſt potent King of the world.
            
               
It is he, that for the proſecuting of his impious
intentions, hathe ſent foorthe ſo-many thouſandes
of the naturall people of the realme to be cō
               ſumed
in forreyne countries.
            It is he, that hathe cauſed ſo-many great and
generall exactions, and that hathe exhauſted the
treaſure of the Queene & realme for the maintenāce
of rebells, and purchaſing of enemyes to his
naturall country.
            It is he, that hathe bene the occaſion, that the
Queene (contrary to her owne honor,Leiceſter Hatton. and the
well lyking of her other counſelors which ſhe
most affected) hathe made ſo many offers of mariage
to forreyne princes: and yet notwithſtanding
hathe euer vtterly perſwaded her from mariage,
thereby to bury her poſteritie in her owne
body.
            It is he, that was one of the moſt principall
contriuers of the deuyſed plott, for the trecherous
ſlaughter of the Scottiſh Queene, which
will redownde vnto the eternall infamy of England,
and dothe threaten a continuall reuenge.
            It his he, that becauſe he could not ſomtyme
eſtabliſh ſuch heyr apparent as he liſted, hathe
lefte the ſucceſsion of the crowne ſo confuſedly
among ſomany competitors, bothe within,
and without the realme: which tendeth vnto
the effuſiō of the blood of infynite thowſandes,
more then alredy he hathe brought to diſtruction.
            It is he▪ that hathe bene the cauſer of al the
inconueniences troobles, and daungers, that the
realme hathe alredy paſt,Theſe 33. yeares. or dothe preſently
ſuſtaine, or hereafter may ſuffer, being now

brought into ſuch a labyrinth of calamities, as
neuer the ſame, nor any other can be remēbred
to haue bene brought vnto. And as this hathe
bene wrought by himſelf and not by Catholykes,
ſo himſelf and not Catholykes, is iuſtly
therefore to be accuſed and blamed. And howſoeuer
he do now in ſupreame aucthoritie falſly
impute vnto others the crymes of treaſons, and
trecheries: yf the matter might come to any
equall hearing before indifferēt iudges, it ſhould
cleerely be prooued, that he which wiſheth the
reformation of his country, cannot be a traitor
to his country: but that Cecill being the cauſer of
the moſt enormious euills thereof, is a traitor
himſelf, and the greateſt, that euer England
nowriſhed, and farr more noyſome and pernitious
to the realme, then euer were the Spencers,
Peeter of Gauerſtone, or any other that euer abuſed
either Prince or people. And becauſe no man
dare frame an endytement againſt him, I will
heere omit many other articles of highe treaſō,
but yf any will vndertake to iuſtifie his actions
in his courſe of gouernment, let him know, that
there is ſufficiēt matter of reply reſerued for him,
which is not extracted out of Mother Hubberds
tale,Proſopopoia or mother Hubberds tale. of the falſe fox and his crooked cubbes,
but is to be vttred in plaine proſe, and ſhal lay
open to the world, his birth, his lyf, and perhaps
his death, ſeing his deteſtable actions are ſuch, as
do aſke vengeance of heauen and earth.
            It is a lamentable grief to conſider, that the
manifold harmes which comonly the afflicted
ſubiects do ſuffer, the Princes themſelues do
neuer feele, and that the perills & dangers

wherein they do ſtand, are kept from their ſight
and knowlege by ſuch, as in whome they repoſe
ouermuch truſt and confidence, vntill with violence
they do fall vpon their owne heades, and
comonly when all remedy is paſt to auoyde thē.
And thus the great euills which are cauſed by
one man, do redownde vnto the vniuerſall
harme, both of the Prince and people. How
greatly dangerous is it then for any Prince, to
be wholy led and conducted by the perſwaſiō
of one man, and to deliuer the poſſeſsiō of his or
her eares, vnto the deceitfull tonge of a flatterer.
By ſuch meanes was the puiſant Emperor Charlemaigne,
miſguyded, whoſe ouer-great affyance
in the wicked counſell of one only Gano, was
the occaſion of wōderfull harmes, that fell bothe
vpon himſelf and his people: which great inconuenience
is by a moderne Poet greatly lamēted,Arioſto.
who amōg other his verſes to the ſame purpoſe,
hathe theſe enſuing.
            
               Ben ſaria il dritto, che tornaſſe il danno
               Solamente ſù quei, che l'error fanno.
            
            And happy were it for the Queene & realme
of England, yf all the ſuſtayned or expected harmes
of that Prince or people, being directly cauſed
by one man, might iuſtly redownd vpon the
cauſer himſelf. But more happy had it bene, to
haue ſought in tyme by iuſt ſatisfaction of iniuries,
to haue auoided the deſerued reuēges of thē.
But moſt infortunate is it, that he which hathe
bene the beginner of theſe miſchieues, & hathe
no meaning to redreſſe them, is yet permitted to
plunge the realme into what further calamities
himſelf liſteth, and to hazard the ſhedding of the

beſt bloud of the Nobilitie and People, for the
only eſtabliſhing of his owne houſe and poſteritie:
to make the ruinated families of the one, &
the dead bodies of the other, the ſteppes to moūt
vnto his entended height.
            He commaundeth bothe England and Scotland,
he laboureth inceſſantly with the Queene
to make his eldeſt ſonne deputy of Ireland,
and (as it is aforeſaid) entendeth to match his
grandchild with the Lady Arbella, & ſo to put
in for a kingdome yf not for the Monarchie
of Albion. And for the better contriuing of the
whole domination to himſelf,This keeping of the 
                     ••
                  iue ſeale hath a miſtery in it. he hathe lately
brought in his ſecond ſonne, to be of the
Queenes councell▪ and keper of her priuy ſeale:
the which of wyſe-men is much maruailed at,
and the rather for that the Queene is reputed
learned, and therefore ſeemeth to be the
more ouerſeene in the choiſe of ſo il ſhapen and
crooked a counſelor (hauing neither wiſdome
nor experience) to forgett the precept of the
graue Philoſopher, who giueth eſpetial warning
of ſuch ſo marked by nature, in theſe woordes:
Caue ab his, quos natura ſignauit. And albeit ſhe
had forgotten ſuch wiſe aduice of ſo aunciēt an
author, I wiſh ſhe had called to mynde the
woordes of a later (thoughe of leſſe aucthoritie)
which perhaps for her recreation ſhe may
ſomtyme haue red: who in his Macaronicall verſes
giueth good notes, to beware of ſuch deformed
creatures, ſaying in admiration.
            
               O Deus, a guerzis, Zoppis, gobbis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cauendum eſt
               Nulla fides gobbis, mancum mihi credite Zoppis.
               Si ſguerſus bonus eſt, inter miracula ſcribam.
            
            
               
And yf her Matie. had bene diſpoſed to prefer
him, it ſeemeth vnto me, that to haue made him
a writer vnder ſome clerck or officier of the
courte, had bene very conueniēt for him, becauſe
as a courtier told her, he was fitteſt for ſuch
purpoſe, for that he caried his deſke on his back.
But ſuch is the omnipotencie of his father, that
he plotteth to effectuate greater thinges thē this,
and thinketh to determyne bothe of crowne
and kingdome, and to diſpoſe of prince and people,
and to purchaſe his deſyred greatneſſe with
the effuſion of the blood of ſomany thowſandes
as he ſhal liſt to ſend vnto the ſlaughter.
            He hathe of late bene very vigilāt to fynde ſuch
in the Queenes debt after their deceaſſe,As Leiceſter and others. as before
by her fauour and countenāce, vſed extorſions
in the comon welth: but himſelf yf he were wel
looked vnto, would be found much more in her
debt, by how much more he hathe menaged her
treaſure ſo long a tyme together, and wrong
himſelf into ſo many matters of gaine, and was
neuer yet accomptable for all the thirtene ſcore
poundes by yeare, which he hathe exacted of
ſomany Catholike recuſants. VVhat ſhould I
ſpeake of his pluralitie of offices, wherewith he
can neuer be contented, but maketh a monopoly
of all thinges within the realme, that any way
may turne to his comoditie. By which meanes
his gettinges are ſo infinite, that his ſeruantes
with the very ſhreddes of his briberies and extorſions
are able to purchaſe great reneuewes &
to buyld ſtately palaces: & yet himſelf is ſo encroching,
that he letteth not to entrude into Churche
matters, yea and to contend with the B. of

Canterbury, about the appointing of preachers.
            He kepeth (I knowe not by what vnhappy cō
               ſtellation,
or rather deuiliſh enchauntemēt) the
fauour of his prince, which neuer ſubiect ſomuch
abuſed. He hathe made himſelf the very owner
of her determinations, not permitting her to recompence
the ſeruice of her other officers & ſeruantes,
and diuers tymes when ſhe hathe promiſed
reward, he denieth her the meanes of performance,
and ſo forceth her to breake and go from
her woorde: yea he maketh her accōptable to hī,
how ſhe entēdeth to diſpoſe of her owne: which
yet muſt neuer be, but as himſelf lyketh. Al men
may iuſtly lay vnto him the vndoing of the
realme, not ſomuch cōdemning her whoſe ſexe
is eaſy to be miſ-led, nor the reſt of the councell
whoſe willes by him are violently ouerruled. He
is neither embraced in the courte, nor beloued in
the coūtry. He is freindly to none, but for his
owne profit. He is not welcome to his peeres,
nor of affection followed of his inferiors: but reſembleth
a ſtorme in the aire, which all creatures
do feare and ſhun, and none do loue or deſyre.
            And albeit that he now in his altytude, dothe
manifeſt in himſelf the very nature and conditiō
of a Tyrant, whoſe vile and abiect courage is to
murther & butcher ſuch as innocētly liue vnder
his iuriſdictiō: let him not think that thereby he
can diuert the iuſt iudgmēt of God, vnto whome
their ſacred bloode do the inceſſantly call for ven
geance: Nor that all the reuenges of iniuries, wrō
               ges,
and violences, don vnto other princes, and
eſpetially vnto the King of Spaine, cā poſsibly be
auoyded by his killing of a fewe poore prieſtes,

and Ieſuytes, which (he may aſſure himſelf)
ſhould be remembred, yf there were neither Ieſuyte
nor Seminarie Prieſt liuing in the world.
            And he that preſerued his Prophets, Apoſtles,
and the holy men of the primitiue Churche in
caues, dennes, woodes, & wilderneſſes, & fed thē
miraculouſly from heauē, will not forſake thoſe
that ſhall ſerue him ſincerely, but will giue thē
courage and meanes alſo, bothe to enter and to
abyde in the realme, and there to ſerue ſuch numbers,
as of mercie he will haue ſaued. Againſt
which apoſtolicall practize, let him proſecute
what new Cecillian Inquiſition▪
                he can deuiſe, and
to vexe forraine princes abrode, let him make as
many ſhippes to the ſea as he liſt, and to fortifie
himſelf at home, let him commaunde as many
muſters by land as he pleaſeth, our hope and confidence
is in God, who can diſsipate the councell
of Achitophel and all others that are againſt him.
            During the tyme of thirty and three yeares,
bothe lawe, ſwoord, & all humaine force hathe
bene vſed, to extinguiſhe the Catholike party,
pulpites, proclamations, and all meanes els employed
againſt it: their liuinges & comodities,
diſpoſed of by the aduerſary: and yet theſame
ſtandeth, and putteth him in more feare then
euer afore. And yf he were not blynde, & perhappes
by God himſelf blynded for his ſinnes, he
would ſeeke another way to ſaue himſelf ab ira
ventura, which is to ceaſe from perſecuting of
Gods Churche, and to returne vnto the obedience
thereof, where is mercy, & the only way
to remedy all theſe feares, & to eſcape that which
he feareth not, and that is, eternall damnation.
            
               
THus good reader haue I briefly ended this
precedent diſcours,The cōcluſion. and declared vnto thee
bothe by whoſe meanes, and in what manner,
the realme of England is diſtreſſed with ſomany
preſent calamities, and deliuered to ſuch feares,
of greater future troobles.
            The mature conſideration of the premiſes, I
refer vnto thy indifferent iudgement. The iuſt
blame of theſe euills, where it is iuſtly deſerued.
And the reformation of ſo great iniquity, to
the infynite mercy of almighty God: who voutſaf
to woork theſame, by the ſweeteſt, & eaſieſt
meanes, that his iuſtice may admitt.
            And now in concluſion I haue not deemed it
amiſſe, to giue the ſome caueat of a vile and hatefull
kynde of dealing, which the aduerſary of late
hathe vſed, in diuulging nūbers of falſe and defamatorie
libells: which it ſeemeth cuſtome hathe
made ſo familiar to the libellers themſelues, that
by an ordinary habite which therein they haue
gotten, they ſeme to haue forgotten, that there
is any difference betwene lying, and telling
ttuthe: for otherwiſe it might be preſumed, they
would neuer ſo greatly buſy themſelues, ſo
egregiouſly to abuſe the world. And albeit as the
Pſalme ſaith Mētita est iniquitas ſibi, & that theſe
libells do comonly cary their owne diſcredit in
themſelues, by being ouercharged with moſt palpable
lies: yet becauſe they tend vnto the furtherance
of the pretended Goſpell, and that the neceſsitie
of that cauſe ſo much requireth it, they
muſt paſſe without contradiction of them that
can detect them of falſhoode, and be taken for
verities, of thoſe that are not able to diſcerne

them for vntruthes. And therefore in reſpect of
pitie of the abuſed multytude, I wil make recitall
of ſome fewe of this kynde, to the end that
the reader may giue ſuch creditt vnto the lyke
hereafter, as he ſhall well perceaue the former to
haue deſerued.
            Of theſe ſortes of libells, many do declare
great numbers of French & Flemiſh victories,
which are ſo famous, that ſundry of them were
neuer knowne nor heard of in all the world, but
only in England.
            Others are of obſcure and tryfling matters,Printed by vv Blac vvall. except
ſuch as is that of the happy conqueſt of the
ſuburbes of Paris, &c.
            Others tell of viſions in the ayre,Printed by Nelſon. 1590. which are
enterpreted to preſage detriment to thoſe of the
league.
            Somtymes they are of propheſied victories
before they happen,Printed by VVoolf 1590. and appointed tymes of the
death of Princes, as that the duke of Parma
ſhould die at martinmas 1590.
            Some are of triumphes of victories,Printed by Allde. 1591. before
they be obtayned, as when the Earle of Eſſex,
was to go with his forces into Normandie.
            Some haue bene ſet foorthe to make loſſes
ſeeme victories,Printed 1589. as the diſcours of the Portugall
voyage,And by ponſonby 1591. and the loſſe of the Reuenge.
            And whereas there was one Caçalla & others
of his company,Printed by Nelſon 1591. executed for Hereſy and Apoſtaſie
at Validolid in Spaine 30. yeares paſt: the manner
of this execution is in an Engliſh libell newly
ſet foorth, and ſaid to be for profeſsion of the
Goſpell, and to be donne but of late.
            In lyke ſorte is very perticularly ſet downe,

the glorious & conſtant martirdome of an Engliſhmā
(not lōg ſince) in the towne of Dunkerck,Printed at Londō. 1590.
whoſe torments endured fowre dayes: & yet
there was neuer any ſuch man, nor any ſuch
matter hard of in the ſaid towne, as all the inhabitants
will witneſſe.
            So was it publiſhed,Printed by Purfoot 1591. that the King of Spaine
(whome the libeller calleth the Archtyrant of the
world) was dead.
            And another libell that came foorthe of late
entituled A fig for the Spaniard cōtradicteth that
lie,Printed by VVoolf 1592. with another as manifeſt an vntruthe, and
ſaith that Phillip of Spaine is not dead, but lyeth
bedred.
            In all theſe and ſundry other lyke lybells,As in the forged cō
                  feſſion Printed by VVoolf 1590. it
ſeemeth they haue chalenged vnto themſelues
a kynde of priuilege, to raile and raue at Princes,
and to be-ly and ſlaunder whome they liſt: and
this good dealing is vſed, for the aduauncement
of the cauſe of the Goſpell, but argueth in dede,
that all the plotts and practizes of the aduetſary
as they firſt were begun, ſo haue they bene contynued,
and ſo are they ſtill vpholden and vnderpropped,
with cogging, foiſting, lying and cooſining:
which equity & truthe hathe euer deteſted,
and all honorable ſtates and honeſt myndes, do
vtterly abhorr. Neither is theſame able to continewe
the vſurped credit of the newnamed Goſpell,
but muſt needes in tyme bring it to extreeme
hatred and contempt.
            And it ſeemeth that the exceding malice of
ſome of theſe libellers,The figgiuer. hath tranſported them
into ſuch a feruour of folly, that they imagyne all
Chriſtendome (without any queſtion to the cō
               traty

bothe to knowe & acknowledge, Iohn Caluyns
expoſition of the Goſpell (as it is vnderſtood
in England) to be the very Goſpell of
Chriſt in dede: els would they neuer ſo peremptorily
raile at other princes and people, for not embracing
theſame.
            The Sacred Scripture and true Goſpell of
Chriſt, as it hathe euer bene inuiolably preſerued
in the Catholike Churche, ſo is it only of
that Churche moſt highly eſteemed, and folowed.
And no Caluiniſts or other Sectaries, haue
any ſcripture at all, that they haue not had from
that Churche. And by this true Goſpell and
woord of God, the woord of Caluyne, and miſnamed
Goſpell of Proteſtants, is clerely proued
to be falſe and flat hereſy. And yf the Engliſh
Goſpellers, will not ſtand to the iudgement of
Catholikes in this point, all the Lutherans of Germany
will reſolutely offer to prooue the ſame alſo
out of a ſuppoſed Goſpell of theirs, which they
as confidently chalenge to themſelues, as any
Engliſhe Goſpellers cā poſsibli claime any other.
And therefore my maſters in England, muſt not
ſo run in crie with their peculier Goſpell, as to
chyde others for nor following the ſame, when
they belieue it not to be true, but do truly belieue
it to be falſe. And ſo leauing this later clauſe for
A fig to the figmonger. I wiſh the reader to ſuſpect
the diſcordant Engliſh Goſpell of hereſy,
and the Goſpellers libells, of malitious lies.
            FINIS.
         
      
   