
      
         
            
            
            D. HESKINS, D. SANDERS, AND M. Rastel, accounted (among their faction) three pillers and Archpatriarches of the Popish Synagogue, (vtter enemies to the truth of Christes Gospell, and all that syncerely professe the same) ouerthrowne, and detected of their seuerall blasphemous heresies.
            By D. Fulke, Maister of Pembrooke Hall in Cambridge.
            Done and directed to the Church of England, and all those which loue the trueth.
            AT LONDON, Printed by Henrie Middleton for George Bishop. ANNO. 1579.
         
         
            
            The contentes of the seuerall treatises conteined in this Booke.
            1 The Parleament of Christ, auouching the inacted trueth of his presence in the sacrament, restored to his veritie, and deliuered from the impudent and outragious corruptions of Tho. Heskins.
            2 That it is lawfull to breake superstitious Images, and vtterly vnlawful to honour them, (with a confirmation of suche true doctrine, as Maister Iewel hath vttered in his reply concerning that matter) against a blasphemous treatise made by Nicholas Sander.
            3 The challenge and sound doctrine, conteined in M. Iewels sermon, mainteined and deliuered from the lewde and slaunderous dealing of Rastel, with an answere to his challenge.
         
         
            
            ¶ A CATALOGVE of all such Popish Bookes either aunswered, or to be aunswered, which haue bene written in the English tongue from beyond the seas, or secretly dispersed here in England haue come to our hands, since the beginning of the Queenes Maiesties reigne.
            
               1 HArding against the Apology of the English church, answered by M. Iewel, Bishop of Sarum.
               2 Harding against M. Iewels challenge, answered by M. Iewel.
               3 Hardings reioynder to M. Iewell, aunswered by M. Edwarde Deering.
               4 Coles quarrels against M. Iewell, answered by M. Iewell.
               5 Rastels returne of vntruthes answered by M. Iewel▪
               
               6 Rastell against M. Iewels challenge, answered by William Fulke.
               7 Dorman against M. Iewel answered by M. Nowel.
               8 Dormans disproofe of M. Nowels reproofe, aunswered by M. Nowell.
               9 The man of Chester aunswered by M. Pilkington Bishop of Duresme.
               10 Sanders on the sacrament in part aunswered by M. Nowell.
               11 Fecknams Scruples, aunswered by M. Horne B. of Winchester.
               12 Fecknams Apologie, aunswered by W. Fulk.
               13 Fecknams obiections against M. Goughes sermon, aunswered by maister Gough and maister Lawrence Tomson.
               14 Stapletons counterblast, answered by M. Bridges.
               15 Marshall his defence of the crosse, answered by M. Caulfehill.
               
                  16 Fowlers Psalter, aunswered by M. Sampson.
               17 An infamous libell or letter (
                     〈…〉
                  ) against the teachers of Gods diuine prouidence and predestination, aunswered by Robert Crowley.
               18 Allens defēce of Purgatorie, answered by W. Fulk.
               19 Heskins parleament repealed by W. Fulk.
               20 Ristons challenge, answered by W. Fulk, & Oliuer Carter.
               21 Hosius of Gods expresse word translated into English, aunswered by W. Fulk.
               22 Sanders rock of ye church, vndermined by W. Fulk.
               23 Sanders defence of images answered by W. Fulk.
               24 Marshals reply to Caulfhil answered by W. Fulk.
               25 Shaclockes Pearle, answered by M. Hartwell.
               26 The hatchet of heresies, answered by M. Bartlet.
               27 Maister Euans answered by himselfe.
               28 A defence of the priuate Masse answered (by con
                  
                     •
                  ecture) by M. Cooper Bishop of Lincolne.
               29 Certein assertions tending to mainteine the church of Rome to be the true and catholique church, confuted by Iohn Knewstub.
            
            
               These Popish treatises ensuing for the most part are in answering, and those which are not (by God assistance as 
                     〈◊〉
                   will serue) shall receiue their seueral replies. If the Papistes know any not here reckoned, let them be brought to light, and they shall be examined.
               
                  1 Sanders, vpon the Lords supper, partly vnanswered.
                  2 Allens defence of Priests authoritie to remi
                        •
                      sinnes and of the churches meaning concerning indulgences.
                  3 Stapletons fortresse of the faith.
                  4 Stapletons returne of vntruthes.
                  5 Rastels replye.
                  6 Bristowes Motiues and Demaunds collected out of the same.
                  7 Vaux his Catechisme.
                  8 Canisius his Catechisme translated.
                  9 Frarins oration translated.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ THE AVTHOVR to the Reader.
            
               ALTHOVGH there is nothing in these bookes which haue beene so long vnanswered, but either it is vnworthy any answere, or else hath ben satisfied sufficiently before in many treatises extant in the English toung already: yet because the aduersaries should not altogether please themselues in their fantasie that they be vnanswerable, nor the simpler sort suspect that there is any thing in them that we need to be afraid of, I thought good to take in hand this short manner of confutation. In which I trust the diligent & indifferent reader wil confesse, that I haue omitted much matter whereof I might haue taken aduantage, rather then that I haue left any argument of importance vnsatisfied. Considering therfore what breuitte I haue vsed as was necessarie for me, being but one against so many, I trust the reasonable Readers will looke for no other vertue of writing at my handes, but onely the simple shewing of the trueth, and the plaine confutation of the false reasons of the aduersarie. Which that they may the better see, & with more profit perceiue, I exhort all such as haue the Popishe Bookes here confuted, to conferre their argumentes with mine answers. And for them that haue not the bookes at hand, I haue so set downe the titles of their Chapters, and the cheefe pointes of

their treatises collected by themselues, in their ow
                  ••
                tables, that the perusers may vnderstand, I haue left no matter of any moment vntouched. In rehearsing of their arguments, I haue rather added weight vnto them, then taken any force from them, in my repetitiō or abridgement of them, so neere as I could by any wit I haue, conceiue their order, and resolue their Methode. What I haue perfourmed in answering, let the godly and learned Iudge. In the meane time I desire God to graunt that this my labour may be to the glorie of his name, and the profite of his Church, by Iesus Christe our Lord.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
               
               THE FIRST BOOKE OF HESKINS PARLEAMENT REpealed by W. Fulke.
               
                  THE first Chapter vpon occasion that this aduersarie, this proclamer, and challenger (he meaneth the B. of Sarum of holy and learned memorie) would haue the Scriptures read of all men (presupposing the same to be easie to be vnderstanded) entereth, as by preamble, to treate of the difficultie of the Scriptures, and to proue that they ought not of all men to be read, without an able interpreter or teacher.
                        D. Heskins.
                     
                  
                  
                     THIS Burgesse for the citie of Rome,
                        D. Fulke.
                      hauing in purpose to make a speake in the Popish Parleament, for the matter of the sacrament of the Masse: and douting least his tale should not be long ynough, if he vttered nothing but that might seeme directly to appertaine to his cause, beginneth with a pretie preamble of eight Chapters long, of the difficultie of the Scriptures, and the vnderstanding of the same. And bicause he hath not aduauntage sufficient of any wordes or writing of the B. of Sarum to inlarge his speach by confuting thereof: he feigneth vnto him selfe, a monster to fight withall, out of Luthers booke, De seruo arbitrio, who teacheth (as he saith) That the Scriptures of them selues be easie of all men to be vnderstanded, and neede none interpreter, for that we be all taught of God and of his spirite, &c. Of which minde he imagineth his aduersarie to be, In that he would the scriptures to be common to all men. How false & slanderous this his report is of Luther, may sufficiently appeare by that one worde, Theodidacti, taught of God, by which it is most manifest, that Luther affirmeth the scriptures to be easie to be vnderstood, not

of all men in generall, but onely of all them that are taught of God, and of his spirite, by which they were indighted. But nowe our Burgesse will make plaine by discussion, that the scriptures be obscure, darke, and hard to be vnderstanded, and for that cause not of all men indifferently to be read, and that by seuen arguments. Although it followeth not, that the scriptures are not to be read, bicause they are hard, but the contrarie; yet let vs weigh these seuen arguments.
                  The first: There be many controuersies of the blessed sacrament, therefore there be difficulties in the scriptures. If controuersies raysed by froward maintainers of falshoode, be a proofe of difficultie, there shall nothing be plaine, not only in the scriptures of God, neither in any other writings or sayings of men, no not in such matters as are subiect to our senses, but we shall be brought into an Academicall doubtfulnesse of all things. But what say you M. Heskins? are not the scriptures plaine for the reall presence of Christes body in the Sacrament which you maintaine? Is Hoc est corpus meum, nowe a matter of diffic
                        •
                     ltie? Let all Papistes that haue witte beware of your proceding, you haue euen now by your first argumēt, cut asunder the synnes & strength of al your cause.
                  The second: The very disciples of Christ, besides the Iewes, vnderstoode not Christes owne words before they were written. Ioh. 6. Much lesse we the same written. To passe ouer the vngodly difference you make, betweene Christes wordes proceeding out of his owne mouth, and the same writtē by inspiration of his owne holy spirit, call you them the very disciples of Christ, which offended with that speach departed from him, or them that abid the interpretation of them, and tarried still with him? Such disciples as the former were be you, and your sect, which when the scripture serueth not your purpose, accuse it of difficultie and vncertaintie, as the olde Heretiques the Valentinians did: as witnesseth Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 2. But Chrysostome I suppose helpeth you much,
                        Chrys. in. 6. Io
                              ••
                           .
                      where hee saith: Quid ergo? est durus? difficilis intellectu, & quem capere non posset

eorum imbecillitas plenus formidinis. What then? is this word hard? difficult to be vnderstoode, and such as their weaknesse could not receiue, full of fearefulnes. Here is the name of the words of Chrysostome, but to what purpose? when no doctor more often, or more earnestly exhorteth all Lay men that are Christians, to read the scriptures of God, affirming thē also to be easie to be vnderstood for the most part, and not onely without daunger, but also verie profitable, euen where they be hard to be vnderstoode. I wil rehearse one or two places of a great number.
                  
                     In Luc. cap. 16. Id
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , hortor & hortari non desinam &c. And this I exhort you, and will not cease to exhort you, that you would not only in this place (meaning in the Church) giue heede to those things that are said, but also when you shall be at home, you would euery day giue your selues to the reading of the holy scriptures. And there followeth a reason, Ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         nunc fieri potest: Neither can it nowe be, I say, it can not be, that any man should obtaine saluation, except hee bee continually conuersant in spirituall reading. And not long after, Etiamsi, non intelligas illic recondita &c. yea, although thou vnderstand not the misteries that are therein hidden, yet of the very reading of them, great holinesse groweth. Finally, In genesim Hom. 9. In diuinis autem scripturis &c. but in the holy scriptures, & in those spirituall and precious stories, neither is it lawfull to suspect any danger, neither is there any great labour, but vnspeakable gaine, onely let vs bring with chearefulnesse that which lyeth in vs.
                  The third: If the scriptures be plaine and easie for euery mā to vnderstand, it was no great benefit that Christ did open his Apostles witts, that they might vnderstand the scriptures, nor that he did interpret Moses and the Prophetes, to the disciples that went to Emaus, wherefore we conclude with S. Peter, that as he witnessing the Epistles of S. Paule be hard: so be the rest of the scriptures hard. O blundering Burgesse! Who did euer affirme that the scriptures were easie to be vnderstād without the spirit of Christ? Or what asse of Acarnania, wold

brave out suche a reason? The Apostles could not vnderstand the scriptures sufficiētly to teach all the world, without a singular gift of interpretation, therefore no Christian man may learne by reading the scriptures, howe to knowe God to his eternall saluation, without the same extraordinarie gift. But by your leaue maister speaker, (for the office you take vpon you, I know not howe you came vnto it) you misreport S Peter being a Lord of the higher house as you count him, for he saith not that the Epistles of S. Paule be hard, but that among those things which he wrote of the second comming of Christ, some things are hard to be vnderstoode. Wherefore neither his authoritie, nor your reason, will be sufficient to conclude your cause.
                  The fourth. The Chamberlen could not vnderstand the prophet Esay without an interpreter, therefore the scriptures are not plaine and easie of all men to be vnderstanded. A proper conclusion. There is some difficultie in some scriptures, therefore they are all hard and can not be vnderstoode. We neither affirme that all things in the scriptures are easie to be vnderstanded; nor that they are easie to be vnderstood of all men. But that the children of God by his spirite, are instructed to vnderstand so much in them as is profitable for their saluation, and that nothing necessarie for vs to knowe, is so obscurely set foorth in one scripture, but it is as plainly set down in an other. Neither do we reiect interpreters, bicause we read the scriptures, but as Chrysostom teacheth, by reading the scripturs, we are made more apt to vnderstād the interpreters. In Euan. Ioan. Hom. 10. The exāple of Philip sent vnto the Chamberlen doth also declare, howe God wil blesse the reading of the scriptures, whē he is sought in them.
                  The fift. The Apostles them selues vnderstoode not Christe speaking of his passion and resurrection. Iohn. 16. After a while, &c. therfore if the liuely voyce of Christ was dark, much more is the same now written in dead letters, dark & hard to be vnderstanded. The Apostles by speciall dispensation, not yet so wel lightned, that they vnderstood their master, not only

at this time, but at many other times also, bewrayed their naturall ignorance, that the grace of God in their illuminatiō in due time afterward, might appeare more glorious. But doth it therefore followe, that the sayings of Christe were hard, or their vnderstanding darke? A blinde man can not see the Sunne, is it therefore a good conclusion, that the Sunne is darke, and not easie to be seene? Howbeit, it is well to be marked, that once againe hee putteth difference betweene the liuely voyce of Christ, and his word written in dead letters, making opposition betweene The liuely voyce in the eare, and the deade: letter in the eye. As though the vnderstanding of the scripture, consisted either in the eare or in the eye, when neither the eye hath seene, nor the eare hath heard, neither haue they ascended into the heart of man, such things as God hath prepared for them that loue him. 1. Cor. 2. Es. 64. But God hath reuealed them vnto vs by his spirit, which spirit searcheth out al things, euen the depthes or greatest secretes of God. Neuerthelesse, here is brought in Hieronyme ad Paulinum. Habet nescio quid latentis energiae viua vox &c. The liuely voyce hath I knowe not what hidden vertue, and being vttered frō the mouth of the author, into the eare of the disciple, soundeth more strongly. Wherfore Aeschynes when he was banished at Rhodes, and that Oration of Demosthenes was read, which he made against him, when all men did woonder at it, and praise it sighing he said: What if ye had heard the beast himself sounding out his owne words? This writeth Hieronyme to persuade Paulinꝰ, not only to satisfie him self with his writings, but also to trauel that he might so him, & heare him, whom he had known before only by his writing, & that by the example not only of heathen Philosophers, but also of holy men of the Church, as the next wordes following immediatly do plainely testifie: Haec non dico quod sit in me aliquid tale &c. I say not these things, for that there is in me any such matter, whiche either thou mayest, or art desierous to learne: but bicause thy feruent heate, and desire of learning, ought to be commended euen without vs. Thy wit is pregnant

and commendable without a teacher 3. So farre is it off that Hieronyme meant to compare the word of Christ spoken, with that which is writen, whose force is as great by his spirite in the scriptures, which this dogge calleth the deade letters, as it was in his voyce when it was vttered. But howe impudently the name of Hieronyme is abused against his plain iudgment, wherby he not only alloweth lay men to read the scripturs, but also confesseth that they receiue great fruit therby, may appeare by this one place amōg many, written in Esaiam libro. 4. cap. 11. Frequenter euenit vt homines soeculi. It commeth to passe verie often, that lay men being ignorant of the mysticall sense, are yet fedde with the plaine and simple reading of the scriptures. 33. And in his epistle vpō the same Cōmentarie, he affirmeth, that Ignoratio scripturarum, ignoratio Christi est.
                      Ignorance of scriptures, is the ignorance of Christ. Shortnes will not suffer me to point the places only, to the confusiō of the aduersary: if any dout or would see more, let them reade the places at the full.
                  The sixt All men haue not the gift of knowledge of prophesie, nor of interpretation of tongues, therefore euerie man hath not the vnderstāding of the scripturs, neither be they easie to be vnderstanded of euerie man. First I pray you note, that he maketh interpretatiō of the scriptures and the interpretatiō of tongs al one, secondly, what force is in this reason, all men haue not extraordinarie gifts of tongs, of healing, of knowledge, of prophesie, of interpretation of tongues &c. Therefore the scriptures are so harde, as they cannot be vnderstood by the ordinarie gifte of prophesie, which is promised to all the seruaunts of God, young & olde, men and women, vpon whom his holy spirit is powred. 10.2. Act. 2. I am ashamed to troble the readers with any more words, in answer vnto such a grosse consequence.
                  The seuenth, God hath ordeined first Apostles▪ secondly Prophetes, thirdly teachers, &c. Now if the scriptures be easie for euerie mans vnderstanding, then either these states be superfluous, or else euerie man is a teacher and prophete, but this were a great absurditie, therfore the scriptures are hard & full of difficulties.
                     
If a yong Sophister had D. Heskins in the scholes at Cambridge, where somtime he hath been a Sophister, he would with one common warde, which is Nego consequentiam, auoyde the pikes of all these seuen arguments. Alas poore man, is there no vnderstāding of the scriptures, but such as may make a man a teacher, & an extraordinarie prophete? are there no degrees of knowledge but either the highest perfection, or the depest ignorance? Will this reason follow? Men may profite in knowledge by reading, therefore teaching is superfluous: or this, teaching is necessarie, therfore reading is vnprofitable. What shall I say to these reasons, but that they are giuen ouer into a reprobate minde, which are so furiously bent to withstand the trueth, that they set not foorth so much as any shadowe of reason.
               
               
                  The second Chapter to proue that the scriptures be not easie, reciteth certaine harde and obscure places of the olde Testamente.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The purpose of this Chapter, as of the next also,
                        Fulk.
                      is al together foolishe and vnreasonable, for who is so mad to denie, but that ther are diuerse places both in the old and newe Testament, which bee obscure and hard to be vnderstode, not onely of the ignorant, but euen of the best learned, yet doeth it not therefore followe, because something is harde, therefore all is so: or because some places in the scripture are harde, therefore there is no profite in reading of all the rest. But let vs see these places recited. First he nameth all the prophetes, the books of Iob, the book of Psalmes, the Preacher, & the song of Salomon, Al which books in his iudgement are so hard, as they cannot be vnderstoode without an interpreter. Wel, let vs graunt great difficultie to be in these books, as in diuers other, is all time lost therfore that is spent in reading of them? The harder they be, the more diligently they are to be red, yt they may be vnderstood. The difficultie to good scholers will not dull but whe
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     hei
                        •
                      desire to learne▪ to 
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                      to conferre to se
                        ••
                     e 
                        〈…〉
                      to find Cōcer
                        •
                     ing Genesis he alledgeth out of Hieronyme, the tradition of the vnbel
                        •
                     uing Iewes, that they might not read it before they were 30 yeres olde. But Hieronyme him self wold haue yong childrens tender tongs seasoned with sweet Psalmes▪ and exercised in studie of the scriptures and Prophets, which you M. Heskins professe to be so difficult. For he instructing Laeta 
                        〈◊〉
                      she should bring 
                        •
                     p her daughter, saith▪ 
                     
                        Adhuc tenera lingua, Psalmis dulcibus imbuatur. let her tong when it i
                           •
                         yet but tender be seasoned with sweete Psalmes, & when she groweth to yeares of discretion, Quaerant eam; &c. let them seeke her in the iourney of the worlde, among the flockes and companies of her kinsfolkes, but let them finde her no where else, but in the closet of the scriptures, asking counsell of the Prophets and Apostles of her spirituall marriage. But more agreeing with the title of this Chap. you alledge the 49. Chap. of Gene. & one speciall place of that Chapter, namely the blessing of Iuda. What if this Chapter be harde, and this place especially in the Chapter: is it therefore hard, which Moses writeth in the beginning of this booke. In the beginning God created Heauen and Earth. And shal all the profitable and necessarie doctrine of this booke be vnread for the difficultie of one Chapter?
                  In Exodus and Leuiticus, although many things require a ripe iudgement, yet are many thinges also very easie and plaine, and the same scripture also teacheth vs, that all figures were referred to the patterne shewed in the mount, which is Christ. Exod. 25. Acts 7. Heb. 8. But these sayings offendeth M. Heskins, and seemeth to him to haue almost no reason in them, where God forbiddeth them to suffer their cattel to gender with a contrarie kinde, or sowe their fielde with mingled seede,
                     Leuit. 19. 
                     or to weare a garment of linsiwoolsie. Which positiue lawes me thinkes do plainly teach, that God loueth purenesse, and abhorreth all vnholy mixtures. As likewise, those wordes Deut. 23 of sowing the vineyard with diuers seeds, and plowing with an oxe &

an asse. The law Deut. 22. of leauing the old bird when a man taketh her yong out of the nest, was a good rudiment to teach them to abhor either couetousnes, or crueltie, or both. Which law, when the heathen men had by the light of nature, as appeareth in Phocylides, I maruell why it seemeth so straunge to M. Heskins, which would be taken both for a Christian and a Diuine. As for the moosling of the oxe, that treadeth the corne, is yet more plaine, when the Apostle doth gather a strong argument out of that place, from the lesse to the more, that God which would haue men to consider bruite beastes, with humanitie, would not haue the Ministers of his word neglected at their handes. But ô noble Diuine. Doth the high prouidence of God occupie it selfe in making ordinances for birds nestes? Yea M. Doctour, and in teaching birdes to make their nestes, and in feeding their young birds that cal on him, although these ordinances cōcerning birdes nestes, were not made for birds, but for men. Or doth the wisedome of God ioyne such rewardes of prosperitie and long life to such trifles? O M. Doctour, obedience before God, is better then sacrifice, though it be in neuer so small matters.
                  But Salomon in his Ecclesiastes pleaseth not M. Heskins, where he saith, that Where much wisedome is, there is also much trauell and disquietnesse &c: herevpon the vnlearned, he saith, might take occasion to contemne wisedome, and much more by that which followeth. cap. 2. If it happen to the foole as to the wiseman, what needeth me to labour any more for wisedome. And herevpon he sweareth, that he heard a man of worship grauitie, wisedome, godly life, competent learning, able to vnderstand, and exercised in the scriptures, earnestly say to him, that it was a naughtie booke. When Salomon doth so exceedingly not onely in his other bookes, but also in that same booke, and place, set foorth the commendation of wisedome, it was a very spiderlike iuyce that your wise Gentleman (M. Doctour) gathered out of that booke, and such as no Bee would sucke out of so-sweete and wholesome flowers. As for The title Inci
                           •
                        ament vnto vertue,

that you suppose to appeare in the ballattes of Salomon, yea rather how vngodly and wanton they seeme to be, rather in the outward face teaching and prouoking wantonnesse, then godlinesse of life, Declareth how reuerently you iudge of the holie scripture And that offence you dreame off (belike not most chastly affected) is most easily auoyded: for what vnlearned man indued with common sense, reading in so many other places of the scriptures, all wantonnesse of life expressely forbidden, will not immediately conceiue, that this is some spirituall and mysticall loue, which is set forth in these ballats, rather then lewd or wanton songes, prouoking to wickednesse? But then followeth the sonne of Syrach, With his vnseemely wordes describing the wickednesse of an harlot Cap. 62. Which an honest man would be ashamed to speake, and you ashamed to write, if they were not scripture. Like as one that goeth by the way, and is thirstie, so shall she open her mouth, and drinke of euery next water that she may get. By euery hedge shal she fit her downe, & open her quiner to euery arrowe. Then what trifling, resting, and pastime you haue seene and heard vpon the reading, and rehersall of this text, and what vnchast wordes haue fallen out vpon the same. It appeareth you haue beene in good company, where you haue often heard such wholsome talke. But once againe you sweare, that This text being spoken in the presence of a good vertuous gentlewomā, the book turned & the place read, she exclamed & said, that if the scripture had such bawdie wordes, she would no more beleeue the scripture, for it was naught, with mo such like wordes. To passe ouer the blasphemous nicenes of this your Gentlewoman, and your iudgement of their goodnes and vertue, with their honestie, that troubled her with this place: I pray you maister Heskins, was it the darkenes of the place, that did so much offend her, or else because she thought it to be too plaine a description of suche a matter? You see therefore, or if you do not, all the worlde beside doeth, that while you seeke to bring the reading of scriptures into contempt and hatred, you forget your selfe so much, that you bring examples of one contrarie for

another. Although if I may speake of mine experience, as well as you, I do very well remember, that I hearde a sober and chaste matron, of her owne accorde, not prouoked thereto by any meanes, but the only hearing the same place read, affirme, that it was a modest description of so vile manners as an harlot vseth.
                  To conclude this Chapter, you bring in a long testimonie of Origen. 10. lib. Strom. Who to defend his wicked allegorizing vpon the scriptures, goeth about to proue by some examples and sentences, that the litteral sense is not profitable, but rather hurtfull. As the incest of Iuda, & the polygamie of the Patriarks, the dronkennesse of Noe, and such like, which are not commended in histories, but reproued. The sacrifices of Leuiticus he imagineth should prouoke men to idolatrie, but without all colour of reason. He addeth the iudgement of God against Babylon and her children in the Psalme. 136. and the iustice that Dauid doeth promise to execute against al the wicked of the land. Psalm. 101. to incourage men to cruelty and contention, but all in vaine: like as his purpose (for which he alledgeth them,) was wicked, namely to ouerthrowe the true and naturall sense of the scripture. But yet the same Origen is directly against maister Heskins, in that cause for which he is alledged, as appeareth plainely in Leuitici cap. 16. Hom. 9. An tu putas qui vix diebus fectis ad Ecclesiam venis, &c. 
                     Thinkest thou whiche scarcely commest to the Church vpon the holy dayes, & giuest no heede to heare the wordes of God, nor takest any paines to fulfill his commandements, that the Lordes lot can come vppon thee? Yet we wish that after you haue heard these things you would take paines not only in the Church to heare the wordes of God, but also at home in your houses to be exercised, and to meditate in the Lawe of the Lorde day and night. Go your wayes now and boaste of Origens authoritie, that the scriptures are not to be read of all men, when in a publique Sermon he exhorteth all the people to the diligent reading of them,

and sharply reproueth them for their negligence in this behalfe.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The third Chapter to declare the newe Testament not to be easie to be vnderstanded▪ bringeth diuers obscure places of the same.
                  
                     
                        Fulk
                     As I said before, there was neuer man yet so foolish, to affirme the scriptures to be so easie, that there was no obscure place in them, but that nothing needful to saluation is so obscure in them, but that it may be easily vnderstoode by conference of other places, where the fame is most plainely set foorth. But let vs see his wise reasons, to proue the new Testament to be hard, bicause some places therein be hard to be vnderstanded.
                  
                     The Euangelistes Matthewe and Luke seeme to varrie in the Genealogie of Christ, therefore all is not easie. What then? They both doe manifestly agree in that, which is materiall for our faith, 
                        •
                     hat Christe was the seede of Abraham, and the sonne of Dauid. In the rest, what straunge matter is it, if one pedegree be brought from one principall ancester by seuerall discents, lineall, and collaterall, natural, and legall, by the male and by the female▪
                  
                  For the second obscure place, Chrysostome is alledged, who Numbereth it among the hid thinges, howe Elizabeth being of the tribe of Leuie, may be called the cousen of Marie. 
                     A perillous doubt, in solution whereof, though a number be ignoraunt, yet I doubt not but they may be saued. And yet by conference of the stories of scripture it is easie to finde, that men of the tribe of Iuda might marrie of the Priestes daughters, and the Priestes did marrie euen of the Kings daughters of Iuda. By which mariages cousenage might easily be vnderstoode to growe betweene the two tribes▪ notwithstanding the lawe of Num 36. Which did forbid only those marriages, by which the inheritances might be confounded.
                  The third doubtfull place is in Marke. 13. Where it is said, that Of that day and houre knoweth no man, no not the

Angels in heauen, nor the sonne him selfe, but the father. And Chrysostome is againe alledged, to shewe that this is a doubtful place: and yet a simple Christian that knoweth the two diuers natures in Christ, humane and diuine, can easily solute it, and say, that although Christe by his godhead knoweth all things, yet as he was man he knewe not all things.
                  The fourth proofe is taken out of the example of Algasia and Hedibia, two godly women, and studious of the scriptures; whereof the one found twelue, the other eleuen doubtes in the newe Testament, and sent to S. Hieronyme for resolution of them. I maruell M. Heskins hath so small discretion, to alledge these examples, which do quight ouerthrowe his purpose. If not onely men, but women also, may read the scriptures, and profite so well in the studie of them, that they can finde but eleuen or twelue doubts in the whole newe Testament, for resolution whereof, they did (as became good schollers) send so farre for the iudgement of their learned maister. But M. Heskins, not content to shewe that they douted, will also set downe some of their douts, namely this one moued by Algasia. Why Iohn the Baptist should send his disciples to Christ to aske this question: Art thou he that shalt come, or do we looke for an other? seeing he both knewe, & openly pointed at Christ with his finger before? Although this good woman doubted of this matter, yet it is easie to answer, that thē he sought the instructiō of his disciples, rather then the confirmation of his owne knowledge. An other was moued by Hedibia, Howe Christ in Iohn 20. forbad Marie to touch him, when Matthew 28. affirmeth, that the women held his feete. It seemeth to M. Heskins that one of these must be vntrue, I dare say it seemed not so to Hedibia, although she could not perfectly reconcile these places. But seeing that both these reports are true, it is plaine ynough, that he suffered Marie Magdalene to holde his feete so much, as was sufficient to confirme the certeintie of his resurrection, & forbad her not, vntil she shewed her self too much addicted to his bodily presēce.
                  
                     Another doubt is, howe Marke saith the women came to the sepulchre when the Sunne was rysen, and then saith, Marie Magdalene came early in the morning when it was yet darke. A woman sitting at her distaffe, woulde easily solue this doubt, and say that it was darke when they set foorth of their dores, but the Sunne was risen by that time they came to the Sepulchre.
                  Yet another doubt of Hedibia, whether Christ breathing on his Apostles gaue them the holie Ghost, when he promised to send him after his ascension. There is no doubt but he did then in some small measure, but afterwardes sent him with most plentifull vertue and power.
                  To conclude, what needed Austen to haue written a great volume, De consensu Euangelistarum, what needed the comentaries of Hieronyme & Ambrose vpon the Euangelistes, or the Homilies of Chrysostome & Augustine, and the expositions of so manie learned men, &c. if the Scriptures be so plaine & easie? O foolish conclusion! as though the Scriptures may not planely set foorth vnto vs, all things necessarie for vs to learne, and yet the same things (with all other things conteined in them, be set forth more plainly & largely to the instruction & increase of our faith, hope, comfort, obedience, &c. by Comentaries, Homelies, expositions, yea admonitions, and exhortations.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The fourth Chapter conteineth certeine hard places of the Epistles.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     M. Heskins taketh great paines in those Chapters, to proue that which no man doubteth of, that there be some hard and darke places in the Scriptures, and yet it followeth not, but that the Scriptures are a light vnto our steppes, & a lanterne vnto our feete, & the worde of the Lord giueth wisedome vnto the simple. But let vs follow him whether he leadeth vs. In the Epistle to the Romanes be mo obscure, then plaine places, yea, the matter of iustification how hard it is, the controuersies thereupon risen may suffise to declare. Such is M. Heskins diuinitie, that he counteth al scripture obscure, that cā not easily be wrested to

maintein poperie. Otherwise ther is nothing more clere then the doctrin of iustification: though the Owles & Battes of our time, either can not, or will not see it. But it is no easie matter to reconcile the saying of S. Paul Rom. 3. We conclude that a man is iustified by faith, without the workes of the lawe, & that which Iames saith: Iac. 2. what auayleth it my brethren, if a man say he haue faith, if he haue no workes, can faith saue him? And after he concludeth: euen so faith if it haue no workes it is dead in it selfe. It is an easie matter to reconcile these places to him that can put a differēce between him that hath faith in deede, & him that onely saith he hath it: betweene a true liuely faith, & a false & dead faith: finally, between the cause of iustification that goeth before, & the effectes therof that followe after.
                  
                     In the same Epistle Cap. 10. concerning the reiection of the Iewes & calling of the Gentiles, there are many places that trouble M. Heskins, as that out of Esay, for calling of the Gentiles. I am found of them that sought me not, &c. But against Israel, &c. yet afterward he asketh if God haue forsaken his people, & aunswereth: God forbid, & such like. The matter is not so hard as it seemeth to him, but who so doth read the text attentiuely, may see the difference betweene a perticuler reiectiō of many, & an vniuersal reiection of all, a temporal reiection of most, & the finall reiection of al. The former is true, the latter is false.
                  The matter of predestination no man denyeth, but it is a great secreat, yet so much as the spirite of God hath reuealed of it, for our comfort, is not so hard, but it may be easily vnderstood. And as for that contrarietie which he seemeth to finde, betweene these two texts, Rom. 9. It is neither in him that willeth, nor in him that ru
                           •
                        neth, but in God that hath mercie: & that other Rom. 7. To will is present with me, but I finde no meanes to performe that which is good, is so absurd, that I thinke it would not enter into the head of any vnlearned man, to make a doubt, whether the will which is in a regenerate man by the grace of Gods election, was the cause of his election before the world was made.
                  
                     A like difficultie he findeth betweene these places: God will haue all men to be saued and 
                           〈◊〉
                         to the knowledge of the trueth
                     ▪ 1. Tim. 2. and that Rom. 9. Who can resist his will. And againe: Many are called, fewe are chosen. If master Heskins would vnderstande like a man, and no
                        •
                      like a childe, the verie wordes following would teache him, that in the first sentence, by all men, are meant all forces of men, as well Kings and Princes, as inferior subiectes.
                  After this he repeateth another doubt of Algasia: What Paule meaned to wish him selfe accursed from Christ, for the Iewes, which doubt is increased by an obiection of Hieronyme, that he had sayed before: I am sure that neither death nor life, &c. nor any other creature can separate vs from the loue of God. In which saying he seemeth to affirme that he so feruently loued Christ, that nothing could separate him from his loue, in the other he seemeth for the loue he bare to the Iewes, to wish that he were sepaerated from Christ, as though he loued the Iewes better then Christ. A short aunswere is best. Although his desire was exceeding vehement, yet it was more for zeale of Gods honour, then for loue of the Iewes. And although he loued Christ feruently▪ yet the boast he maketh of assurance, was not of that loue wherewith he loued Christ, but of that loue wherwith Christ loued him. And yet there is another doubt moued by Algasia vpon the wordes of Paule Rom. 5. For scarse will any man dye for a righte
                        
                           •
                        us man. But yet for a good man it may be that one dare dye. The obscuritie of which place, hath moued two contrarie heretikes, to take their heresies thereof. Marcion, who made two Gods, a iust GOD of the Lawe, for whome fewe dyed, and a good God of the Gospell, Christ, for whome innumerable Martyre haue suffered. Ar
                           •
                        ius contrarywise calleth Christ the iust God vppon the Psalme 71. Lord giue thy iudgements to the King, and thy righteousnesse to the Kings sonne. The good God he called father of heauen, of whome Christ saide, none is good but God. These doubtes Master Heskins moueth, but he aunswereth none. The place is not so darke, that eyther such doubt should be made of it, or such farre fetched expositions sought as the heretikes made. For a man may

be righteous in some case, for which he is condemned to dye, which is not simply a good man, and for such a one will hardly any man giue his life, although peraduenture for a very good man, some woulde venture to dye: But Christ dyed for vs, being his enemies, iustly condemned, & altogether naught or wicked, which no man would euer do but he. The douts of Algasia are matched with the foure questions of Amandus, of which one was, of that place 1. Cor. 15. He must reigne till he haue put all things vnder his feete. The last enimie that shalbe subdued is death. For he hath put all things vnder his feete. But when he sayeth, all things are put vnder him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which did put all things vnder him. When all things are subdued vnder him, then shall the sonne himselfe also be subiect vnto him that put all things vnder him, that God may be all in all▪ The question is, howe the sonne shalbe subiect to the father when he is equall with him. And this doubt is answered by Hillarius lib. 11. de Trin. M. Heskins doth often declare, that he had rather men should be taught by him to doubt, then to be resolued in doubtes, for he vouchsafeth not so much, as to recyte the aunswere of Hillarius, but onely to cyte the place. But the aunswere is easie by the distinction of the two natures in Christ: for he shall neuer be subiect in his diuinitie, but in his humanitie, wherein he is nowe exalted, & reigneth vntill all his enimies be put vnder his feete.
                  Yet another doubt vpon Coll. 1. Where Paul writeth: Nowe ioye I in my suffrings for you, and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my fleshe for his bodie which is his Church. Here he seemeth to make the passion of Christ insufficient. Not a-whit: for as Christ suffered once in his owne person, for their redemption, so he suffereth daily in his members, for their exercise of patience, & confirmation of faith.
                  Then the Epistle to the Hebrues hath two sore sentences. Heb. 6. & 10. For it is not possible that they which were once lightened, and haue tasted of the heauenly gift, and were made partakers of the holie Ghoste, and haue tasted of the good worde of God, and of the power of the world to come, if they fall away, should be renewed againe by repentance, seeing they crucifie againe to

them selues the Sonne of God and make a mocke of him. And againe. For if we sinne wilfully after we haue receiued the knowledge of the trueth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sinnes, but a fearefull looking for of iudgement, and violent fire which shall deuour the aduersaries. The difficultie of these places resteth in one point, and in a manner in one worde in eche of the sentences. For the Apostle excludeth not from repentance euery one that falleth and sinneth, but him onely which sinneth so wilfully, that he falleth cleane away from Christ. For then there is no repentance nor remission, because he sinneth against the holie Ghost, as did Iudas, Alexander the coppersmith, Iulian the Apostata, & such like.
                  The contention of Hieronyme & Augustine about Peters dissimulation is the last example of difficultie,
                        Gal. 2. which did not arise of any obscuritie of the place, but of Hieronymes immoderate and ouer great zeale to defend Peter, where the holie Ghost saith plainly, he was worthie to be reprehended. But for as much as these two great doctors, could not agree about the exposition of this place, it doth not so much declare the hardnesse of the Scriptures, as it doth discourage vs, to finde the certeine exposition of them at all times in the iudgement of the doctours: which both in this place and many other, are not onely diuers, but oftentimes contrarie one to another. The conclusion of the Chapter is not all amisse, wherein he dissuadeth not men from reading the scriptures, but from rashnesse of iudgement, and exhorteth the readers of them to humilitie and modestie, that so the spirite of GOD may rest vppon them, which will leade them into all trueth.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The first Chapter declareth the mindes and iudgements of the Fathers and Doctours, vpon the difficultie of the scriptures.
                  It is not ynough for this bold Burgesse, to trouble the house,
                        Fulk.
                      in prouing that which no man doth gainesay, but he wil also charge men with impudencie and arrogancie,

which giue him no occasion of this his long and vaine speache. But herein, he sheweth his witt more then his honestie. For, bicause he can not disproue that which they say, he laboureth to proue that which they do not denie. And nowe of the doctours, (substantially no doubt) Origen must beginne, who saith: That these wordes of Paule: Brethren, you are called into libertie. Gal 5. is an hard place, and that the holy Ghost must be found in the scriptures, with much labour and sweat &c. We say likewise with Dauid, that the godly mans studie must be in the lawe of the Lorde day and night. But that Origen would not for the difficultie of the scriptures, dissuade any Lay man from reading of them, is manifest by this place in Gen. Capit. 26. Hom. 12. 
                        Tenta ergo & tu ô auditor habere proprium puteum, & proprium fontem, vt & tu cum apprehenderis librum scripturarum, incipias etiam ex proprio sensu proferre aliquem intellectum, & secundum ea, quae in Ecclesia didicisti, tenta & tu bibere de fonte ingenij tui. Assay therefore thou ô hearer, to haue a pit of thine own, a spring of thine owne, that euen thou also, when thou takest in hand the booke of the scriptures, maiest beginne to bring foorth some vnderstanding of thine owne wit, and according to those thinges which thou hast learned in the Churche, assay thou also to drinke of the spring of thine owne witte. Here Origen will not only haue men to reade the scripture, but also incourageth them to seeke out the interpretation by their owne studie.
                  
                  
                     But Hieronyme (next to Origen) in his Epistle to Paulinus both noteth diuerse obscure places in the scripture, and also counselleth Paulinus to vse the helpe of interpreters. And who is it that mislyketh his councel? especially if it be to exhort one that meant to be a teacher in the Church as Paulinus was. Yet neuerthelesse we shewed before, that Hieronyme would haue euen infantes brought vppe in the knowledge of the scriptures, and exhorteth not onely men, but women also to the studie of them, and commendeth husband men, and labourers; for their knowledge of the scriptures.
                  And although he confesse the questions of Algasia

to be full of difficulties, yet he both commendeth her studie in the scriptures, and desire to be resolued in her doubtes.
                  
                     Yet Basill teacheth that all the scriptures are not to be published and made common.
                     Basil. lib. Sp. 5. cap. 27. 
                     For there are poyntes of learning, or of doctrine that are to be kept close, and the obscuritie which the scripture vseth is a kinde of silence so framing those points of learning, that a man may hardly vnderstand them.
                  
                  The wordes of Basil are these 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . That is, (according to Erasmus translation) exercising a minde vnapte for the contemplation of this doctrine, and that for the profite of them that exercise them selues in the scriptures. Which last wordes, M. Heskins hath fraudulently left out, and so he is cleane contrarie to M. Heskins purpose. Although Basill speaketh not expressely of reading the Scriptures by the faithfull, but of publishing the mysteries of Christian religion that were receiued by tradition without Scripture. For in his short definitions 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        : to this question, whether it be expedient that they which are new come to the faith, should be instructed in the holie Scriptures? he aunswereth 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , &c. This question may be dissolued by those things that were sayde before. For it is both conuenient & necessarie, that euery man for his neede should learne out of the diuine Scriptures, both for the certeine persuasion of godlinesse, & also that he be not accustomed vnto mans traditions.
                     lib. 7. E. 44. 
                     But S. Ambrose also in fewe words saith much to this matter, calling the Scripture of God the great sea, hauing in it a deepenesse without bottome of deepe senses & vnderstandings, into the which many floods do enter. But this letteth not S. Ambrose vpon 118. Psal. Serm. 1. to exhort the laye people to read the Scriptures. 
                        Et tu lege prophetam vt videat, lege vt apperiat os tutum. And thou also read the Prophet, that thou mayst see, read that he may open thine eyes. And againe: Quod sisugias lectionem propheticam, si domi non legas, in ecclesia audire nolis, &c. But if thou flye from the reading of the Prophetes, if thou read not at home:

thou wilt not heare in the Church, but while thou feinest to heare those things that are read, &c. And if in your iudgement he said much for you, when he cōpareth the scripture to the sea, I thinke he saith more against you, where he compareth the Church to the sea. 
                     Hexam. lib. 3. cap. 3. 
                        Vnde bene mari plerum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            comparatur ecclesia, quae primo ingredientis populi agmine totis vestibulis vndas vomit: deinde in oratione totius plebis tanquam vndis refluentibus stridet: tum responsorijs. Psalmorum, cantus virorum, mulierum, virginum, paruulorū, consonus vndarum fragor resultat. Whervpō the Church is oft times verie wel compared vnto the sea, which first by the cōming in of the multitude, floweth out waues frō euery porch or entrie: and then maketh a noyse with the prayer of the whole people, as it were with the ebbing or flowing backe of the waues: last of all, with answerings of Psalmes, singing of men, women, virgines, and little children, a well tunable sound of the waues reboundeth. By this place it appeareth, that all sorts of people were admitted to the reading of the scriptures, and that no tong was vsed in the Church, but such as was cōmon to all the people. Chrysostome succeedeth Ambrose, who saith:
                        Hom. 44 in Matth.
                      
                     The scriptures are darke that they are found out with labour, but not shut that they can not be found out at all, and that the priestes ought to be the keykeepers of the scriptures, not to shut them vp, but to open them, &c. I would oppose some testimonie of Chrysostome to explane his meaning, not to be to discourage men frō reading the scriptures, but that M. Heskins doth soone after confesse the same, of his owne accord, in these wordes: I am not ignorant (gentle reader) that Chrysostome doth so, that is, that Chrysostome in a number of places most earnestly exhorteth men to the reading of the scriptures, and doth not feare them with the obscuritie, and difficultie thereof. I aske no more against M. Heskins, but his own confession of Chrysostomes iudgement to be against him, whervnto we must returne anon, after a little consideration of Gregories iudgement. Gregorie sheweth, that the obscuritie of the scriptures is for great profite, for exercising the vnderstanding, for auoyding of wearines, idlenes, contempt, and for great delight, when

it is found out with labour. Augustine hath the like sentence, but this maketh much for our cause, that the obscuritie of the scripture, where, it is darke: is very profitable for the diligent reader. To conclude, if all the scripture were neuer so darke, yet seeing it is necessarie to be knowne of al men, it ought to be read and studied of all, & the more & the oftener, where it is more hard to vnderstand, yt long & diligent search may find out, yt which sildome & slight reading would passe ouer. As for the last testimonie of Hieronyme ad Paulinum, concerning the Canonicall Epistles, That they are both short and long so that there be not many which are not blind in them. Bicause we had the like before, I will referre it to the former answeres. The rest of the rayling stuffe, charging vs with cause of heresies, arrogance, and ignorance, in suffering and allowing the people to reade the scriptures, affirming them to be easie, when they be hard &c. is more meete for M. Heskins to write, then vs to answere. But to return to the obiection, that he maketh of the iudgement of Chrysostome and Erasmus, whom he confesseth to be against him, let vs see his wittie answeres. To Chrysostome he answereth, That there were two causes why he would haue the scriptures read, one, that they might the better vnderstand his expositions in the Churche, the other that they might reade them to followe them: to these purposes he graunteth it were tollerable they should be read, but not to frame newe doctrines out of them, nor to cont
                           •
                        mne the learned teachers, &c. And who (I pray you) would haue them read to other purpose? Not Luther, not Iewell, nor any man whom you most spyte at. But see the force of truth, and the malice of an enimie therof. Heskins hauing reasoned in fiue Chapters, against the reading of scriptures, nowe graunteth to it: but yet that which is most conuenient & of al, most necessarie, he vouchsafeth to cal it but tollerable. To Erasmus he replyeth, first, yt seeing he confesseth in diuers places the scriptures to be hard to vnderstand, he maruelleth that he would exhort ignorant men to the reading of them. But Erasmus would easily turne backe M. Heskins reason vpon his owne head. Seeing they are

hard, they are the more often and diligently to be read & studied. Secondly, he thinketh Alphonsus good ynough to oppose against Erasmus, who affirmeth, That although it were meete the people should read the scriptures in Chrysostomes time, yet it is not meete nowe, bicause lawes are changed as the times and manners of men are. And it is no more meete that the people should nowe read the scriptures, then that the Vigils should be kept as they were in Hieronymes time, or that Infantes should receiue the Communion as they did in Augustines t
                           •
                        me, or men shuld abstaine from bloud and strangled as in the Apostles time, or discipline and publique penance should be vsed as in the old dayes. If the maners of men be worse nowe, they haue more neede of the knowledge of God, whereby they might be reformed, wherefore the similitudes are nothing like. And besides this, note also the errour of the Church in S. Augustines time confessed, and the want of discipline in the Popish Church acknowledged.
               
               
                  The sixt Chapter, declaring howe the people shall come to the vnderstanding of the scriptures.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The vnderstanding then of ye scriptures is necessarie,
                        Eulk.
                      seing God as you cōfesse, which ordeineth nothing in vain, hath appointed a meane, wherby the people should come to the vnderstanding of the scriptures. So by the way we haue gained thus much: that ignorance is not the mother of Christian deuotion, as was most impudently affirmed by all the Bel weathers of Papistrie, in the conference of Westminster, to the perpetuall shame & ignominie, both of them selues, and al the Popish Church. But nowe to the meane appointed by God, which you say, Is, that the lawe should be in the mouth of the Priest, and the people should learne it at his mouth. A very godly order in deede, but yet such as neither promiseth, that the lawe shal be alwayes in the Priestes heart, nor bindeth the people to learne it only at his mouth. And therefore nothing in the world letteth, but that the godly man should meditate in the lawe of God day & night, Psal. 1. and haue it so familiar vnto him, that he shuld teach his childrē therin, talke of it at home,

& abroad, vprising, and downlying, and write on the postes of his doores, and vpon his gates, that he may learne to do it. Deut. 4. & 11. Wherefore all the places that M. Heskins alledgeth, to shewe that the Priestes should be learned, and the people instructed by them, serue to proue nothing that is in controuersie, but is confessed of al men: except it be to condemne the Clergie of Papistrie, which for the most part are ignoraunt, not onely of Gods lawe, but of all honest knowledge, and vpon very necessitie, open a gate vnto the people, to seeke instruction them selues, where the ordinarie passage is stopped, through the ignorance of the Ministers.
                  The first place by him alledged, is Deu. 17. That if there rise a matter too hard for the people in iudgement betweene bloud and bloud, &c. they shall come to the Priestes, and stand to their iudgement on paine of death, &c. Although I might answere, that this ordinaunce appertaineth to iudiciall causes, of which God gaue his lawe also, yet if it be taken generally, so long as the Prieste determineth according to the lawe, it is well ynough. But this proueth not, that the people must haue no vnderstanding, beside the priests mouth. For the decree is onely of matters that are difficult, and such as cannot be decided at home. No more do the wordes of Malachie, That the lips of the Priest shall keepe the law, and men shall require it at his mouth. And much lesse the commaundement in Aggee: Enquire the lawe of the Priestes, And least of all that Christ commaundeth the Scribes and Pharisees to be heard sitting in the chaire of Moses. These places proue, that it is the Priestes duetie to be learned in the lawe of God, but repel not the general lawe, wherby euery man is cōmanded also to studie in the law of God, yea, though the Priestes neither would nor could teach him. For if the blinde followe the blinde, they both fall into the ditch: which our sauiour Christ willeth all men to take heede of. Hieronyme in the place by you alledged (M. Heskins) gathereth rightly of these places,
                        
                           
                              •
                           n Agge. 2. that it is the Priestes office to know and expound the scriptures: but I muse how the greatest number of your Priestes can

brooke those words of his: If he be ignorant of the law, he proueth him selfe to be no Priest of God. Much more against your cleargie, & your cause is that large sentence you set down out of Hieronyme, thē to hurt your aduersaries, where he concludeth out of 1. Tim. 3. & Tit. 1. that both by the new Testament and the old it is the priests office to know and teach the lawe of God. As is also that which you adde out of 1. Cor. 12. that God hath appointed some Apostles, some Prophets, some pastors, & teachers, as though these orders might not stand with the peoples reading of the scriptures: whē euen in the Apostles time, the Thessalonians or Berrhoeans wer cōmended, for that thei did not only heare the Apostles, but also cōferred their doctrin with the scriptures Actes. 17. Hauing rehearsed your texts, you fal to collecting of three things out of thē. 1. That it is the dutie of a Priest to be learned in the law of God, and godly life also, which euerie man confesseth. 2. That there be doubts and hard matters in the law. And that also shal be confessed. But withall out of the same place it is proued, that there are many plaine and easie pointes in the lawe, because the decree was not for all the lawe, but onely for harde cases of the lawe. Thirdly, that the people must bee taught them and learne of the priestes, and this also shall be granted to the vttermost, so that you will allow the people to learn such things as are easie, not only of the priests, but also of their own reading, study, & conference with thē that are no priestes. And this is no inuerting of Gods order, M. Heskins, how much soeuer you enuie the peoples instruction. For it is gods commaundement, as I shewed before, that his people shoulde not onely reade the lawe themselues, but teach the same to others, yea parentes are commaunded to teach the lawe of God to their children, and yet I weene you will not say that all parents be priestes. But the marke you shoote at, is easie to see, the ignorance of the people is more for your worshippe and gaine then their knowledge. The examples you bring, of the people teaching Aaron, of Chore, Dathan, & Abiram; rebelling against Moses and Aaron, and of the Israelites

in deposing Samuel and desiring a king, are of no force to dissuade men from reading of the Scriptures, no thoughe they haue learned and true teachers: much lesse, when they are vnder dumbe dogges and heretikes, as all popishe priestes are: nor to abridge the authoritie of lawfull magistrates, in banishing and suppressing all vsurped power and false teachers, nor to shake off the yoke of Antichrist to submit thēselues vnto a king. There is too great oddes betweene the Pope and Samuel, betweene Moses and Aaron & the popish cleargie, that they which withstande the Pope and his Prelates, should be in the case of Dathan and his complices, or of the people that refused the regiment of Samuel. The saying of Augustine Ep. 118. Although it come in here out of season, yet it maketh nothing against vs. (He saith, It is most insolent madnesse to dispute, whether that is to be done, which the Church throughout all the worlde doth obserue:) Excepte M. Heskins can shewe, what is obserued of the Church throughout the worlde; which we doe not obserue, or deny to be obserued. For S. Augustine in that place speaketh of Ceremonies.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The seuenth Chapter declaring the same by examples of the Fathers and authorities of the Doctours of the Church.
                  The title of this Chapter pretendeth to declare, howe the people shall come to the vnderstanding of the scriptures,
                        Fulk.
                      but the examples are most of the preachers and teachers, how they shall atteine to knowledge sufficient to discharge their office. But the first argument whervpō almost all the rest of the Chapter doth runne, is a maruellous conclusion God commaundeth the children of Israell, 32. Aske thy father and he will shewe thee, thy Elders and they will tell thee. Ergo God did not sende all the people, only to the fiue books of Moses to learne, but willed them to learne of their Elders: So now, all men may not be sent to the scriptures to learne, but they must learne of their Fathers, what be the goodly workes of God conteined in the Scriptures. Why M. Heskins, you forget not only lodgike, but common reason? We would not haue men to learne, onely by reading the scriptures, but muche more by hearing their teachers, first their Pastors, and then

all other, whom God hath indued with any gift of knowledge. And wil you conclude wt shame, that because men were not sent, only to the fiue Bookes of Moses, men may not now be sent at all to the scriptures? And are you so blinde that you cannot see, this text to ouerthrowe the purpose of both your sixth and seuenth Chapters after this manner, by necessary conclusion? Men must learne of their fathers, therefore not only of the Priestes. The rest that followeth for certeine pages, is so tedious a proofe of that which is not at all in controuersie, that it yrketh me to abridge it, but for orders sake. The Apostles learned of Christ in three yeares study, prayer is required to the vnderstanding of the scripture by Origens iudgement. The Fathers of the Church learned of their Elders, as Clemens, Marke, Linus, Cletus, of Peter: Titus, Timotheus, Luke, & Dionise, of Paule: and so one of an other. Basil and Gregorie Nazianzen studied thirteene yeres in a monasterie. Hieronyme learned of ye Hebrues, & trusted not his own iudgement, wherefore all rashe readers and arrogant teachers may be abashed, which take vpon them, to teach before they be learned, whereas no man, may be his owne teacher in the scriptures. All this, and much more shall be graunted to M. Heskins without any strife at all. But yt which he also granteth, (though it be not very liberally) yet, it must not be refused. That in S. Hieronymies time many did study the scriptures, which if the people coulde nowe reuerently and meekely vse might be tollerated. Well then, the allowance of antiquitie is of our side, and the conditional tolleration of M. Heskins: for I may not say of the Popish Church, knowing what horrible persecution they practise against thē, which haue but a book of the scriptures in their mother tonge, found in their hand or house, although it cannot be proued, that they read it. Wherefore, it is most absurd, that hee chargeth the proclamer, with slaundering their Churche, to bring hir in hatred with the lay people, as though she had nowe forbidden them to read the Scriptures, in their owne tongue: whereas he knoweth no suche prohibition, giuen to the lay people vniuersally.

But the reason is most monsterous. For if there had bene any such prohibition, there should not haue bene so many lay men, which haue both read and written of the scriptures in their natiue tongues, &c. As thoughe learned lay men, coulde not haue readd the scriptures but in their mother tongue. But the church fearing the abuses of the scriptures by the vnlearned lay men, forbad them. But such lay men as vnderstād the scriptures in Hebrue & Greeke, the Church wil allow them to read thē in English. O wise & prouident Church! Nay meruell not at this. For the learned if they be rashe fall into heresies: much more the vnlearned. And the learned also, yea and phisitians themselues sometimes take surfeites, therefore it were a sure way for the people neuer to eate meate. Noble men and wisemen somtime haue their houses burned, therefore it is much more dangerous for poore and simple men to haue fire in their houses.
                  
                     The knowledge of Mysteries muste not bee made common to all men for the Iewes would not suffer Genesis, and Cantica to be redde of young men before 30. yeares of age. The heathen men also, as the Romanes & Philosophers, kept close their secrets: the one Sibyllaes bookes the other Morall philosophie, & especially Metaphysike. If I had time I might make sporte with this Metaphysical argument,
                        In Matth. H. 44. that Christian men must folow the practise of Infidels. But I must passe ouer to the rest. Chrysostom in the Greeke Church, as wel as Hieronyme in the Latine, wold haue the people to learne by hearing their teachers, and not onely by reading them selues, because the scriptures are darke, and are a storehouse not common for all men, but out of which the stewardes must deliuer to euerie man his portion. Remember all this notwithstanding, that M. Heskins confessed before, that Chrysostome doth often earnestly exhort the lay and vnlearned people to the diligent reading of the scriptures.
                  Then followe similitudes of young children and vnthriftes, the one if they feede thēselues, the meate runneth about their mouth, bosome, and clothes, the other spende their fathers goods in suites, and quarels, and contention with their brethren: So men without witte & grace abuse the scriptures to the hurt of others, & no profite

of themselues. Except all laye men want witt and grace, these similitudes proue nothing. For many priestes also want wit & grace, whō you admit to read the scriptures. After similitudes come examples. Valdo an vnlearned man caused Bookes of scripture to be translated, and so beganne the sect of Valdenses, or Pauperes de Lugduno. Out of the same founteine of ignorance sprang the heretikes, called Begradi Turrelupini. Valdo was a godly man, & seeing the ignorance and vngodlines of the Priests, did very wel to procure the translatiō of the scripture, and vppon good groundes departed from the Church of Rome vnto the Church of Christ, what the other were as stories are vncertein, so I leaue them in doubt.
                  But Luther and Zwinglius are charged to affirme The scriptures to be easie, and make it free for all men to read and expound them, and teach that not onely men, but also women may openly preache the worde of God, and that as well a childe and a woman absolueth, as a Bishop. If these were not meere slaunders, he would haue set downe their owne wordes, the circumstance of which no doubt, would discharge them of such absurdities as he collecteth. For they would neuer affirme euery place of the scripture to be easie, nor women, but in case where al men, (or the most) faile of knowledge to teach, as the prophetesses of the olde lawe did, nor women and children to absolue as well as a godly bishop by the doctrine of the Gospell, but perhaps better then an ignorant Popish Prelate.
                  Likewise where he chargeth Luther To boast that he was ignorant in no part of the scripture, and yet bringeth in his owne wordes: wherein he confesseth that he knew not whether he had the right vnderstanding of the Psalmes, and saith also, that it was most impudent rashnesse for any man to professe that he vnderstoode any one booke of scripture in all partes: I say the conference of these places doeth declare, that no man except he were blinde, madde, or dronke with malice, would beleeue the slaunder of boasting to be true in manner and forme as Maister Heskins setteth it downe.
                  Hauing vomited his malice against Luther & Zwinglius, he inueyeth with mayn sayle of open rayling against

the people of our time, for the rashnesse and disorder of some. As though there were no talke, but rash babbling of predestination, free wil, iustification, yea God to be the author of sinne, of the number of ye sacraments, & especially the sacrament of the altar, and no where, but in Tauernes, Innes, Alehouses, and Barbarshops, in streetes, highwayes, and fieldes, and in the mouthes of women, boyes, and girles. God be thanked, this slaunder is false. Although there be great rashnesse in some, and vnreligiousnesse in more: yet the true members of Christ, profite much by reading of his word. We confesse with Gregorie Nazianzene, that it is not for euery man rashly to dispute of God, nor yet of diuine matters, but with humilitie and sobrietie, which they shal learne no where so well, as in the holy scriptures of God. The other cauil that followeth, of lay men artificers, preaching in open places, & ministring the sacramentes deserueth no answere, for if they be admitted to the office, beeing worthy thereof, there is no doubt, but they may as well now, as in all ages of the Church they haue done, neither are they to be takē for laymen, though they haue beene artificers. Yet if they presume without calling and admission of the Church, they are no more borne withall among vs, then suche as counterfet themselues to be Priestes among the Papistes. As Englishe Ioan did to clyme to the Papacie, & as of late a lewd fellow in Italie feigned himselfe to be a Cardinall, as Stephanus in his defence of Herodotus doth witnesse. We condemne according to the scriptures, not only all intrusion of men without calling, but all ambitious and symoniacall practises, to procure the outward calling. So farre off is it, that we allowe euerie man of his owne fantasie, to intrude himselfe, as this man doth most vainely slaunder vs.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Heskins.
                     The 8. Chap. exhorteth men to heare, or to read the expositions of the scriptures, & not to presume vpon their own vnderstanding.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     If there were nothing in this Chapter, but answering to the title thereof: I would willingly subscribe vnto it. But after he hath exhorted as he promiseth, by the counsell of

Iames, Salomon, and Hieronyme, that we should heare & learne of them, whom God hath appointed, pastors and teachers in his Church: he dissuadeth men also, by the authoritie of Paule, and Ecclesiasticus, to appoint vnto them selues Elders, or maisters, to be carried about with new and straunge doctrines: & decreeth, That they only are lawfull Elders, that haue learned of their fathers. For whiche cause Luther was no good Elder, allowing women to teach openly, contrary to Paul, 1. Cor. 14. which is an impudent slaunder of Luther, who by no meanes would haue women to teache, except it were extraordinarily, as the prophetesses of the olde time did namely Debora, Holda, & such like. Such stuffe is in the other slaunders, That contrition maketh a man more sinner, where Luther meaneth of yt, which is without faith, & therfore must needs be sinne. That a righteous man in euery good worke sinneth mortally, where he meaneth that sinne and imperfection is mixed, euen with the best works, not that good workes are sinne. That is also a detestable lye, that Luther should teach, Euery Christian man, to be a priest for the common or publique ministery, wheras he neither thought nor spake otherwise, then the scripture speaketh, which hath made vs Kings & Priests. Apoc. 1. And no lesse is ye slander of Zwinglius, That he taught, that originall offence is no sinne, whereas the worlde knoweth, that Zwinglius taught the contrarie, and the Papistes come neerer to that errour, whiche define it to be no sinne in the regenerate: it is as false that he taught, That Christian mens children neede not to be baptised, As it is true, that if they dye without baptisme, (without any cōtempt of their part,) it is no cause of condēnatiō vnto them. The saying of Christ, except a man be borne againe of water & of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heauē, maketh no more for the baptisme of infantes, then his saying also, except ye eate the fleshe of ye sonne of man, & drinke his bloud, ye haue no life in you, maketh to proue, that infants must receiue ye cōmunion, for neither in the one speaketh he of the sacramēt of baptisme, nor in the other place, of the sacramēt of his supper. But where Luther doth often protest yt he will not be

taught by man, but by God, he doeth as euerie Christian man ought to do, and yet excludeth not the ministerie of men, but the authoritie, doctrines, traditions, and inuentions of men, which by Luciferian pride take vpon them to teache that they haue not learned of God. But howe shall we vnderstand this saying of Maister Heskins, speaking in despight of Luther: This is another Paule. As though only Paul wer called of God without the ministery of mā, whē all the Apostles were so, or as though it were a reproche to be so called as Paul was: if God do extraordinarily stir vp any man, as he did the Apostles & Euāgelistes. After his deriding of Paul, Zwinglius is condemned, by that which Maister Heskins hath saide, for writing a booke De claritate verbi Dei, How wisely and iustly, let the godly Readers iudge. Next followeth generall rayling against Oecolampadius, Bullingerus, Caluinus, Bucer, of whom his aduersarie (meaning I thinke the B. of Sarum) learned his heresies: then he returneth to vnlearned artificers, teaching in corners. All which he would haue to be auoyded: I suppose because he hath rayled vpon them, and called them heretiques, for other reason he bringeth none. Except this be one, that Hieronyme thinketh it not sufficient, if a man say, he loueth God, and yet breaketh the vnitie of the Church. The Church once named, by and by all is his. As though it were no cōtrouersie at this day, whether the Synagogue of Rome be the Church of God or no. And as though all Christendome, had bene at all times, and in all places obedient to the Churche of Rome, before these fewe yeares. And therfore he is bolde to demaunde where it was taught in the Christian worlde, that Christes naturall bodie is not in the sacrament, nor to be offered, nor receiued, nor honoured? Nay Maister Heskins, where was this taught in the affirmatiue for fiue or sixe hundreth yeares after Christe? As for your other questions of prayer for the dead, and prayers to the dead, if you bring any reasons for thē in this your Omnegatherū, they shal be answered otherwise the readers for me shall resort to other treatises where they be handled of purpose. But seeing men

must learne the law of their mother, that is the Church, they must follow Hieronyme, which neuer ceased from his youth, to seeke knowledge of learned men, and trauelled to Alexandria to be instructed of Didym
                           •
                        s. So did Augustine to Millain to learne of Ambrose. No wise man will mislike this counsell. But this one thing especially is notable: That Damasus being bishop of Rome, did send to S. Hieronyme to be answered in certein doubts, and disdained not to learne of him. I had thought the Pope, had had all knowledge In scrinio pectoris, in the closet of his brest, that he had the spirite of trueth, to resolue all doubtes, so that he could not erre, and that Hieronyme hauing him at Rome, needed not to haue sought knowledge at Alexandria. But Damasus, although euen in that time, a ioly stately Prelate, as appeareth by some of his Epistles, (if they be not counterfet) yet shewed himselfe farre from that Antichristian pride, which the Popes of Rome, (I cannot say his successors,) did shew afterward, and yet to this day do holde.
                  But to omitte Damasus Many learned of Saint Augustine, and of other learned men also, which were learned them selues. They did wel, & many, (God be blessed) follow their example at this day, and yet too fewe, for it were to be wished, that such modestie were in all men. The saying of Clemens, registred also in the cannon lawe, although you alledge it out of a counterfet and barbarous epistle, yet is it very godly, and worthie of the Apostles scholler: That the scripture must not be drawen into straunge and forreigne senses, according vnto euerie mans phantasie, but the true sense must be taken out of the very Scriptures themselues, agreeable to the iudgement of them, that haue receiued is from the elders, That is the Apostles. For there were none other in the time of Clemens, whiche went before but euen they.
                  The rest of the Chapter conteineth a repetition of that he hath handled in these eight Chapters, with a promise that after this prety preamble, he will goe immediately to his purposed matter, to bee debated in this highe Court of prattlement. And yet I weene as you haue

had a preamble, so you shall haue a preface of other matter, for three or foure Chapters more, or euer you come to the principall matter. In deede great solemnitie becommeth a parleament.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Heskins.
                     The ninth Chapter declaring that our redemption was prenunci
                        ••
                     ed by promises figures, and prophesies, and what the promises be, and to whom they were made.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     In this Chapter, so long as he followeth the scriptures, he hath well and truely satisfied the title: shewing that Christ was promised principally to Adam, Abraham, and Dauid, denying that Salomon was promised to Dauid, but Christ. Where I hope he meaneth, that Salomon was not promised as Messias, but as a figure of him. Finally, I agree with him in all things, for which he bringeth authoritie of the worde of God, onely I cannot admitte the exposition that Iacobus de Valentia maketh of the Dominion of Christ from sea to sea, that is, from the mid lande sea to both the Oceans, the South, and the North, whiche inclose Affrike, and Europe from the floudes, Nilus and Tanais, vnto the endes of the world, that be towarde the East, which comprehendeth all Asia. For since the time of Iacobus de Valentia, we haue knowledge of the fourth part of the worlde, toward the West, called America, greater then any of the three other, which his circumscriptiō, doeth exclude, out of the kingdome of Christ, although I doubt not, but thither also the founde of the Gospell hath beene carried, and is nowe restored in some places, although brutish barbarousnesse hath of long time ouerwhelmed it.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The tenth Chapter toucheth the figures of Christes incarnation, passion, resurrection, and ascention.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     In this Chapter as in the former, following the authoritie of the holy scriptures, he sheweth that the conception of Sampson, was a figure of the incarnation of Christ:

Ioseph, of his betraying: Isaac, of his suffering: the priesthood of Aaron, and the sacrifices, of his priesthoode & sacrifice: Ionas, of his resurrection: & Elias, of his ascention. Wherein I see nothing worthie of reprehension, except peraduenture in some collation, there be more subtil curiositie, then sound stedfastnesse.
               
               
                  The eleuenth Chapter, declareth by the Prophets of what line the Messias should come, with his cōception, birth, passion, & death.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  In this Chapter also he doeth well discharge his promise, for the historie of the cōception, & passion of Christ.
                        Fulk.
                      If al the rest were like these Chapters, we should soone agree.
               
               
                  The twelfth briefely toucheth a prophesie or two of the resurrection, and ascention of Christ.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  In this Chapter, as he promiseth,
                        Fulke.
                      is touched a saying of Dauid Psalm. 16. alledged by Peter, Act. 2 to proue the resurrection: and an other, Psalm. 67. for the ascention, alledged by Paule. Eph. 4. in these foure Chapters, there is nothing in a manner, but that which is confessed of both sides.
               
               
                  The thirteenth Chapter, how that Melchisedech was a figure of Christ both in Priesthood and sacrifice.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  This Chapter promiseth more then it performeth,
                        Fulk.
                      for it sheweth in deed, and as the trueth is, that Melchisedech was a figure of christ, but it scarse toucheth his priesthod, and speaketh not one worde of his sacrifice, as by a briefe collection of the whole Chapter, and euerie parte thereof shall appeare. First he there declareth, that as the mysterie of our redemption was promised, figured, & prophesied in the olde Testament, and accomplished in the New: so was the memorial of yt redemption: which Newe Testament being euerlasting, hath an euerlasting Priest, & an euerlasting sacrifice. The euerlasting priest he cōfesseth to be our

sauiour Christ. But the euerlasting sacrifice (he saith) is the very body & blod of the same, our sauiour Christ. Which as he according to the order of his priesthood, did sacrifice in his last supper, vnder the formes of bread & wine: so did he giue authoritie & cōmandemēt, to the Apostles & ministers of his Churche to do the same, saying: Hoc facite in meā cōmemorationem. This do ye in the remēbrance of me. Beside that these thinges of the euerlasting sacrifice, be vttered without all proofe, or shadowe thereof, marke one horrible blasphemie, and an other detestable absurditie. For in as much as he affirmeth, the euerlasting sacrifice, to be Christes body and bloud offered in the supper, and it is manifest by the scripture, that Christe neuer offered but one sacrifice, and that but once: Heb. 9.25.10.14. it is euident, that he vtterly excludeth the sacrifice of his body vpon the Crosse, as not being done, according to the order of his euerlasting priesthoode. For a prodigious absurditie note this, that he graunteth the euerlasting priesthood to Christ, (Which as the Apostle witnesseth is without succession) Heb. 7.24. because it is euerlasting in him: and yet he maketh the Apostles and ministers of the Church, partakers of that Priesthod, to offer that sacrifice, which none could offer, but he himselfe, which is an euerlasting priest, after the order of Melchisedech, that is, both a King and Priest.
                  He proceedeth and affirmeth, that Of this new Priesthood and sacrifice, there were figures, and prophesies, which must aswell be performed, as the other were of the instituter of them. The other figures and prophesies ended in Christ touching the fact, but not touching the efficacie and vertue which is eternall. The newe Testament with the new priesthood, and the new sacrifice are begon, and confirmed in the bloud of Christ, but must continue alwayes, whereof there be figures in the lawe of nature, and in the lawe of Moses. In the lawe of nature, albeit that Seth, Noe, and other did offer sacrifices vnto God: yet were they not figures of this sacrifice now vsed in Christes Church, but rather of Christes sacrifice offered vpon the crosse after the manner of Aaron. Here marke first, that he maketh Christ to haue two sacrifices, this sacrifice whiche is now offered, (I can not tell after what manner,) and

that which he offered on the Crosse, after the manner of Aaron.
                  Secondly, that he maketh Christ a Priest after the maner of Aaron, which the holy Ghost in expresse words denyeth Heb. 7.11.
                  
                     But the first that figureth both the priesthood and sacrifice of the new law, is Melchisedech. So that this priesthood is peculiar only to our sauiour Christe, as both Dauid, Psal. no. and the Apostle to the Hebrues the 7. do proue it: there is no doubt but Melchisedech was a figure of Christ: But what sacrifice hee offered, the scripture maketh no mention, neither is M. Heskins able to shewe. For first, he hath rehearsed the historie of him, which is written in Gen. 14. And Melchisedech king of Salem brought foorth breade & wine: and he was a priest of the most high God, Therfore he blessed him, saying: blessed is Abraham of God most high, possesser of heauen and earth: and blessed be the most high God, which hath deliuered thine enimies into thine hande. And Abraham gaue him tithe of all. In which words, there is no mentiō of any sacrifice. Afterward he compareth him in all those points, in which the Apostle to the Hebrues doth Heb. 7. Which are these: that he was king of rightuousnesse, and king of peace, without father, without mother, without kinred on earth. Hauing neither beginning of dayes, nor end of life, but is likened to the sonne of God, and continueth a Priest for euer: that he blessed Abraham, and that Abraham payde tythes vnto him. In all which applications, there is not one worde of any sacrifice. Neither in the apostle, nor in M. Heskins: therefore as I sayde in the beginning, M. Heskins hath not satisfied the title of his Chapter. And verily, the Apostle in these two pointes, onely considereth the Priesthoode of Melchisedech, yt he blessed Abraham which had the promises, and receiued tythes of him, in whose loynes Leuie the father of Aarons Priesthoode was tythed: who vndoubtedly would not haue omitted the sacrifice of breade and wine, if there had bene any, when he applyed the interpretation of his name, which was a great deale

lesser matter. And surely it seemeth, that Maister Heskins could not handsomely frame an application thereof, else would he not haue admitted so plausible a matter, and so commonly prated of among the Papistes. He sawe first in the text was no mention of oblation, secondly if there had bene oblation of bread and wine, it would not well haue figured that sacrifice, wherein they say, is neither bread nor wine.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The fourteenth Chapter declareth, after the minde of Chrysostome that Iob was a figure of Christ, for the desire his seruants had to eate his flesh.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     Maister Heskins doth well to adde, after the minde of Chrysostome, for it is plaine by the text, that the words of eating his flesh, are meant of hatred and not of loue. Either that Iobs seruaunts shewed their desire to be reuenged of their maisters enimies, of whō he speaketh in ye two verses before, or else as Saint Hieronyme thinketh, that he had procured his seruants hatred for his intertainment of straungers, and other vertues mentioned in the next verse following. Pro hospitalitatibus eius & virtute, quae & caeter
                           •
                         sancti Deo placuerunt odium seruorum contraxerat. So that this matter standeth not vpon any certaine figure of the scripture, but onely vpon Chrysostomes minde, vnto which, you heare the contrarie minde of Hieronyme. But 
                        •
                     owe let vs consider what the authoritie of Chrysostome maketh for him: his wordes are as he cyteth them out of Hom. 45. in 6. Ioan. Vt autem non solùm per dilectionem &c. But that we should be conuerted into that flesh, not onely by loue, but also in deede: it is brought to passe by that meate which he hath giuen vs. For when he would shewe his loue toward vs, he hath mixed himself with vs by his body, and made himself one with vs, that the body might be vnited to the hed These last words. For this is the maner of them that loue especially, in M. Heskins trāslation are left out, I know not for what causes, peraduenture of negligence. This did Iob signifie by his seruants of whome he was loued especially, which declaring their loue, did say: Who would giue

vs, that we might be filled with his flesh. Which thing Christe did, that he might binde vs to him with g
                           •••
                        ter loue: and that he might shewe his desire that he had to vs, suffering him selfe not onely to be seene of them that desire, but also to be touched and eaten, and their teeth to be fastened in his flesh, and all to be filled with the desire of him. Wherefore let vs rise from that table as Lyons breathing fire, terrible to the diuell, and let vs knowe our heade, and what loue he hath shewed vnto vs. Parents haue oftentimes giuen their children to be nourished of other: but I doe feede with mine owne flesh. I giue my selfe vnto them, I fauour all, I giue an exceeding good hope to all of things to come. He that giueth him self so vnto vs in this life, much more in the life to come. I would be your brother, and I tooke flesh and bloud with you for your sakes. and by what thinges I am ioyned to you, the same I haue giuen to you againe. In this long speach of Chrysostome, what is there that maketh for Maister Heskins bill, that hee hath promoted into the Parleament house? and not rather altogether against it? For first, it can not bee necessarily concluded out of this place, that Chrysostome speaketh of the Lordes supper, but rather of that table, meate, giuing and eating of Christes flesh, which is spoken of in the sixt of Saint Iohn, where no worde is of the sacrament or supper, which at that time was not instituted. Secondly, if we should neuer so much vnderstand this speach of the sacrament, yet must we graunt it to be figuratiue, or else there wil folow infinite absurdities, beside such as M. Heskins affirmeth. Wherfore I will reason thus: Christ by this saying of Chrysostome, is none otherwise eaten then he is seene: but he is not seene corporally, but spiritually by faith, therefore he is not eaten corporally but spiritually by faith. And likewise thus: as Christ is touched and teeth fastned in his flesh, so is he giuen or eaten, but he is not touched corporally or naturally, nor teeth fastned in his flesh corporally but spiritually, therefore hee is not giuen nor eaten in the sacrament corporally, but spiritually.
                  The maiors of these argumēts are Chrysostoms words, the minors are ye confessions of the Papistes, which affirme

Christes body to be in the sacrament inuisibly, and doe correct the recantation of Berengarius, where he affirmed, that the body of Christ is torne with the teeth: the conclusions I trust be rightly inferred. But nowe let vs see what handsome stuffe M. Heskins gathereth out of this text of Chrysostome.
                  
                     First that we are ioyned to Christe two wayes, by loue, and by the thing it selfe. Which in other termes, is called spiritually and really. Marke this wise diuision of spiritually and really, as though such things as are ioyned spiritually, might not be ioyned really. But (M. Heskins) a spirite is not contrarie to a thing, except you will say it is nothing, but to a body, and therefore spiritually and bodily are opposite, not spiritually and really. For we are ioyned to Christe spiritually, and yet really, so that Christ dwelleth in vs by his spirite through faith, but not bodily, so in the sacrament, we eate the body of Christ really, that is in deede & vnfeignedly, but yet in a spirituall kinde of eating, and not carnally or corporally.
                  But M. Heskins proceeding, affirmeth that We are spiritually ioyned to Christ by charitie and faith, and therefore incorporated into his mysticall body, but really or substantially we are ioyned to him, when by eating his very substantiall flesh in the sacrament, THE SVBSTANCE OF OVR FLESH IS TVRNED INTO THE SVBSTAVNCE OF HIS FLESH, and thereby so ioyned to him, as we are made one flesh with him &c. Note here, good reader, for thy learning, that these wordes printed by M. Heskins in another letter, that they might be seene as a speciall paradoxe▪ teach thee a newe kinde of transubstantiation. For he is not content, to haue the breade turned into the body of Christe, without all type or figure, really, substantially, corporally, &c. but as really, corporally, and substantially, he affirmeth that the substance of our flesh, is turned into the substance of ye flesh of Christ. O monstruous paradox, as euer any was heard, since the beginning of the world!
                  After this he noteth, that Christes flesh is not digested

in vs, as other meates are, which is needlesse to note, if our fleshe be digested or turned into his: adding this reason, that As it is a celestiall meate, beeing now a glorified bodie, so it draweth vs vp to it, conuerting and turning vs into it, according to the nature of a celestiall thing. Howe vayne this reason is, by whiche hee would auoyde the digestion, and proue his new transubstantiation and conuersion, appeareth by this, that the body of Christe in the Sacrament, was as effectuall, while hee liued in his passible bodie on earth, in which he instituted this sacrament, as it is nowe beeing a glorified bodie in heauen. And whereas hee chargeth, I knowe not what Stercoranites of our time, to affirme that the fleshe of Christ, passeth through the bodie as other meates, I thinke verilie, he lyeth most impudently. For I neuer heard, or read of any that so affirmed. Although, I woulde wishe men to speake reuerently of so high mysteries, yet the importunitie of the Papistes with their matter of transubstantiation enforceth them not to affirme of them selues, but to report, what they reade in the fathers, concerning the breade, beeing the terrestriall or outwarde parte of the Sacrament, that it is digested & passeth through, as all other naturall meates do, whereof Origen writeth in Math. Chap. 15. Quod si quicquid ingreditur in os in ventrem abit, & in sesession eijcitur: & ille cibus qui sanctificatur per verbum Deipér
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         obsecrationem iuxta id quod habet materiale, abit & in sesessū eijcitur. If what soeuer entereth into the mouth goeth into the bellie, and is cast foorth into the draught: euen that meate also which is sanctified by the worde of God and by prayer after that which it hath materiall, goeth and is cast foorth into the draught. This douteth not Origen to speake of the materiall parte of the Sacrament, by which it is manifest, that he knew no transubstantiation. The cheefe thing that M. Heskins vrgeth vs to marke, is that, Whereas the Sacramentes woulde haue onely a spirituall receiuing, this holy father teacheth that we are framed to Christ not onely spiritually by loue, which may bee without receiuing of meate, but, re ipsa, in deede by receyuing of meate. But I praye you M. Heskins,

where saith Chrisostom that our coniunction vnto Christ is not onely spirituall. In deede he saide, not onely by loue, but in deede, but he opposeth not spiritually and really as you doe. And where you vrge that this coniunction is by meate, and this meate is his bodie, and therevppon conclude that it is a corporall coniunction, and Christ is ioyned corporally: I aunswere, that if Chrysostom may expound himselfe, this meate and this body is a spirituall meate, therefore a spirituall coniunction, and Christ is eaten spiritually. De prod. Iud. Nemo sit Iudas in mensa: hoc sacrificium cibus spiritualis est. Nam sicut corporalis cibus, &c. Let no man be Iudas in this table: this sacrifice is a spirituall meate. For as corporall meat when it findeth a bellie, possessed with humors contrarie to it, it hurteth and offendeth more, and helpeth nothing at all: euen so this spirituall meate, if it finde any man polluted with wickednes, it destroyeth him the more, not of it owne nature▪ but through the fault of him that receiueth it. Thus far Chrysostome, for the meate to bee spirituall. Finally the last obseruation that Christ doth giue vs in ye sacrament, is the same fleshe, by which he was ioyned vnto vs, therefore his verie substantiall body and bloude, auayleth him nothing: For wee contende not, of the substance of the thing, that is giuen, but of the manner of the giuing, the thing is the verie body and bloude of Christ, but not after a corporall or naturall manner, but after a spirituall and diuine maner, or as the olde writers haue saide. Modo ineffabili, after an vnspeakeable manner, as so many figuratiue speaches that are spoken therof do declare, whiche to expound literally or grāmatically, were little better then extreme madnesse.
                  The other place which you adde out of Ho. 24. in 10.1. Cor. helpe them nothing at all, that Christ hath giuen vs his flesh &c. That this body the wisemen did reuerence in the māger. You might haue added out of the same place: Quod est in calice, id est quod a latere fluxit, that which is in the cuppe is the same that flowed out of his side, and thereof we are partakers. But that all these are figuratiue speaches

it is manifest by this interrogation, that followeth in the same homilie. 
                        Quid enim appello inquit communicationem? id ipsum corpus sumus. Quid significat panis? corpus Christi. Quid autem fiunt qui accipiunt corpus Christs: non multa sed vnum corpus. For what do I cal it (saith he) a participation? We are the selfe same bodie. What signifieth the bread? The bodie of Christ. And what are they made which receiue the bodie of Christ? Not many bodies but one body. And in ye same homilie. Sed quare, Addit quem frangimus? hoc in Eucharistia videre licet, in cruce autem minimè sed omnino contra. Os enim eius non conteretur. Sed quod in cruce passus nō est, id in oblatione patitur, & propter te frangi permittit. But why? doth he adde (speaking of the breade) which wee breake, that you may see in the sacrament of thankesgiuing, but not on the crosse, but altogether the contrarie. For there shall no bone of him be broken. But that which he suffered not on the crosse, he suffereth in the oblation, (for so they called the ministring of the communion, because it was a sacrifice of thanksgiuing) and for thee suffereth himself to be broken. In these places Chrysostome affirmeth the Church to be the same bodie, which the breade doth signifie, and which the faithfull doe receiue, and in the latter place, he sheweth manifest difference, betweene the naturall body of Christ that suffered on the crosse, and the spirituall receiuing of him in the supper, in whiche his bones are broken, which (he saith) was not on the crosse, which must needes bee figuratiue. I passe ouer the large allegorie he continueth in the same homilie, affirming that we must be Eagles to flye vp into heauen, and feed of Chrstes bodie where it is, for where the bodie is, thether the Eagles will be gathered.
               
               
                  The fifteenth Chapter declareth by scriptures that the figure of the pascall lambe, was a figure of the eating of Christ our pascall lambe.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  There is no doubt but the killing of the pascall lamb was a figure of the killing of Christ,
                        Fulke.
                      and of the eating of the lambe, was a sacrament of the eating of Christe our pascal lamb, but not properly a figure of ye Lords supper.

For Christe is eaten not onely in the sacrament, but also by faith, which the vse of the sacrament is to confirme, as he himselfe teacheth Ioan. 6. It is true also, that this sacrament is succeeded in the place of that. But that the eating of the Lambe, was a figure of our eating of the Sacrament, no scripture teacheth. For first your comparisons will not serue M. Heskins, The lambe was verily eaten, therefore Christ is verily eaten, the lambe was substantially and really eaten, therefore Christ was really and substantially eaten. For I may reason as well, the lambe was a naturall lambe; therefore Christ was a naturall lambe: or as you doe of the age of the lamb: the lamb was but one yere old, therfore Christe was but one yeare olde: or rather and more properly thus, if you will algates haue it a figure of the sacrament, the lambe was called the passouer, and yet it did but signifie the passouer, so the breade is called the body of Christe, and yet it doth but signifie the body of Christe: or thus, the eating of the lambe was a figure of the eating of Christ, so the eating of the bread is a figure of the eating of Christ. As for the desire that Christe had to eate the passouer, proueth not, that he called his supper so, but the olde passouer, which he so desired to eate, bicause it was the last & should be fulfilled, and then was in fulfilling, in the suffering an oblation of his body. The other text alleadged out of S. Paule, 1. Cor. 5. (Christ our passouer is slaine, therefore let vs feaste, not in the olde leauen, nor in the leauen of malice and wickednesse, but in the vnleauened bread of sinceritie and truth) is manifestly wrested vnto the eating of Christ in ye supper: wherof, the Apostle speaketh not, but of the whole course of our life, wherein we must holde the feast in the vnleauened breade of sinceritie and trueth.
                  The rule borowed out of Augustine in Psalm
                           ••
                        ts. 77. will doe you little pleasure: for graunte that the thing figured in good thinges, is better then the figure, and in euill thinges worse, what haue you gained? Yes forsooth verie muche: For then the passouer figured must needes bee better then the passouer the figure. If the passouer

which is nowe eaten, be but a peece of bread, a bare signe, a figure, (as the sacramentaries affirme:) then the pascall Lambe is a figure of a peece of bread, which is not better then it. Of this argument no small accompt is made, for it is continued in sixe long tedious chapters following. But howe soone will all this smoke be blowen away? yea, euen with one breath. For admitte that the Pascall lambe was a signe of the Lordes Supper, which is not yet prooued by Scripture: yet shall the thing figured be better then the figure. For the supper of the Lorde consisteth of the bodie and bloud of Christe, and not of a peece of breade, (a bare signe or figure,) although bread and wine are elements which do liuely represent that, which Christe in his supper doeth feede vs withall. And he doeth more then beastly belye them, whome he calleth Sacramentaries, to affirme that it is but a peece of breade, a bare signe or figure. They affirme that it is bread, but they affirme not, that it is nothing but a peece of bread: they saye it is a signe and a figure, but they saye not, it is a bare signe, and nothing but a figure: except baptisme be a bare signe, and nothing but a figure, because it is a signe and a figure. Therefore, when you come to your conclusion (M. Heskins) you may well conclude, that the Sacrament is not a bare figure: but you falsly cogge in, that by Christes institution, it is consecrated to be offered: for Christ was offered vp but once, and that by him selfe only. Likewise, (verie vnlike a diuine,) you say, the Pascall Lambe was but a bare figure, which is vntrue: for it should not haue beene called the Passouer, except it had truely assured the worthie receiuers of their spirituall deliuerance. But where you make it such an absurditie, that one figure shoulde be figure of another: there is no such inconuenience as you immagine, but that one thing may be the signe of another thing, which shall be a figure of the third thing. As in this very example, if you will call your wittes together, I am sure you will confesse, that the Pascall Lambe was a figure, of the deliuerance of the Israelites, from the destruction of

Aegypt, and the same deliuerance of their bodies was a figure of the spirituall deliuerance of our soules. Because Dionysius (whom you cal the Areopagite) sayth nothing to the matter in controuersie, I will passe him ouer vntil some other time.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The sixteenth Chapter teacheth this matter by Tertullian, & Isychius.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     This Chapter neither prooueth substantially that it promiseth, nor gaineth any thing if it proued it. For, if ye Pascall Lambe were a figure of Christes supper, yet that proueth not, as was shewed before, that the bodie of Christ is there eaten corporally, and after a corporal maner. Tertullian, a noble man in Christes Parleament Cont. Marcion lib. 4. writeth thus. Professus igitur se concupiscentia concupiscere edere pasca, vt su
                           ••
                        m (indignū enim vt quid alienum concupiscat Deus) acceptum panem, & distributum discipulis corpus suum illum fecit. Therefore, when he had professed that with desire he desired to eate the Passouer, as a thing of his owne: (for it was an vnworthie thing, that God should desire that pertained to another) that bread which he tooke and distributed to his disciples he made his bodie. This saying M. Heskins hath most vntollerably abused: first, by false translating, and then by leauing out that which expoundeth the mind of Tertullian most clearely. For the true vnderstanding of this place, we must note two things: firste, that Marcion, against whome he writeth, affirmed that the God of the lawe, was not the God of the Gospel: secondly, that Christ had not a true bodie, but a fantasticall bodie. Against both these errours, he reasoneth in this sentence. Against the first, when he saith, he desired to eate the Pascal lambe of the olde lawe, which was his owne, namely of his owne institution, (for it was absurd that Christ being God, shoulde desire that which was another Gods institution) as the heretike sayde, the lawe and all ceremonies thereof were. And this is directly contrarie to M. Heskins purpose, who ioyning with the heretike, denyeth that he did desire to eat the Pascall of the lawe, and that it

was not properly his owne, and for this intent, to make it serue his turne, he translateth falsly vt suum, as his owne Passouer, & alienum, any strange thing. Against the seconde, Tertullian reasoneth in the same sentence, which words, because M. Heskins could not abyde, he hath cleane cut off. The wordes are these, Acceptum panem, & distributum discipulis corpus suum illum fecit, hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est figura corporis mei. Figura autem non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus. Caeterum vacua res, quod est phantasma, figuram capere non posset. Aut si propterea panem corpus sibi finxit, quia corporis ca
                           
                              •
                           ebas veritate, ergo panem dibuit tradere pro nobis. Faciebat ad vanitatem Marcionis vt panis crucifigeretur. The bread which he tooke & distributed to his disciples, he made his bodie, saying, this is my bodie, that is to saye, a figure of my bodie. And it could haue bene no figure, except his bodie had bene of trueth. But a vaine thing which is a phantasie, cannot receiue a figure. Or else, if therefore he made breade his bodie, because he lacked the trueth of a bodie, therefore he should haue giuen bread for vs. It made wel for the vanitie of Marcion, that bread should haue beene crucified. There can nothing bee more euident, then that Tertullian by this place, ouerthroweth both the transubstantiation and also the carnall presence, maintained by the Papistes. This M. Heskins because he coulde not brooke, he brake off the sentence, and commeth out of the matter also, to raile against Cranmer of holy memorie; first, doubting whether the booke set forth in his name were made by him, as though Cranmer was not wel enough knowen to be as well able to write a booke as Heskins: then that he affirmeth, the Papistes vnable to shewe one article of faith, so directly contrarie to our senses, that all our senses shall by daily experience affirme a thing to be, and yet our faith shall teach vs the contrarie.
                  
                  Maister Heskins like a wilie Pye, obiecteth the article of the resurrection, where our senses teacheth vs, that mens bodyes be dead, and faith teacheth, yt they shall rise againe. But the subtile sophister doth not see, I weene a difference betweene it & is in M. Cranmers assertiō, & is

and shalbe in his balde obiection. Faith teacheth, that shalbe, which our sense teacheth nowe not to be. But faith teacheth not that to be white, which our sense teacheth to be blacke. But he hath another wise instance. The senses taught, that the wounde which Christe had in his side, after his resurrection was verie sore, but faith taught the contrarie, because his bodie was glorified. Seeing the wounde was made after his death, reason would iudge, that it was insensible, especially when he was risen againe frō death, by his diuine power. And Thomas was not so rude, that he would haue thrust in his hand, if he thought it shold haue hurt him, and when he did thrust in his hande, he perceiued by his senses, that it did not hurt. But it is pittie to spende any time about so vaine a matter: sorenesse being not the thing, but a certeine affection of the thing, which cannot alwayes be knowen by another mans senses, but by his onely that feeleth it, as in him that hath the Palsey, if his legge were cut off, he feeleth nothing, yet some such wise man as M. Heskins, would thinke it were verie sore. But he woulde-faine excuse the matter, why he cutteth off Tertulian by the waste, promising in another place to do it, and willeth you in the meane time to consider, that Christes bodie is giuen in the sacrament, and further alledgeth out of Tertullian in another place, which is in his booke De resurrectione carnis: That the fleshe doth eate the bodie and bloud of Christ, that the soule may be fedd of God. Where hee meaneth none otherwise, then in the former place, calling the sacrament a figure of Christes bodie, and so an ende with Tertullian. Then commeth Isychius disciple of Gregorie Nazianzene, who firste dissuading men from vsing of the Iewes ceremonies, affirmeth that which M. Heskins denyed, that Christe did eat the legall Passouer in his last supper. His wordes that are materiall are these: 
                        Christus primùm celebrauit figuratum Pasca. Post canam auem intelligibidem tradit. Christ did first celebrate the figuratiue Passeouer, but after supper he deliuered the intelligible supper.
                  
                  
                     Then followe diuers places, to shew that by intelligible, he meaneth figured. But being graunted that the supper was figured, by the pascall Lambe, which is the egge that he is so long in brooding, yet he is neuer the neerer, for the carnall presence and corporall manner of eating, no not with that whiche Isychius saith: That he tooke the intelligible bloud first in the mysticall supper,
                     
                        In Leuit. lib. 2 cap. 8. 
                     and afterward gaue the cuppe to his Apostles, and that he dranke himselfe, and giuing to his Apostles to drinke, then he powred the intelligible bloud vpon the altar, that is to say, his body. Now the body of Christ is the Church and all his people. He that seeth not, that this Father doeth vse figuratiuely these wordes: bloud, body, altar, powre, drinke, &c. is worthy to weare a cockes combe, & a bell. Yet Maister Heskins noteth in the margent, Christ dranke his owne bloud, and gaue it to his Apostles. Which if it be true in the litterall sense, as he meaneth, then it is as true, that he powred his owne bloud vpon his owne body in the literall sense. For the same bloud, which he dranke, and gaue, he powred on his body. But he powred not his natural bloud vpon his body, therefore he neither gaue nor dranke his naturall bloud in the litterall sense. But you will say, his body signifieth his Church and people, for whom he powred forth his naturall bloud. Well, beside that you are inforced to acknowledge a figuratiue speeche, you are neuer the neere. For although he powred out his bloud for them, yet he powred it not vpon them. And your Authour saith, he dranke none other bloud, but that he powred vpon them. Here is also alledged Chrysostomes name, for Christes drinking of his bloud, but his wordes are referred to another place. Then followeth a conclusion: If Christ drank his owne bloud, he drank it spiritually, or corporally: spiritually he could not: wherfore he dranke it corporally. This is very round dealing M. Heskins. But if he could drinke his bloud, I pray you why could he not drinke it spiritually, as well, & rather, then corporally? For if he dranke his owne bloud, he also did eate his owne body, which if it sound not grossely in your eares, it is, because you haue a grosse vnderstanding.
                  
                     In this Chapter two Lordes of the Parleament beeing required of their iudgment, haue giuen their voices both directly against his bill for the carnall presence.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The seuenteenth Chapter proceedeth in the same matter, by S. Cyprian, and Euthymius.
                  Maister Heskins, in his Epistles, and prefaces, promiseth great sinceritie,
                        Fulke.
                      and euery where obiecteth impudencie, and insinceritie against the proclaymer, and his complices. But see what sinceritie he vseth, that matcheth Euthymius, scarse worthy to be a burgesse of the lower house, 
                        •
                     ith Cyprian one of the most auncient Barons of the vpper house. And yet afterward he him selfe placeth him in the lower house, that is, among the writers within the compasse of nine hundreth yeres. Wheras the higher house consisteth of them that writ within 600. yeares after Christ, as the Bishop whom he tearmeth the proclaymer, maketh his challenge. And certeinely Euthymius was neuer accounted for a Lord of the parleament, before he was called thereto by Maister Heskins writte, which of what force it is to make a Baron, let the readers iudge.
                  For he liued about the yeare of our Lord 1170. Notwithstanding we will examine his voyce as it commeth in order. But we must first consider the voyce of Cyprian Bishop of Carthage. Which is this. The supper therefore being ordered among the sacramentall meates,
                     
                        De coena Domini.
                      
                     there mette together the newe ordinances and the olde. And when the lambe was consumed or eat
                           •
                        n, which the olde tradition did set foorth, the maister did set before his disciples the inconsumptible meat
                           •
                        . Neither are the people now bidden to feastes, painefully wrought with expenses and cunning: but the foode of immortalitie is giuen, differing from common meates, reteyning the kind of appearance of corporall substāce, but prouing by inuisible efficiencie, the presence of Gods power or the diuine vertue to be there. In this saying, First there is neuer a worde, to proue that the Pascall Lambe was a figure of the Lordes supper, which is the purpose of the Chapter, but onely that the newe institution succeeded

the olde, which is manifest by the history of the Gospell: Euen as Baptisme succeded circumcision, and yet was not circumcision a figure of Baptisme, Secondly note, that he doeth not affirme, the reall presence of Christes naturall bodie, but the inuisible working of his diuine power. And so his voyce is flatly againg Maister Heskins bill. Nowe let vs consider his fonde collections. First that Christ gaue inconsumptible meate, the sacramentaries giue consumptible meate? For they giue but bread. This is a false slaunder, a thousand times repeated, for they giue not bread only, but euen the same inconsumptible meate, by the inuisible working of his diuine power, which Cyprian affirmeth, that Christe gaue his Disciples. But he vrgeth, That it was put before them, taken by hande, & laid in sight, which the merite and grace of his passion could not be. See I pray you how this man agreeth with Cyprian: Cyprian saith, it was by inuisible working of Gods fauour, he saith it was put before them, (for so he translateth apponit) taken by hand, and laide in sight.
                  His second collection is, That it differeth from common meates, reteining the fourme of corporall substaunce, whiche can neither be the breade, which differeth not from common meates, nor the spirituall meate, which they call the merite of his passion, because that reteineth not the fourme of corporall substance.
                  
                  A wise reason, disioyning and seuering thinges that should bee taken together. The water in baptisme, differeth from common water, and conteyning the fourme of corporall substance, by inuisible working, proueth the presence of Gods power to be there. So doeth the bread and wine in the Lordes Supper. Which although of them selues, they be no more holy then other creatures, yet when they are consecrated for the vse of the sacrament, they differ as muche from common meates, as the bodie and the soule doe, as temporall life, and eternall life: as heauen and earth doe differ, so doeth the water consecrated for baptisme differ from common water.
                  
                     His third collection, that it is called The foode of immortalitie, which cannot be bare materiall bread. A true collection, for the sacrament is not bare material bread, but the body and bloud of Christ, represented by materiall bread, as a materiall lauer is the water of regeneration, but not bare materiall water.
                  For confirmation is brought in Ignatius ex Ep. ad Ephe. Be ye taught of the comforter obedience to the Bishop, and the priest with vnswaruing or stable minde, breaking the bread which is the medicine of immortalitie, the preseruatiue of not dying, but of liuing by Iesus Christ. Although no learned man, that is not more wilfull then wise, will graunt this Epistle to be written by yt auncient father Ignatius, whose name it beareth: yet doth this saying, cōtein nothing but very sound doctrine of the sacrament, which he calleth bread, that i
                        •
                      broken to be ye medicine of immortalitie. M. Heskins vrgeth as before, yt it can non be bare bread, which hath such effects. Which I graunt willingly, but I reply vpon him, that it cannot be the naturall body of Christ, which he exhorteth them to breake. For Christes body is not broken, but the sacramentall bread, to signifie the breaking and participation of his body.
                  But he proceedeth to another speech of Cyprian, which is in deede a more apparant speeche for his purpose, the wordes are these: Panis iste, quem Dominus Discipulis porrigebat, non eff
                           •
                        gie, sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia verbi factus est caro. Et fiout in persona Christi humanitas videbatur, & lateba
                           •
                         diuinitas: ita sacramento visibili ineffabiliter se diuina infudie essentia. This bread which our Lorde did reache vnto his disciples, beeing chaunged not in shape, but in nature, by omnipotencie of the worde is made fleshe. And as in the person of CHRISTE, the humanitie was seene, the diuinitie was hidden, euen so the diuine essence hath powred it selfe vnspeakably into the visible sacrament. The Papistes esteeme this place to be an inuincible bulwarke of their transubstantiation, but alas it is soone ouerthrowne, when the meaning of Cyprian is boulted out, not onely by sentences going before and after this saying, but also by the very

wordes of this same sentence. For he maketh a manifest difference, betweene the visible sacrament and the diuine essence, which is inuisible. Whereas the Papistes by their transubstantiation, haue no visible sacrament, but onely accidents of breade and wine, which they, nor none other can call a visible sacrament. Moreouer, the word diuine essence, answering to the word flesh, in the former sentence, plainely expoundeth what he meaneth thereby, namely the diuine power which the flesh of Christ hath, to giue life, and not the diuine nature or substance, as M. Heskins translateth it, and much lesse Christ, God and Man, as he expoundeth it. For if we take the diuine essence, for the diuine substaunce of Christes Godhead, it will bee a grosse absurditie, and a blasphemous heresie, to make any infusion or powring of that into the visible sacrament, which filleth all places. Wherefore of necessitie it signifieth the propertie or efficacie, euen as the worde nature, in the former clause doth signifie. For the former shape of the breade is not chaunged, but the nature or propertie is altered, namely to feede the soule and not the body only, as before it was made a sacrament, it serued to do. But M. Hesk. liketh not this glose, but wil haue nature to signifie substance, and not propertie, as it doth very often: as when we say, the nature of hearbs, of stones, of beastes, we meane the properties. But whether he will or no, it must be so taken, seing it may be so taken, or else Cyprian should be contrarie to him selfe: who distinguisheth the visible sacrament from the diuine essence, who calleth that diuine essence (a word more vsuall for substance) which is but diuine efficacie or propertie, who, if he had meant, that the bread had bene turned into the naturall body of Christe, wold neither haue cōpared it with the diuinitie of Christ hid vnder his humanitie, nor haue said, euen so the diuine essens, infundeth it selfe in the sacrament, but euen so the bodie of Christ is hid vnder the formes of bread & wine. But that there should be no doubt of his meaning, thus he writeth in the same sermon, a litle after: Haec quoties agimus, non dentes ad mordendum acuimus, sed fide syncera panem

sanctum franginus & partimur. As often as we do these thinges, we doe not sharpen our teeth to byte, but with a sincere faith we breake and diuide this holy breade. What can be more plaine to expresse the meaning of this doctour, then that wee receiue not the body of Christe with our mouth, but with our heart, not with the instrument of our teeth, but with the instrument of our faith. In the same Sermon, hee writeth Panis est esca, sanguis, vita, caro, substantia, corpus, Ecclesia: Corpus, propter membrorum in vnum conuenientium: panis, propter nutrimenti congruentiam: sanguis, propter vinificationis efficientiam: caro, propter assumptae humanitatis proprietatem. The breade is foode, bloud, life, flesh, substaunce, his body, the Church: his body, for the agreement of the members in one: bread, for the aptnes of nourishment: bloud, for the efficiencie of quickening: flesh, for the propertie of his humanitie that he tooke on him. These places do sufficiently expound the meaning of Cyprian, howe the breade is chaunged into flesh, not after any change of substance, but of qualitie and propertie, as in so many figuratiue termes is more thē manifest.
                  Let vs nowe come to Euthymius aduaunced by Maister Heskins into the higher house. And he in deede seemeth to affirme the purpose of this Chapter, that the Paschall lambe was a figure of the sacrament, and yet not very plainely, but rather it was a figure of the true Passeouer, which the sacrament doth represent, but that is no materiall point of our controuersie, whether one sacrament did figure an other, his wordes are: Christe in the same table described the figuratiue and shadowing Passeouer, and set before them the true and perfect Passeouer. Herevpon hee inferreth that Christe was not truely and perfectly giuen to the Iewes in the Paschall Lambe as we teach, but onely a figure and signe of him, but in the sacrament he is giuen to vs truely and perfectly, that is by a true and reall presence. But it is pitie that hee seeth not that his authour compareth the thing signified by our sacrament, with the outward signe of the Iewish sacrament, as also the scripture doth oftentimes, against them that depended vpon the outward ceremonies. Not

that a false or vnperfect Christ was figured and receiued of the faithfull by them, but to shewe a difference betweene the shadowe and the trueth, the figure and the thing figured, when ye Iewes so sticked in the figure, that they considered not the thing signified.
                  The other place which was alledged out of Euthymius, bicause hee referreth the handling of it vnto the second booke, thether also will I referre the aunswere. In the meane time, it is a childish insultation that hee makes against the proclamer, noting that hee hath found a plaine place for Maister Iewell, when neither the place is so plaine, nor the Authour within the compasse of his challenge.
               
               
                  The eighteenth Chapter treateth of the same matters by S. Hieronyme and Chrysostome.
                  In this Chapter Hieronyme is first brought foorth, In Matth. 26. in these wordes. After the figuratiue Passeouer was fulfilled, and he had eaten the flesh of the Lambe with his Apostles, hee taketh breade which comforteth the heart of man, and passeth to the true sacrament of the Passeouer, that as in prefiguration of him, Melchisedech the Priest of the highest GOD had done, offering breade and wine, hee also might represent the trueth of his body and bloud. Here Hieronyme doeth not affirme the Passeouer to bee a figure of the sacrament, but of Christe the true Passeouer. Calling the supper a true sacrament of that true and prefigured Passeouer. Which wordes would bee noted, that hee calleth the breade a true sacrament, that is a liuely signe of the verie Passeouer Christ, and a representation of the trueth of his body and bloud. But here Maister Heskins, fareth as hee were halfe madde, sending vs to the Vocabularies, Calepines, and Dictionaries, for the signification of this worde repre
                           •
                        ento, That among learned men it is not so streighted, as onely to signifie, to shewe a thing by a figure or signe.
                  
                  And therevpon we will not striue, but that it is often

taken to shewe by a figure or signe, hee him selfe can not denie, and that it must be so taken here in this place, appeareth by this reason. The comparison will not else stand betweene Melchisedech and Christe (which all though it bee not grounded on scripture, Hierome often maketh) except Christe offered breade and wine in a figure or representation, as Melchisedech did in a prefiguration.
                  M. Heskins enforceth the word Truth, that he should not meane a figure, for then he would haue saide (as he imagineth) that he also must represent his body and bloud, and not that he also might represent the truth of his body. But if you marke the force of this word, quoque, also, you shall see, that Melchisedech did prefigurate the truth of his body likewise. For it importeth an equalitie of both their doings, Melchisedech by breade and wine did represent or prefigurate the truth of his body, and Christ also by breade and wine did represent the truth of his body. For Christ could not doe also, that which an other had not done. Therefore very foolish are M. Heskins oppositions, of typicall passeouer, and true passeouer, and figure and truth, where the argument is a consentaneis, and not a dissentaneis. The other friuolous interpretation, that he maketh of the bread comforting mans heart, being both out of the minde of Hieronyme, and out of his purpose, I omit. At length hee commeth to an other place of Hieronyme ad Heliodorum Ep. 1. Absit vt de ijs quicquam sinistrum loquar, qui Apostolico gradui succedentes: Christi corpus sacro ore conficiunt. God forbid that I shuld speake any euil of thē, which succeeding the apostolike degree, doe make the body of Christ with their holy mouth. M. Heskins translateth it, which do consecrate, bicause in the word, make, which Hieronyme vseth, hee should be enforced to acknowledge a figuratiue speach. But let him turne ouer all his vocabularies, Calepines, and dictionaries, vnto which he sent vs ere while, and he shall not finde this Verbe conficio, signifying to consecrate, but to make, to dispatch, or to kill. Likewise he leaueth out these wordes which folowe immediatly, Per quos & nos Christiani

sumus, by whome wee also are Christians. It is euident that Hieronyme speaketh hyperbolically of the dignitie of priestes, for as to speake properly, we are not made Christians by them, no more is the bodie of Christ made by them. But where he speaketh properly, he vseth proper tearmes, as Contra Iouin. lib. 2. In typo sanguinis sui non obtulit aquam, sed vinum. In the figure of his bloud he offered not water, but wine. Here he calleth the sacrament, the type of his bloude, and saith it is wine. And in the same booke, he saith of Christ, that although it be written of him, that he hungred and thristed and went often to diner, yet excepto mysterio, quod in typum suae passionis expressit, & probandi corporis veritate, nec gulae scribitur seruisse, nec ventri. Excepting the mysterie whiche he expressed in figure of his passion, and in prouing the trueth of his bodie, it is not written that he did serue his throte or bellie. Meaning that it is not saide expressedly what he did eate and drinke, but onely a
                           •
                         his last supper, and after his resurrection to proue the trueth of his body.
                  
                  The other collection that hee maketh, that because priestes doe consecrate with their mouthe, therefore the faith of the receiuer, maketh not the presence of Christ in the sacrament, beside that it is not Hieronymes word, yet it proueth nothing, because, as there be causes that worke altogether alone, so there be causes which be helping, and concurre with other, of which sorte is the faith of the receiuer, necessarilie to conceyue with the ministerie of the Minister, that Christ may bee present. That Christian Priestes should not be contemned if they be good, it is easily graunted, if they be naught, the ministerie is to bee honoured, but not the person.
                  Out of Chrysostom are alledged two long testimonies, the one out of his homilies de prodit. Iudae. But by that also an other greater benefit was shewed, that that lamb was a signe of the lambe to come, and that bloude shewed the comming of the Lordes bloude, and that sheepe was an example of the spirituall sheepe. That lambe was a shadowe, this lambe the trueth. But after

the sunne of righteousnesse shined, the shadowe was put away by the light. And therefore on the same table both the passeouers were celebrated, both that of the figure and that of the trueth. For as painters are wont to shadowe the table that is to be painted, with certayne lineamentes, and so with varietie of colours to make it perfecte. Euen so Christ did in the table. Hee did both describe the figure of the Passeouer, and shewed the passeouer of trueth: Where wilt thou that wee prepare for thee to eate the passouer? That was the Iewish passouer, but let the passouer giue place to the light, and the image be ouercome of the trueth. If this place be well considered, it maketh altogether against the Bill of transubstantiation. For the similitude of the Painters Table, hauing in it shadowes and colors, applyed vnto the pascal lambe and the sacrament, declareth that they both together make a perfect image, to shew and represent the true lambe Christ which was offered for vs, the olde pascall, being the shadowing, & the new sacramēt which he calleth also a passouer, being the varietie of colors, by which the passouer of trueth is discribed and plainely shewed. Therfore M. Heskins collections are vaine, and from the authors meaning. For his purpose is not, to make ye pascall lamb a figure of ye sacramēt, but of christ, and both ye lamb & the sacrament, figures of Christ: but yet the lambe a shadowing figure, like the first draught of a painter, ye sacrament a cleare demonstration like an image in colors. It is therfore verie babish, yt he groūdeth vpon the word of the Passeouer shewed in the table, that the bodie of Christ was really present on ye table in ye sacrament, wheras it is plain, that Chrysostom speaketh of shewing by signes, as by colours an image is set forth in a painted table. As childish it is, that he will oppresse the proclamer to tell him why Hierome and Chrisostom call not the Iewish pascal, light, trueth, & veritie, as they doe our pascall, seeing by it they receiued Christ
                           •
                         as well as wee in our sacramente. A sore matter. The Iewishe pascall represented (if I may vse that tearme vnder correction of M. Heskins dictionarie) the true pascal Christ, as our sacrament doeth, who is the light, trueth, and veritie: the sacramente they call not the pascall lambe,

light, nor trueth, but by a figure, as they call it manye other thinges. But when they speake properlie they vse other tearmes, so doth Chrysostome. Homi. Ex. Psal. 22. & 116. 
                        Sapientia ędificauit sibi Domum, supposuit columnas septem, parauit mensam suam, misit seruos suos conuocans omnes, & dicens, venite & edite de panibus meis, & bibite vinum quod miscui vobis: & quia istam mensam preparauit seruis & ancillis in conspectu eorum, vt quotidie in similitudinem corporis & sanguinis Christi, panem & vinum secundum ordinem Melchisedech nobis ostenderet in sacramento, ideo dicit, parasti in conspectu meo mensam aduersus eos qui tribulant me. Wisedome hath builded hir an house, shee hath set vnder seauen pillers, shee hath prepared hir table, shee hath sent foorth her seruantes calling all men to hir and saying, come and eate of my breade, and drinke of the wine that I haue powred foorth for you: and because she hath prepared this table for hir seruauntes and maides in the sight of them, that she might dayly shew vs in the sacrament after the order of Melchisedech, breade and wine in similitude of the bodie and bloude of Christe, therefore she saith, thou hast prepared a table in my sight againste them that trouble mee. What Papistes holding transubstantiation, would thus write, that breade and wine is shewed in the Sacrament in the similitude of the bodie and bloud of Christ?
                  
                  The seconde testimonie that M. Heskins alleageth out of Chrisostome, is vpon the 1. Cor. 10. This table is the strength of our soule, the sinewes of our minde, the bonde of our trust, our foundation, hope, healpe, light, our life, if we depart hence defended with this sacrifice, with most greate confidence, wee shall ascende into the holy entrie, as couered with certaine golden garmentes. But what speake I of thinges to come? For while wee be in this life; this mysterie maketh earth to be heauen vnto vs. Ascende vnto the gates of heauen & marke diligently, or rather not of heauē but of heauen of heauens, & thē thou shalt behold that we say. For that which is worthy of highest honor, I will shew thee in earth. For as in kings houses, not the walles, not the golden roofe, but the kinges body sitting in the throne is most excellent: so also in heauen the kinges body, which nowe is set foorth to be seene of thee in earthe.

I shewe thee neither Angels, nor Archangels, nor the heauens, nor the heauens of heauens, but the Lorde himselfe of all these thinges. Thou perceiuest how that which is greatest and cheifest of all things thou doest not onely see it on earth, but also touche it: and not onely touch it, but eate also: and when thou haste receiued it returnest home, wherefore wipe thy soule from all filthinesse, prepare thy minde to the receyuing of these mysteries. For if the Kinges childe being decked with purple and diademe, were deliuered to thee to bee carried, wouldest thou not cast all downe to the grounde and receiue him? But nowe when thou receiuest not the childe of a kinge beeing a man, but the onely begotten sonne of God, tell mee I praye thee, doest thou not tremble and caste awaye the loue of all seculer thinges?
                  
                  This testimonie so necessarily muste bee vnderstood, of a figuratiue and spirituall receyuing of Christe by faith, that nothing in the worlde can bee more plaine. For euen as earth is made heauen vnto vs, so is Christe made present. And euen as wee see, the Lorde vppon earth, so we handle and eate him, and that is onely with the eye, hand and mouth of faith.
                  But let vs see M. Heskins collections. First hee is enforced to confesse that the sentence beginneth with a figure, The table for the meate therevppon: Secondely, hauing such honourable tearmes, it can not bee a peece of breade, but Christe himselfe. This shall bee graunted also. Thirdly, that Christe is verily on the table, which he calleth Altars. As verilie as earth is made heauen. Fourthly, that it is Christ whiche is worthie of highest honour verily present in the Sacramente. As verily present as hee is seene: but hee is seene onely by faith, therefore present onely to faith. But this obiection hee taketh vppon him to aunswere: If we saye the bodie of Christ can not be sene in the sacrament. No more saith he, can the substance of man be seene, but his garmentes or outward formes & accidentes. This is such a boyish sophisme as I am ashamed to aunswere it. By which I maye as well proue, that Christes body was neuer seene, and therefore not seene in the sacrament, contrarie to that whiche Chrysostome saith. Frō this obiection he falleth into an other, yt if christ

in the Sacrament be worthie all honour, then of sacrifice also, and the sacrifice being Christ, Christ shalbe offered to him selfe. This he calleth an ignorant obiection. But there is more knowledge in it, then he hath witt to answere. He alledgeth the words of Augustine. lib. 4. de Trin. cap. 14. Christ abideth one with him, to whome he offereth: and maketh him selfe one with them, for whom he offereth himself: and is one with them, that offer: & one, with that which is offered. Here are diuerse kindes of vnitie, and yet not Christ offered vnto him selfe, vnlesse M. Heskins will be a Sabellian and a Patripassian, to confound the persons of the Godhead, and say, that God the father, yea, the whole Trinitie is likewise transubstantiated in the Sacrament. Though Christe be one with his father, yet did he not offer him selfe to him selfe, but himselfe to his father. As for the other saying of Augustine that he bringeth, it is altogether against him De ciuitate Dei. lib. 10. c. 20. He is the Priest him selfe, he is the offerer, he is the oblation, whereof he would haue the daily sacrifice of the Church to be a sacrament; seeing that of her bodie he is the head, and of his head, shee is the bodie, as well shee by him, as he by her being accustomed to be offered. First Christ is the offerer and the oblation, but not he to whome it is made. Secondly, that which he calleth the sacrifice of the Church, is a sacrament, that is a holie memoriall of that propitiatorie sa
                        •••
                     fice, which he offered. Thirdly, this sacrifice of the Church, is of the Churche her selfe offered by Christ, and of Christe offered by the Church, which must needes be spirituall, as the coniunction of Christ and his Church is spirituall, therefore it is not the natural bodie of Christ offered by the priest, but his mystical bodie offered by the Church & by himselfe, and so a sacrifice of thanksgiuing and not of propitiation.
                  After these obiections, he returneth to his collections out of the authoritie of Chrysostome. There neede no such preparation nor trembling, if the Sacrament were but a peece of bread. He hath neuer done with this slaunder, as though any Christian man did saye, it was but a peece of bread,

which Christe vouchsafed to call his bodie. Wee saye truely, it is bread: but wee say not, it is but a peece of bread.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The ninteenth Chapter continueth the proofe of the same matter by S. Augustine, & S. Cyrill.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     M. Heskins promiseth in his Epistle, and gloryeth often in his worke, that he doth not alledge the doctors wordes truncately, & by peece meale, as heretikes do. But you shal see how well he handleth him selfe. He would haue S. Augustine speake for his bil, and alledgeth his words out of his worke. contrae literas Petiliani, quoting neither what booke nor what Chapter of the same, by which it seemeth that either he red not the place him self out of Augustine, but receiued it of some gatherer, or else hee would cloake his vnhonest dealing. Hee citeth it thus: Aliud est Pascha quod adhuc Iudaei celebrant de Oue: Aliud autē quod nos in corpore & sanguine domini celebranus. It is another Passouer that the Iewes do yet celebrate with a sheepe, another, that wee do celebrate in the bodie & bloud of Christ. 
                     But Augustines wordes, not truncately and by peece meale rehearsed nor altered are these: Contrae literas Petiliani lib. 2. Cap. 
                        
                           •
                        7. Sed sicut aliud est carnis circumcisio Iudeorum, aliud autem quod octauo die baptizatorum nos celebratius: et aliud est Pascha quod adhuc illi de Oue celebrant, aliud autem quod nos in corpore & sanguine domini accipimus: sic alius fuit baptismus Ioannis, alius est baptismus Christi, illis enim ventura ista praemanciabantur: istis completa illa praedicantur. But euen as the circumcision of the fleshe of the Iewes is one thing, and that which wee do celebrate the eyght day of them that are baptized is another thing: and the Passeouer whiche they do yet celebrate of a sheepe is one thing, and that which wee receiue in the bodie and bloud of the Lorde is another thing. So the baptisme of Iohn was one, and the baptisme of Christe is another: for by those things these things were foreshewed to come: by these, those things are preached to be accomplished.
                  
                  
                     First, the supper is not made here another Passeouer but another thing, that is, an other sacrament. Secondly here is declared, howe the sacraments of the old lawe, differ from ours of the newe Testament, not in substance, which is all one in both, but that they were signes of things to come, ours are signes of things accomplished. Which thing hee teacheth often, and in this Chapter moste plainly. Lex & Prophetae, &c. 
                     The lawe and the Prophetes had Sacraments, foreshewing the things to come: but the Sacraments of oure time do testifie that to bee come, which they did preache that it should come.
                  
                  
                     And in Ioan. Tract. 28. hee sayeth, that the Sacraments of the olde testament and the newe, in signis diuersa sunt, in re quae significatur paria. In visible kindes, diuerse, but aequall in spirituall vertue. By which, and a hundreth such places, it is manifest to be ouerthrowen, which M. Heskins would buylde, that Christ spiritually receiued, is not our Pascall lambe, but that we receiue another substance of Christe, then the faithfull did in the olde Testament. The seconde place he citeth out of Augustine, I marueile he could not see it to be as plaine against him as the first. cont. Faust. Man. lib. 20. Cap. 18. The Hebrues in the sacrifices of beastes, which they did offer to God many and diuerse wayes, as for so great a matter it was meete, did celebrate a Prophesie of the sacrifice to come, which Christ hath offered. Wherefore nowe the Christians do celebrate the memorie of the same sacrifice being accomplished by the holie oblation and by the participation of the bodie and bloud of Christ. In this sentence is manifestly declared, the same difference we spake of before of the Iewishe sacraments, and of our sacraments, the one being a Prophesie of Christes sacrifice to come, the other, a remembrance of the same beeing past, and fulfilled.
                  And whereas M. Heskins vrgeth the worde oblation, to exclude ye spirituall eating, he doth verie ridiculously, as though there might not be as wel a spiritual oblation, as a spirituall participation, especially when the author

shewing what we do in oblation and participatiō, sayeth, we so celebrate the memorie of Christes sacrifice alredie fulfilled. Therefore, this oblation is another from that: namely, a spirituall oblation and thanksgiuing, for that whose memorie it celebrateth, as Augustine most plainly teacheth in the same booke, Cap. 21. Sed quid agam & tantae caecitati istorum Hęreticorum, quando demonstrabo quam vim habeat quod in Psalmis canitur: Sacrificium laudis glorificabit me & illie via est vbi ostendam salutare meum? Huius sacrificij caro & sanguis ante aduentum Christi per victimas similitudin
                              •
                           m promittebatur: in passione Christi per ipsum veritatem redd
                              •
                           batur: post ascensum Christi per sacramentum memoriae celebratur. But what shall I do? or when shall I shewe vnto so great blindnesse of these heretikes, what force that hath which is soung in the Psalmes? The sacrifice of praise shall glorifie mee, and there is the way where I will shewe my saluation. The fleshe and bloud of this sacrifice before the comming of Christ, was promised by sacrifices of similitudes: in the passion of Christ, by the verie trueth it selfe, it was giuen vp: after the ascension of Christ, it is celebrated by the sacrament of remembrance. Iudge by this place, whether Christes bodie be really offered, or whether it be a mathematicall sacrifice, as it pleaseth M. Heskins in his merie vaine to call it. Augustine maketh three kindes of oblation of the fleshe and bloud of Christ: In promise by sacrifices of similitudes, in truth by Christ in his passion, in the sacrament of remēbrance after his death.
                  Now followeth a long speache of Cyrill, directly against M. Heskins the alledger of it: lib. 4. in Ioan. 6. ca. 14. Nec putet &c. Neither let the Iewe of the dullnesse of his whiche thinke, that we haue inuented mysteries neuer heard of before. For he shall see, if he will seeke more diligently, that the verie selfe same thing hath beene done since the times of Moses. For what deliuered their Elders from death, and the destruction of Aegypt, when death raigned vpon the first borne of Aegypt. Is it not euident to all men, that because they being taught by Gods institution, did eat the flesh of the Lambe, and oynted the postes and

vpper doore postes, with the bloud of the Lambe, therfore death departed from them: for destruction, that is death of this fleshe, raged against mankinde for the transgression of the first man. For because of sinne, we haue heard: Earth thou art, and into earth thou shalt returne: but for asmuch as Christ by his flesh would ouerthrow that cruell tyrant, therefore that was shadowed by a mystery among the auncient fathers, and they beeing sanctified by the sheepes fleshe and bloud (God so willing) escaped destruction. Therefore ô Iewe, why art thou so troubled, seeing the trueth prefigured long before: Wherefore I say art thou troubled, if Christe saith: except ye eate the fleshe of the sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, you shall haue no life in you, whereas it behoued thee, beeing instructed in the lawes of Moses, and well taught by the olde shadowes to beleeue, to be most ready to vnderstand these mysteries? The shadowe, and the figure thou knowest, therefore learne the very trueth of the thing. My fleshe, saith he, is meate in deede, and my bloud is drinke in deede. In these wordes beside that there is nothing to proue the Pascall Lambe, to be a figure of the Lordes Supper: it is directly said, that the selfe same mysterie of eating the fleshe of Christ, hath ben obserued since the time of Moses: and that there is no cause, why the Iewe should be offended at the saying of Christe, if he would vnderstand the trueth, whereof the Pascall lambe was the figure and shadowe. Which trueth was no mysterie newly inuented, but practised euer since Moses, for not by the fleshe and bloud of the Lambe, but by the flesh and bloud of Christ, the people were deliuered from death. The Lambe was then a sacrament: Christe was then, and euer shall be the trueth: but what neede we more striue, whē M. Heskins confesseth, That the faithfull of the olde Testament did eate the flesh, & drinke the bloud of Christ spiritually, as the Apostle teacheth. 1. Cor. 10. They did all eate the same spirituall meate, &c. And Cyrill saith, We haue no newe mysterie, but euen the same that hath beene practised since the time of Moses.
                  
               
               
                  The twentieth Chapter, ioyneth Saint Gregorie, and Damascen to confirme the same matter.
                        Heskins.
                     
                  
                  
                     In the beginning of this Chapter, he doeth honestly confesse,
                        Fulk.
                      that Gregorie was the last of the higher house: & Damascen the first and chiefest of the lower house, he may make him Vantparlar if he will. But neither of thē haue any thing materiall for his purpose, that he alledgeth them, nor for the generall purpose of his bill. For Gregories wordes are altogether alegoricall, & therefore cannot be taken in the Grammaticall sense, Hom. 22. Pasch: All which thinges do bring forth to vs great edifying if they be discussed by mystical, or alegoricall interpretation. For what the bloud of the lambe is you haue learned, not now by hearing, but by drinking, which bloud is put vpon both the postes, when it is dronke, not only with the mouth of the body, but also with the mouth of the heart. For he that doeth so receiue the bloud of his redeemer, that he will not as yet followe his passion, hath put the bloud on a post. Heare what a great thing is there? But that he calleth the sacrament of the bloud, ye bloud of the redeemer, speaking alegorically, as he calleth it the bloud of the Lamb, meaning the olde Paschal, whiche doth signifie the bloud of Christ. Therfore if Maister Heskins will vrge the bloud of the redeemer dronke not only with the mouth of the body, but with ye mouth of the heart: he may likewise vrge the bloud of ye lamb: if this be a figuratiue speech, so is that. But Gregorie proceedeth. In the night (saith he) we eate the lambe, because we do now receiue the Lordes body in a sacrament, when as yet we do not see one anothers conscience. Note here yt Gregorie doth not say simply, we eate the Lords body, but we eate the Lordes body in a sacrament or mysterie: comparing the night of the Iewish eating, with the mysterie of the Lordes body. And in neither of both his sayinges affirmeth the lambe to be a figure of the supper, which is the purpose of the Chapter. As for Damascen, his chiefe words are these, (For it were too long to rehearse all, he being but a knight of the lower house.) If God the word by willing was made man, &c. can he not make bread his owne body, and wine with water his bloud? God saide in the beginning: let the earth bring forth greene hearbes: and vnto this day, beeing

holpen, & strengthened by Gods cōmandement, the rayne comming, it bringeth forth fruits. God said, this is my body, & this is my bloud, and do ye this in remēbrance of me: by his almightie cōmandement it is brought to passe vntill he come. In this testimonie, which M. Hesk. rehearseth more at large, sauing yt he nameth ye old Passeouer yt Christ did celebrate at his last supper, there is no mentiō of any figure yt it was of his supper. Secōdly, although the time, in which Damascen liued, was very corrupt, yet there is nothing in these wordes, whiche may not wel be referred to ye spiritual presence of Christs body, vnto the faith of the worthie receiuer. M. Heskins maketh a needlesse digression of ye cōmandement of consecratiō, which shalbe granted to him, if he wil not frame a new signification of consecration, which none of his Calepines, Vocabularies, nor Dictionaries do acknowledge. For, to consecrate, is to halow, or to separat to an holy vse, so we grant ye bread and wine to be consecrated. But ye Papistes call consecrating, to change ye substances, or to transubstātiat. And so neither Chrysostom, nor any other learned man, did euer vse yt word. His wordes, as M. Heskins citeth thē 
                     Ho. de pro. Iud. be these: And now the same Christ is present, which did furnish that table, he also consecrateth this. For it is not man that maketh the thinges set foorth to be the body and bloud of Christ, by consecration of the Lordes table, but he that was crucified for vs, euen Christ Wordes are spoken by the mouth of the priest, but they are consecrated by the power and grace of God. This is saith he, my body. By this worde the thinges set foorth are consecrated. And as that voyce that said, grow ye, & multiply ye, was but once spoken, but yet it feeleth alway effect, nature working with it vnto generation: so that voyce was but once spoken, but through all the tables of the Church, vnto this day, and vntill the comming, it giueth strength to the sacrifice. In these wordes (because M. Heskins bringeth them in for consecration) note yt Chrysostome affirmeth all consecration vnto the worldes end to be wrought by the voice of Christ, once spoken by him selfe. This is my body, whereas the Papistes affirme consecration to be by the vertue of these words spoken by a Priest. So yt there is great diuersitie, betweene their iudgements

of consecration.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The one & twentieth Chapter concludeth the matter of the figure of the Pascall lambe, by Haymo, and Cab
                        •
                     sila.
                  There is no doubt, but in the lower house, M. Heskins may finde many that fauour his bill,
                        Fulk.
                      but seeing it is shut out of the higher house, I will not trouble my selfe, nor the Reader much to examine the voyces of the lower house. Which if they should euery one allowe it, yet it cannot be an enacted trueth, without the consent of the higher house. Onely this will I note, that Maister Heskins maketh Haymo elder by 500. yeares, then such chronicles as I haue read do account him.
                  But this thing in this Chapter must not be omitted, that he saith, that The sacramentaries cannot bring one father, teaching the sacrament to be onely a figure. And ioyneth issue with the proclaymer, that if he can bring any scripture, any catholique counsell, or any one approued doctor, that by expresse and plaine words, doth denie the reall presence of Christ in the sacrament, then he will giue ouer and subscribe to him. Still he chargeth them, whom he calleth the sacramentaries, to make the sacrament only a figure or a bare signe, which is false. But for euidence to informe the men, that shall go vpon this issue, I will alledge, first S. Augustine, in plaine and expresse wordes, denying that which Maister Heskins, and the Papistes, call the reall presence of Christes body in the sacrament. In Psal. 98. Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis, & bibituri illum sanguinem, quo fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendani, spiritualiter intellectum vin
                              •
                           ficabit vor. You shal not eate this body whiche you see, nor drinke the bloude, whiche they shall shedde, that shall crucifie me: I haue commended to you a certeine sacrament, which beeing spiritually vnderstoode shall quicken you. What can be saide more plainely. The seconde witnesse shall be Chrysostome In Matth. Homil. 11. 
                        Si enim vasa sanctificata ad priuatos vsus transferre peccatum est, & periculum, sicut docet nos Balthasar, qui bibens in calicibus sacratis, de regno depositus est, & de vita.

Si ergo haec vasa sanctificata ad priuatos vsus transferre sic periculosum est, in quibus non est verum Corpus Christi, sed mysterium corporis Christi continetur: quanto magis vasa corporis nostri quae sibi deus ad habitaculum preparauit, non debemus locum dare diabolo agendi in eis quod vult? For if it be an offence to translate the sanctified vessels into priuate vses, and a daunger, as Balthasar doth teach vs, who drinking in the hallowed cups, was put out both of his kingdome and his life: therfore if it be so daungerous to transferre vnto priuate vses, those sanctified vessels in which not the very body of Christ, but the mysterie of the body of Christ is conteyned: howe much more the vessels of our body, which God hath prepared to be a dwelling place for him selfe, ought we not to yeld to the diuil to do in them what hee will.
                  
                  The third shall bee out of the Popes owne Cannon lawe, which M. Heskins may not refuse for good euidence, and it is gathered out of Augustine. 
                        De con. dist. 2. Cap. Hoc est. Sicut caelestis panis qui Christi caro est suo modo vocatur corpus Christi, cum reuera sit sacramentum corporis Christi, illius videlicet quod visibile, quod palpabile, quod mortale in cruce positum est, vocaturque ipsa immolatio carnis, quae sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi passio mors, crucifixio non rei veritate sed significante mysterio: sic sacramentum fidei, quod baptismus intelligitur, fides est. As that heauenly bread which is the flesh of Christ, after a certaine maner of it, is called the body of Christ, wheras in very deed it is but the sacrament of the body of Christ, namely of that body which is visible, which is palpable, which when it was mortall was fastned to the crosse, and the same offering of the flesh of Christe which is done by the Priestes handes, is called the passion, death, and crucifying of Christ, not in trueth of the thing, but in a signifying mysterie: so the sacrament of faith which is vnderstoode to bee baptisme, is faith. Nowe let this issue bee tryed according to this euidence, by any lawful and indifrent men of the countrie, and I doubt not but they will finde Maister Heskins charged by his bond, to yeelde and recant. But to conclude this Chapter, Maister Heskins

will needes haue two manner of presences, as well as the sacramentaries, spirituall and corporall, the spirituall he graunteth to the worthy receiuer, and the corporal also: the corporall only is left to the wicked. Wherevpon I would desire the Christian reader to consider, what hard holde the Papistes keepe for the corporall presence, which is no benefite to the faithfull, but according to their doctrine common to the wicked, and howe proudly they deride and contemne the spirituall presence, wherein yet consisteth all the comfort of the godly, which they them selues can not denie. Vndoubtedly this quarrell for the corporall presence, hath a corporall respect, to abuse the superstitious minds of carnall men, to their carnall commoditie, and not to seeke spirituall recreation of the inward man, which is throughly satisfied with the spirituall presence by faith.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The two and twentieth Chapter beginneth the application of the shewe breade to the sacrament, as of the figure to the veritie, by S. Hierome and Damascen.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     The figures of Manna, and the waters, he reiecteth into the third booke, and nowe will treate of the figure of the shewe breade. And this bread, he will haue to be a figure of the body of Christ in the sacrament. Wherein the matter is not worth the strife, so we remember that the sacraments of the old law, were not bare figures, but ye same in substaunce and vertue that ours are, as we shewed before out of Augustine, and that they were not bare figures of our sacraments, but of the things wherof our sacraments are effectuall signes. Although ours more cleare, as of thinges already exhibited, and theirs were of thinges to come. And therefore the olde writers, Origen, Ambrose, and Oecumenius also affirme, that the Fathers in the sacraments had the shadowe, we the image, and both of vs shall haue the truth in one countrie. Orig. in Ps. 38. Amb. 4. Offi. Chap. 48. Oec. in 10. Heb. The like comparison we had before of the shadowe and image out of Chrysostome

and Euthymius, that borrowed it of him. But how friuolous the comparisons be, that M. Heskins maketh betweene the shewe breade and the sacrament, to proue the one to be a figure of the other: bicause it was set on the table, neuer fayled, was a bread of remembrance, was our offering, might not be eaten of any defiled person: I will declare by as many differences. The shewe bread was 12. cakes in number, so is not the sacrament: had frankincenses set vpon it and burned, so hath not the sacrament: was remoued euery Sabbath, so is not the sacrament: must of necessitie remaine a whole weeke, so must not the sacrament: might not be eaten of any but only the Priestes, the sacrament must be eaten of al men: might not be eaten of the Priestes, vntill it was a seuen nights olde, so is not the sacrament. Where note I pray you, the synceritie of M. Heskins, that rehearsing the text out of 24. of Leuit. leaueth out the putting of incence vppon the two rowes, bicause he could not applie it to his Masse cakes.
                  But to the place of Hieronyme, In cap. 1. ad Tit. If Lay men be commaunded to abstaine from the companie of their wiues for prayer, what is to be thought of a Bishop, which daily must offer undefiled sacrifices for his owne and the peoples sinnes? Let vs read the booke of Kings, and we shall finde that Abimelech the Prieste, would not giue Dauid and his seruants of the shewe bread, before he asked whether the seruants were cleane from a woman, not from a straunge woman, but from their wiues: and except he had heard that yesterday and the day before they had abstained from the worke of marriage, he had not graunted them the bread which before he had denyed. There is as great difference betweene the shewe breade and the bodye of Christe, as betweene the shaddowe and the bodies, betweene the image and the trueth, betweene the exemplars of thinges to come, and the thinges them selues prefigured by the exemplars. Therefore as meeknesse, patience, sobrietie, moderation, abstinence from lucre, hospitalitie also and benignitie, ought to be chiefly in a Byshop, and amongest all Lay men excelling: so also a peculiar chastitie, and, as I may say, Priestly continence, that hee doe not onely keepe him selfe f
                           •
                        om an vncleane woorke, but also the mynde that shall

make the body of Christe may be free from casting of the eye, and wandring of thought. In these wordes Hieronyme maketh the shewe breade, a shadowe and figure of the body of Christe, but not of the sacrament thereof. Neither will Maister Heskins collection of the office of a bishop standing in consecration, offering, and receiuing the body of Christ helpe him. For here is no word of consecrating, but of making the body of Christe, Mens Christi corpus confectura, the minde shall make the body of Christ: which if it be not a figuratiue speach, Hieronyme speaketh both grossely and vntruely, neither of offering the body of Christ, but offering vndefiled sacrifices, which are prayers. Finally if it were plaine, that he called the sacrament by the name of that which it signifieth, yet hee him selfe is the best expounder of him selfe. Where hee sheweth a double taking of the body & bloud of Christe, spirituall and corporall. In Ep lib. 1. cap. Dupliciter vero sanguis Christi & caro intelligitur: vel spiritualis illa at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            diuina, d
                              •
                            qua ipse dixit caro mea verè est cibus, & sanguis meus verè est potus: Et nisi manducaueritis carnem meum, & sanguinem meum biberitis, non habebitis vitam aeternam: Vel caro & sanguis quae crucifixa est, & qui militis effusus est lanc
                              •
                           a. The bloud and flesh of Christ is vnderstoode two wayes: either that spirituall and diuine flesh, of which hee saide: My flesh is meate in deede, and my bloud is drinke in deede: And except ye eate my flesh and drinke my bloud, you shall not haue eternall life: or else that flesh that was crucified, & that bloud which was shead by the souldiers speare. This place may suffice to expound whatsoeuer either Hieronyme or any other olde writer saith of the consecration, offering, or receiuing of the body and bloud in the sacrament: making a manifest difference betweene that flesh and bloud, which is eaten and dronke, and that which was crucified, which the Papistes teach to bee all one.
                  But M. Heskins cannot omit this place, wtout a gird against married Priests, of which number he him selfe was once one, saying, they haue put away the consecration

to keepe their women, but he did put away his wife, that he might returne to consecration: Howbeit to the matter. As it is verie well knowen, Hieronyme was too much addict to the prayse of virginitie, so in this Chapter, hee cannot simplie condemne the mariage of Byshoppes, although he wish rather a continence in them that can absteine: and openly saith to professed virgines, that either they must marie if they cannot conteine, or els continue if they will not marie. Ad Demetriadem.
                  
                  Next to Hieronyme, which is of the higher house, hee is faine to place Damascene of the lower house. Who sayeth that The shewe bread did figure this breade, meaning the sacramentall breade, and not as M. Heskins expoundeth it the bodie of Christ in the sacrament. For transubstantiation is not so olde as Damascene, neither was it receyued in the Greeke Church, neither is it at this daye, neither, doe these wordes helpe him which hee addeth. Therefore with all feare and pure conscience, and with a sure faith let vs come to him and worship him with all purenesse of minde and bodie. Let vs come to him with burning desire, fashioning our handes in manner of a crosse, let vs receiue this bodie of him that was crucified. There can no necessarie collection bee made of this place, that Damascene spake of the popishe reall presence. And if it might, yet it is but one doctors opinion of the lower house, whose authoritie we weigh not. But why doe not the Papistes holde their handes a crosse, when they receyue the sacrament? by like all their ceremonies bee not so auncient as Damascene.
               
               
                  The three and twentie Chapter proceedeth in the proofe of the same by S. Augustine and Isychius.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Out of Augustine he alleadgeth Ep. 86. Ad Casulanum:
                        Fulke.
                      reprouing one Vibicus Dicit cessisse pani pecus. &c. Hee saith that the sheepe hath giuen place to breade, as though he knewe not that then also the shewe breade was wont to bee set on the Lords table, and that now also he doeth take part of the bodie of the immaculate lambe. Hee sayth that bloude hath giuen place

to the cuppe not considering that nowe also hee receyueth bloude in the cuppe. Therefore howe much better and more agreably shoulde hee saye, that the olde thinges are passed, and newe thinges are made in Christe, so that Altar gaue place to Altar, sworde to sworde, fire to fire, breade to breade, sheepe to sheepe, bloude to bloude? For wee see in all these, that the carnall oldnesse giueth place to the spirituall newnesse.
                  
                  The vnderstanding of this place dependeth vppon the knowledge of the errour of Vibicus. And that was this. Hee thought that the outwarde ceremonies of the olde lawe, did signifie the outwarde ceremonies of the newe Testament, that is, that carnall thinges did succeede carnall thinges. As the lambe did signifie the bread, the bloude did signifie the wine in the sacrament, and so bread gaue place to the lambe, the cuppe to the bloud. But this Augustine denyeth. For they had bread then, and they haue breade nowe: they had the fleshe of a lambe then, and they haue the fleshe of a lambe nowe: they had bloude then, and they haue bloude nowe: they had carnall thinges then, and wee haue spirituall thinges nowe. This place therefore is directly against M. Heskins bill of the carnall presence, and hath nothinge to prooue that the shewe breade was a figure of the sacrament: but onely affirmeth that they had breade, as wee haue breade, for they had the shewe breade. But if there had ben transubstantiation, that is, no bread in the sacrament, hee might easily haue confuted Vibicus saying, that breade gaue place to the sheepe. But hee confesseth that wee haue bread, and affirmeth, that they had breade also. And where he sayth, that wee eate parte of the body of the immaculate lambe, hee declareth sufficiently that hee spake of no carnall presence, for then hee woulde not haue deuided the bodie of the lambe into partes, which the Papistes say euerie one receiueth whole. Finally, where he saith that the carnall oldenesse gaue place to the spirituall newnesse, hee doth moste clearely teach vs, that the outwarde ceremonies of the olde Testament, were figures of the spirituall things signified and giuen

by our sacramentes, and not of the outwarde elementes of our sacraments. By which it is manifest, that spirituall thinges and not carnall thinges are the substance of our sacraments. Nowe to M. Heskins collections. He saith that the old sacrifices of the lambe were not figures of the sacrament: denying now in one word, that he laboured to proue before in 7. Chapters: but of the bloudie sacrifice of Christ offered vppon the crosse after the maner of Aaron. Concerning ye sence of Augustines words, let the readers weigh my collection & his, by Augustines place, and by the rest of the Epistle that is of the same matter. But marke here once againe, that hee maketh the sacrifice of Christs passion, a sacrifice after the maner of Aaron, and consequētly Christ a priest after the maner of Aaron, directly contrarie to the scriptures in expresse words Heb. 7. Secondly he vrgeth that, which Augustine saith, we nowe receiue bloud in ye cup, by which he wil exclude the distinction of spirituall receiuing. But all in vaine, except he can conclude, yt we receiue partem de agni immaculati corpore, part of the vndefiled lambes bodie. For if the one be spirituall, so is the other. I am sure the naturall bodie of Christ is not deuided into parts, but wee do spiritually receiue nourishmēt al of one bodie. To be short, if that which Augustine addeth of spirituall newnes succeeding carnall oldnes, were not a sufficient demonstration of a spirituall receiuing, I woulde bring other places of Augustine to shewe the same most plainly. But the thing being so apparant, I will not mistrust the iudgement of any indifferent reader so much, as to trouble him with more testimonies, which shall better come in, where more shewe is for M. Heskins bill.
                  But we must passe ouer to Isychius, whose wordes are set downe at large in Cap. 24. Leui. The verie number of the loaues doth call vs to a contemplation of the cōmandement. So doth the setting forth of thē, & that he doth not cōmand thē to be made a burnt offering as those things which be of the frying pan, of the girdiron, & of the fornace, but that they shold be set on the table one ouer against an other, & that it shold be lawful only for the priestes to eat of thē, not for the Leuites, so that they also must eate thē in a

holy place. And also that they are called holie of holies, (vnderstand what is said, for the Lord shall giue thee vnderstanding) remember the mysticall table of which it is commaunded that none should beginne except the intelligible Aaron, that is Christe, (For he began it first) excepte also his sonnes, which by him are made Christes, and haue put on him, which yet they are commaunded to eate in a holie place. And hee is that holy of holies, that they may haue a principall and vndespised sanctification. These loaues of two tenthes (for they are of God and man, of the same being, perfect in both) are set sixe ouer against sixe. The mysticall supper is set here, and it is set in the worlde to come. Sixe loaues are one proposition or setting foorth, as the mysterie it se
                           •
                        fe is perfecte and maketh them that enioye it perfecte. And in sixe dayes this visible creature was made, and the sixt day man was made, for whome Christe prepared his mysticall table. But yet altogether are rightlie twelue loaues, because the Apostles that were twelue in number first supped at the Lordes table. Here is an allegoricall interpretation of the shewe breade to signifie the Lordes supper, but that proueth it not a prefiguration of the sacrament. For there is great difference betweene an allegory, and a figure of a thing to come. But to the poynte of the bill, here is nothing for the carnall presence, but somewhat against it.
                  First where hee saith that the Christians (whom allegorically he calleth the sonnes of the intelligible Aaron, induti sunt eo, haue put on him, meaning they are baptised, for as manie as are baptised in him haue put him on. But they haue put on him onely spiritually, therefore they are commaunded to eate him onely spiritually.
                  Secondly the twelue loaues, whiche signifieth the bodie of Christ, signifieth the twelue Apostles also, which mystically were his bodie, by which you may see, hee speaketh of no carnall presence, Thirdly he calleth it a mysterie and a mysticall supper, which will not stande wt M. Heskins corporal collectiōs. No more wil yt which he addeth That it is a cleane table, first as making cleane, secondly as hauing no lies or infectiō, such as are in the misteries of the pagās.
                     
Where it is to be laughed at, that he will proue a corporal presence, because it cleanseth sinnes: for then shal we haue the same presence in baptisme, and the Papistes in holie water, which they affirme to clense sinnes also. But it is, a per se, that Isychius addeth. Moreouer, extolling his glorie, and aduauncing the dignitie of this mysterie into an height, he addeth, it is the holie of holies of the Lordes sacrifices for a perpetuall lawe. Therefore prayer is holie, the reading of holie scripture is holie, and the hearing of the interpretation thereof: to be short, all things that are done and sayed in the Church of God, according to the lawe, are holie. But the holie of holies of the Lordes sacrifice, of all things that are offered and done to his glorie, is the table which Christ setteth forth of his owne sacrifice. Here is a great commendation of that mysticall Table, which Christ hath set forth of the sacrifice of his death, which no man doubteth to be moste holie in the right vse thereof, and in respect of him that feedeth vs with his bodie and bloud at that table. But what is all this to the corporall and carnall presence? But M. Heskins woulde finde a contradiction in the wordes of Oecolampadius, in that he sayeth the bread is sanctified, and yet it hath no holinesse in it, whereas that holie man speaketh plainly and distinctly, that it is sanctified, and doth sanctifie, in the right vse of it, & not in the nature of it self.
               
               
                  The foure & twentieth Chapter, applying the continuall reseruation of the Shew bread, to the reseruation of the sacrament, proueth the same reseruatiō by the olde fathers, & by the perpetual practis
                        •
                      of the Church.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  That the sacrament (of some) was reserued in the elder dayes of the Church, it is not so great a controuersie,
                        Fulk.
                      as whether it ought to bee reserued by the institution of Christe. Neither is the simple reseruation, one of the proclaymers articles (as M. Heskins saith,) but whether it should be hanged vp in a Canopie for an ydol as the Papistes vse it. As for reseruation, how slenderly it is proued by him, we shall see by examination of his

witnesses. For as touching his application thereof vnto the reseruation of the shewe breade, because it is but his owne iudgement, I will not vouchsafe to aunswere it, otherwise then to denye it, to be of any force to proue his purpose. His first witnesse is Clemens Ep. 2. The sacraments of Gods secretes are committed to three degrees: to the priest, the Deacon, and the minister, which with feare and trembling ought to keepe the leauings of the peeces of the Lordes bodie, that no rottennes be found in the holie place, lest when the thing is done negligently, great iniurie be done to the portion of the Lordes bodie. By this place M. Heskins will needes proue reseruation, and the carnall presence, but neither of both will fall out of his side, although the authoritie of the Epistle is not worth a strawe, beeing a counterfet decretall ascribed to Clemens, neither in true latine, nor good sense.
                  And first for the carnall presence, note how he sayeth, ye remnantes of the peeces and portions of the Lords bodie, and so he doth often in this Epistle, meaning ye crommes of the sacramentall bread, which was consecrated to bee the bodie of Christ. For Christes naturall bodie cannot be broken into leauings, fragments, and portions, which be the termes he vseth. Nowe touching the reseruation, he meaneth no keeping but of these crommes, which hee calleth leauings, fragments and portions, and no keeping of them, but from mouldinesse or rottennesse, that is, that they should be spent while they are good, and not kepte while they stinke, as the Papistes doe, not the fragments, but their whole Masse cakes sometimes. For touching the sacrament it selfe, he writeth by and by after: 
                        Tanta in altario holocausta offerantur, quanta populo sufficere debens. Quod si remanserint, in Crastinum non reseruentur, sed cum timore & tremore clericorum diligentia consumantur. Let so great sacrifices bee offered on the altar, as may suffice all the people. But if any be left, let them not be kept vntill the next day, but with feare and trembling, let them bee spent by the diligence of the Clerkes. This beeing most manifest against reseruation, Master Heskins

is not ashamed to racke it to stande with reseruation.
                  And first, he asketh the aduersarie, whether hee thinketh that Saint Clement was a foole, to denye that hee sayed before? No verily, but I think him to be no wise man, that either taketh this Epistle to bee written by Clement, the first bishop of Rome, or so vnderstandeth it, that he woulde make him contrarie to him selfe. And I thinke he that did forge this Epistle vnder Saint Clements name, was not onely a doltish foole, but also an impudent falsarie, to make that auncient Clemens to write to the Apostle Saint Iames of such bables as those be, and that followe in the Epistle: which, if they were of weight, yet the Apostle was not to learne them of Clemens, but Clemens of him. But concerning the keeping that he speaketh of, he writeth yet more plainlye: 
                        Non eijcientes foras è sacrario velamina, not shaking abroad out of the holy place or vestrie the couering of the Lords table, lest peraduenture the dust of the Lordes bodie shoulde fall a misse from the linnen cloth beeing washed abroade, and this should be sinne to him that doth it. Lo sir, before wee had reliques, fragments, and portions, nowe wee haue the dust of the Lords body. What dust is this, but small crommes? But he goeth on, and that Saint Iames might the better looke to those matters, he sayeth: 
                        Iterum atque iterum de fragmentis dominic
                              •
                            corporis demandamus. Againe, and againe, wee giue charge, concerning the fragments of the Lordes bodie. And finally, he concludeth in fine Latine and cleanly termes: 
                        A principio Epistolae vsque ad hunc locum de sacramentis delegaui bene intuendis: vbi non murium stercora inter fragmenta dominicae portionis appareant, neque putrida per negligentiam remaneant clericorum. From the beginning of the Epistle vnto this place I haue giuen charge concerning the sacraments to be well looked vpon: where no Mise tordes may be seene among the fragments of the Lorde
                           •
                         portion, nor they remaine rotten through the negligence of the Clerkes.
                  
                  
                     You see this man would haue the sacrament spent, & taketh thought that the crommes, both small and great, be not cast away, nor kept vntill they be rotten, nor suffered to be eaten of Mise, nor defyled with their doung, but he is vtterly against popish reseruation. The next is Irenaeus, who in his Epistle, in which he doth sharply rebuke Victor bishop of Rome, for excommunicating the Bishops of Asia about the celebration of Easter, sayth: That they were neuer for that matter driuen from the fellowship of the Church, or comming from those partes, were not receiued: but rather all the elders or Bishops that were before them, did alwayes solemnely send the sacrament of Eucharistie to all the bishops or elders of those Churches that did not so obserue it. M. Heskins imagineth that the Bishops of Rome, did sende the sacrament into all partes of the worlde, to all bishops & elders of euerie Church: which if he did, hee had neede of many messengers. But the matter is plaine ynough. If any of those bishops or elders came to Rome, they were louingly receiued of Victors predecessours, and at the time of the Communion, the bishop would send the sacrament to them by the deacons, as well as to any of the citizens that were of his owne Church. Here is no shadowe of reseruation, but M. Heskins absurde imagination.
                  Tertullian followeth Irenaeus, writing to his wife, lib. 2. An arbitrare ô vxor ita gesturam te, vt clam viro sint, qua facis? Non sciet ille quid secreto ante omne cibum gustes? & si sciuerie non partem illum credit esse, qui dicitur. Doest thou thinke (ô wife) so to handle thy selfe, that these things that thou doest shalbe vnknowen to thy husbande? shall not he knowe what before all meates thou doest secretely receiue? and if hee shall knowe it, he beleeueth it not to be that bread, that it is saide to be. Thus M. Heskins hath set downe the wordes both in Latine and Englishe. But wheresoeuer he had the former question▪ 
                     An ar
                           •
                        itrare ô vxor ita gesturam te, vt clam viro sint quae facto? He had it not of Tertullian, for hee hath no such wordes in that booke, but onely, Non sciet maritus, &c. shall not thy husbande knowe, &c. By which it is

playne that he neuer read this place in Tertullian himself, but only borrowed it out of some other papist, that alledged it for this purpose, & belike gathered the former question, not as Tertullians wordes, but out of his meaning, which Maister Heskins not vnderstanding, very ridiculously, hath set down, as the words of Tertullian. These be the Popishe doctours, that boast of their great reading, when they reade but patches out of other mens notes, and collections. But to the matter. Although it may seeme, this corruption to haue entred into the African Churches, yt the people carried home ye sacramentall bread, and did eate it daily before all other meates, yet this is nothing like vnto the Popish reseruation in the pixe, to be adored. And Tertullian in his Booke De Corona militis, doeth rehearse this custome among those thinges, that had no ground of scripture for them. The liks is to be saide, to the place of Cyprian, where a woman kept it in her chest, as for the miracle, whether it reproued her vnworthinesse, or her reseruation, it is not plaine by the authour. The story of Satyrus out of Ambrose proueth not directly reseruation, for it is like, the Christians being in daunger of shipwrack, did minister the communion in the shippe, & not bring it with them from the shore consecrated. And Satyrus being then but a nouice or Catechumein, and not baptised, desired the sacrament of them, meaning to receiue it before his death, if he sawe present daunger of drowning, otherwise to tarry vntill he were admitted to it, by order of the Church. But this proueth nothing at all the Popishe reseruation, although the fact of Satyrus was not without imperfection, as greatly as it is commended of Ambrose: and much lesse the Carnal presence, For Satyrus, did not so put his affiaunce in the sacrament, that he thought it to be God, but that he desired it as an helpe of his faith, that he might not depart this life without the communion of the body of Christ in the sacrament.
                  The place of Chrysostome, is nothing at all for reseruation,

where he saith, that in a tumult the souldiers rushing into the Churches, The most holy bloud of Christ was shed vpō their clothes. For he must remēber, it was on Easter day, when all the people did communicate, and such as came were baptised. And where he saith, it was Ad vesperū diei, that they did enter, that is, in the afternoone: he must wit, that Chrysostome after the maner of the scripture, calleth ye morning before day light Vespere Sabbati, & therfore his collection is vaine. But although it were in the afternoone, what inconuenience is it if we say, they spent al the forenoone in prayer, & fasting, and hearing the worde of God, and ministring baptisme, which then was ministred twise a yeare, at Easter, & at Pentecost: and then in the afternoone towarde euening, went to the communion? Hierome reporteth of Exuperius, that he caried the Lords body in a wicker basket, and his bloud in a glasse. What reseruation is here? M. Heskins saith, he did beare it about with him, but Hieronyme saith not so, except you meane about the Churche, when he ministred the communion. But here Maister Iewel hath a double blow. O cunning Maister of defence. For here is not onely reseruation, bu
                           •
                         also he calleth it in plaine wordes, the body and bloud of our Lorde. Maister Iewel shal not greatly feele these blowes. To the reseruation I haue saide before, and to the plaine calling of it body and bloud, I say, what other thing is it, then as Maister Iewel himselfe will call it? and worthily: yet no transubstantiation meant by him. But how will Maister Heskins warde these blowes? Exuperius had no hallowed pixes, nor chalices of Golde and siluer, as the Papistes must haue? And Exuperius ministred to the lay people in both kindes, as the Papistes will not do? What hath M. Heskins gayned by Exuperius? But then Eusebius shall help him, for in his 6. booke, and 36. Chapter, is declared, yt a certeine priest, sent to Serapion (beeing at the point of death) a litle portiō of the Eucharistie in the night season: by which it appeareth, yt it was reserued. In deed Dionysius bishop of Alexandria writeth so vnto Fabianus Bishop of Rome. But withall he sheweth, that it was no publique

order of the vniuersall Church, but his own commandement vnto his owne Church, that he might not seeme in any point to resemble the Nouatians, which denied reconciliation to them that had fallen in persecution: wherfore he saith, that although the priest was sicke, and could not come: 
                        Tamen quia pręceptum fuerat a me, vt lapsis in exitu nemo recōciliationis solatia denegaret, & maximè ijs, quos priùs id rogasse constaret, parum &c. Yet because it had beene commanded by me, that no man should denie to them that had fallen, the comfort of reconciliation at their departure, especially to those who were known to haue desired it before, he gaue a litle of the Eucharistie, &c. Whiche wordes M. Heskins hath cleane left out of the text, wherby the particular commandemēt of Dionyse is expressed: and yet it is not proued that the Priest had the sacrament reserued, but it might well be, that he did then consecrate and send him parte, as he should haue done, if he could haue come to the sicke man himselfe for his owne weakenes. Last of all he rehearseth the wordes of Cyril Ad Colosyrium: I heare that they say, that the mystical blessing, if any remnants thereof remaine vnto the next day following, is vnprofitable to sanctification. But they are madd in so saying, for Christe is not made an other, neither shal his holy body be chaunged, but the vertue of blessing, and the liuely grace do alwayes remaine in him. M. Heskins translateth in illo, in it, as though ye vertue, & quickening grace were included in the sacrament, which ye author saith to remain in Christ. But touching ye authoritie of this Cyrillus ad Colosyrium, I must admonish the Reader, that these wordes are not to be found in all the workes of Cyrillus that are extant, but is only a patch cited by other men, ye whole epistle is not to be found. So yt we can neither tel whether it were writē by the ancient Cyrillus of Alexandria, or by some late writer of yt name, nor yet what was ye argumēt & scope of yt Epistle. Neuertheles, it semeth to some, yt he wrote against ye Anthropomorphits, which thought yt the body of Christ was corrupted, if the remnants of the sacrament were corrupted: but that Cyrillus denieth, because Christ is eternall & incorruptible.
                  
                     He saith not that the remnantes of the sacrament are so, for that the Papistes confesse to be otherwise, affirming that they ceasse to be the body & bloud of Christ, when the species or kinds of bread and wine are putrified or rotten. But Cyril saith, that vertue, & grace, do alwayes remaine in him, not in that sacrament reserued, which doeth corrupt. Finally, he speaketh but of reseruatiō for one day, to the vse of eating, and not of adoration, therefore he speaketh nothing against the challenge, which was not simply of reseruation, but of reseruing the sacramēt to be worshipped. But whereas M. Heskins mainteyneth reseruation by dipping of stoales, and linnen clothes in ye cup, he must remēber that Iulius in his decretal epistles, forbiddeth that dipping, as diuers counsels also do, which in due place are alledged.
                  Finally, Origen doth vtterly condemne that abuse of reseruation of the sacrament, affirming that it is in ye same case, that the sacrifice of the passeouer, and the sacrifice of praise and thankesgiuing were, of which it was not lawfull to reserue any part, vntill the next mo
                        •
                     ning, therefore he saith in Leuit. 7. Ho. 5. Nam & Dominus panem quem discipulis dabat, & dicebat eis, accipite & manducate, non distulit, nec seruari iussit in erasti
                           •
                        um: For that bread, which our Lord gaue to his disciples, and said vnto them, take ye, & eate ye, he deferred not, neither commanded it to be reserued vntill the next day. By which wordes it is manifest, that as he disallowed the reseruation, so was it not in vse in the East Church in his time. And that M. Heskins may be snarled in his owne coarde, he must call to minde, what paines he tooke to proue the Pascall Lambe, to be a figure of this sacrament, and how earnestly he vrgeth, that the trueth must answere the figure, in all things iustly, inso much that he alledgeth this text, that not a iote, or apricke of the law shall passe, vntill all be fulfilled. Nowe of the Pascal lambe, there was an expresse cōmandement, yt no part of it should be reserued vntill ye next day: therfore by his owne figures, textes, & manner of reasoning, I conclude, that the sacrament may not be reserued at all.
               
               
                  
                  The fiue and twentith Chapter proueth the same by Counsells that haue bene neerer to our time.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  For Counsells that haue bene neerer to our time, then sixe hundreth yeares after Christ,
                        Fulk.
                      we doe not admit their authoritie. But M. Heskins promising Counsells, beginneth with the institution of Iustinian, That Monasteries of Virgines should haue libertie to choose a Priest which should bring vnto them the holy Communion. Herevpon he will build reseruation, for they did not celebrate to them (saith he) but they brought it. As though he that bringeth ye worde of God to thē, doth not preach before them, but bringeth a Sermon in his bosome. But for as much as that decree speaketh not onely of a Priest but also of a Deacon, I can be content to thinke, that he brought the sacrament with him and did not consecrate there, but what maketh this for reseruation to the vse of adoration, which is the matter in question▪ Or else for an ordinarie custome of reseruation, if the sacrament were brought from the next Church, (where and when it was celebrated) to the Monasterie, not to be hanged vp in a cannopie, but to be receiued presently? But it is a proper reason that M. Heskins vseth: for may be reserued for a short time, why not for a long time? For answere of this, I will referre him to his owne Popish decrees, that forbid such reseruation, for feare of putrifaction and rottennesse. At last commeth the Counsels of Wormes and Remes, in which times it is certaine that great corruptions preuailed in the church: then followeth the Counsell of Laterane commended for generall held Anno. 1215. speaking of the diligent reseruation of the sacrament: with much adoe about the authoritie of Counsels But all not worth a rush. The generall Counsell of Laterane falsified the text of scripture tract to both in wordes and sense, alledging it thus in their second Canon or Chapter against Ioachim Abbas: Pater quod dedit mihi maius est omnibus, that which the father hath giuen me is greater then all. Whereas the trueth of the text is, the father which hath giuē them to me, is greter then all. A wise and worshipfull Counsel, that can not

confute an errour, but by falsifying of the scripture. And this is the Counsell that first decreed transubstantiation.
                  Last of all commeth the Counsel of Trent in our days, and that, not so vainely alledgeth of The age of the Nicen Counsell to haue acknowledged reseruation, as M. Heskins impudently affirmeth therevpon, that The Nicen Counsell did ag
                           ••
                        se reseruation. Next he iangleth of the authoritie of the Church, as though what so euer the synagogue of Antichrist doth affirme, were the difinition of the Church of Christ. And in the end, he ioyneth an other issue with the proclamer, That if he can bring any plaine scripture, catholique doctour, or counsel, that by expresse wordes forbiddeth reseruation, he will subscribe. For scripture ye institution, do ye this in remembrance of me, proueth the sacrament to be an action, and not a name of a thing that may be reserued, for euery action is in mouing. Secondly, all Catholique doctours in a manner, and all Counsels generall and prouinciall, that speake of this sacrament, call it Eucharistia, whiche is a giuing of thankes, which name can not be rightly applyed to the bread and wine only, but to the whole vse of them according to Christes institution. Thirdly, the expresse decree of Clemens his owne Doctour is against reseruation, alledged in the Chapter next before. Fourthly, Origen in Leuit. Chap. 7. Hom. 6. the place also cyted in the latter end of the 24. Chapter.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The sixe and twentith Chapter answereth the cheefe obiection of the aduer
                        •
                     aries.
                  Our cheefe argument (hee saith) against the reseruation,
                        Fulke.
                      and our very Achilles against all other rites vsed in the sacraments, is, that in the institution thereof there is no mention made of reseruation. But there he belyeth vs. For we say it is directly against the commaundement of the institution, take and eate, and do this in remembrance of me. I would aske this question of him. Was it lawfull for the Apostles to haue reserued it when Christ cōmanded it to be eaten? If he say no, let him shewe me why it is more lawfull nowe to reserue it then it was then: seeing

we haue the same commaundement continued, doe this in remembrance of me, that is, take and eate it?
                  Moreouer, we say it is cleane contrarie to the end and forme of the sacrament, that it should be reserued and caried about to be worshipped. For it is spirituall meate, whose end, vse, and fruit is in eating, not in keeping and carying about, or worshipping. But nowe let vs see Maister Heskins profound Diuinitie in solution of our argument. There be three manner of doings as concerning the scripture. One is, to do so much as the scripture biddeth An other, to do against that the scripture biddeth. The third, to do something besides that the scripture biddeth. Concerning the first, hee saith, that As Christ tooke breade and wine, made it his body and bloud, commaunded it to be eaten and dronken in remembrance of him: so he that taketh bread and wine, and doth consecrate it, eat it, and drinke it in remembraunce of his death &c. doth as much as the scripture biddeth him, and is blamelesse in this respect. This is true, and all this doe we in our Church, therefore are we blamelesse by his owne conclusion. But they that being commaunded to eate, and minister to bee eaten, doe not eate it, nor giue it to be eaten, but keepe it, and hang it vp, doe manifestly breake this commaundement: and so doe the Papiste
                        •
                     . For they doe against that the scripture biddeth. And whereas he alledgeth the sixt Counsell of Constantinople, reprouing the Armenians for ministring with wine without water, it seemeth that both hee and the Counsell forgot his first rule. For they doing as much as they had either example or commaundement, of Christes institution, by his owne rule were in this respect blamelesse. But he addeth, that they in the Counsell alledged the Masse of Saint Iames and Basil, which is vtterly false, for they alledged but the manner of celebration of the mysticall sacrifice set foorth by them, and no Popish Masse. Whether Saint Iames did set foorth any such forme of celebration I will not here dispute, but I am sure there were many thinges intituled to the Apostles, euen while they liued, that were but counterfet, and so I thinke was this, for else it had bene Canonicall scripture,

and the Churche would not, or should not haue chāged S. Iames his Masse, for Gregories Masse: nor Basil nor Chrysostome, should haue needed to haue made any newe liturgye, if they had bene certaine, that the olde had had the Apostles for their authours and inditers.
                  But M. Heskins triumpheth vpon the old vsage of the Primitiue Churche, for mixing water with their wine, which we in our celebration obserue not, neither is it any matter that we striue for, but against the necessitie of water in the wine. Thē he cauelleth against M. Iewel, For punishing a Minister of his Dyocesse, that ministred the Communion with Ale, whereas he him selfe doth worse, like the high Priestes, that made no conscience to condemne Christ, but a great matter i
                           •
                         was with them to put the price of his betraying in the tresurie &c. Where note, that ministring with wine onely, which was Christes institution, is called of him our tradition.
                  
                  The thirde manner of doing he diuideth into two kindes. When the substaunce being kept, some circumstance is altered, or some ceremonie added for decencie. But reseruatiō is no meare circumstance of time, place, or persons, nor yet an indifferent ceremonie, but contrarie to the substance of the institution, and the cōmandement of Christ. For the sacrament was ordeined, only to be eaten and dronken, wherevnto reseruation is contrarie, so was it commaunded to be receiued, therefore ought not to bee reserued, hanged vp, worshipped, &c. And as M. Heskins will ioyne issue, so wil I demurre in law with him and all his fellowes, that Popish reseruation is contrarie to the end of the institution and commaundement of Christe, and nothing like those matters of circumstance wherewith he compareth it, of morning, euening, fasting, after supper, number of persons, or difference of sexe, or any of those kindes. Therefore (he him selfe saith) The Protestants argument of negatiue is eluded, but neuer a wh
                        •
                     t answered or auoyded.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The seuen and twentith Chapter, answering other arguments & obiections of the proclamer.
                  
                     In the beginning of this Chapter, whereas the Bishops challenge was,
                        Fulke.
                      of hanging vp the sacramente vnder a canopie, meaning reseruation, and setting it vp for idolatrous worshipping, for which M. Heskins hath no color in antiquitie, he woulde inforce him to vnderstande his challeng of simple reseruation, or for other vses thē adoration, as to be caried to the sicke, or such as coulde not be present &c. And first he pleadeth possession of nine hundreth yeares, out of which hee shoulde not bee put without reason, but as good a lawyer as hee is, he muste know, that nowe a writ of right being brought against him, prescription of possession will not serue him.
                  But hee wil giue colour to the plaintife, and apply the reason vsed agaynste priuate masse by the proclamer, to see if it will serue against reseruation. That it is the commaundement of Christ Doe this, that is to say, practise this that I haue here done, and that in such forme and sorte as you haue s
                           •
                        ene mee doe it. This exposition hee refuseth as false, concerning the manner and forme: Affirming that the commaundement extendeth no further, but to the receiuing of his bodie and bloud, as the substance wherevppon the memoriall shoulde be grounded, without any charge giuen of the manner and the forme. And for proofe of this exposition, hee citeth S. Hieronyme, Chrysostome, Euthymius, Thomas Aquinas, and Hugo Cardinalis, all whiche in deede affirme, that wee are commaunded to celebrate the remembrance of his passion, but none of them exclude the manner and forme of celebration from the commaundement. Howe 
                        •
                     oudenly hath M. Heskins forgotten the strong clubbe of his Logike, whereby hee did euen now, beate downe the proclaymers negatiue argumentes, but now againe they are the best he canne occupie him selfe. Hieronyme, Chrysostome, and the rest speake not of the manner and forme of celebration: therefore there is no necessarie forme to bee obserued, as commaunded by Christ. But as the proclamer hath no authoritie for his expsition, so M. Heskins will bring good reasō against it to proue it false. First he will graunt that the primitiue Church for fiue or sixe

h
                           •
                        ndreth yeares after Christ did minister the sacramentes purely and without the breach of Christes commaundement. Hee will grant for the substance, but not yt they continued so long without abuse. The assumption of this proposition is, that the Masses vsed in the primitiue Church, varied from Christes institution. As for example, the Masses of S. Iames, Basil, Chrysostome, Ambrose, differed ech from other, and all from Christes institution in forme and manner. It pleaseth him to call the olde liturgies or formes of ministration vsed in diuerse Churches, masses: the diuersitie hee meaneth is in formes of prayers, and circumstances, concerning which Christe gaue no commandement, and therfore, they are contrarie to his institution.
                  The seconde reason is of the proclamers owne practise, who in celebration of this sacramēt vseth other time, other kinde of breade, other garmentes, other number of communicantes then Christe did. But none of these are the forme or matter of the sacrament, and so they touch not the substance. But eating and drinking is of the substantiall forme of the sacrament, and the end of the consecration of the creatures of breade and wine, to the vse of that holy mysterie, against which, not eating is contradiction, and so reseruation is a plaine contradiction of the commaundemente of Christ.
                  An other reason hee hath of admitting an vnworthie person, as Christ did Iudas, which is for all that a matter of question: and yet nothing to the purpose, if hee were admitted. For Christe knewe him by his diuine nature, before he chose him to bee an Apostle, but in as much as Iudas was an hypocrite, before he was reueled to the iudgement of man, hee was not to be refused. To be short, the substance of the sacrament is not only the heauenly matter thereof, as M. Heskins dreameth, but also the earthly matter and the fourme also. As for circumstances and accidentes, that touch neither the forme nor matter, they are to bee applyed to edification, order, & decencie. Cyprian and the fathers in his time, and long

time after, what reason did they vse to confute them that ministred with water, mylke, clusters of grapes, dipping of bread, and linnen cloathes in the wine, and such like? Did they not beate thē down with ye institution of Christ? For they coulde well inough distinguishe the substance from the accidentes, the matter and forme from the circumstances.
                  After this M. Heskins will open a sleight of the proclamer, who confesseth that women in the time of Tertullian and Cyprian did carie home the sacrament to their houses, and receiued a portion therof in the morning, before meat: but he numbreth this custome among abuses, whereas neither Tertullian nor Cyprian do directly reproue them: neither do they allow them, by any one worde. But I pray you M. Heskins, if it bee no abuse, that women shoulde carie the sacrament home with them, keepe it in their coffers, and eate it euery morning next their heart, why doe not you of the Popishe Church continue such an auncient custome? Why haue you abrogated it? and to dissuade them from it, tell tales in you legends and promptuaries, of some that haue carried it home, and founde it turned I cannot tell into what monsters? But peraduenture the vsage of the Church in Iustines time, will prooue it to bee none abuse. For then the sacrament was caried home to them that were absent. And here M. Heskins alleadging Iustines Apollogie, telleth not in whether Apollogie, and setteth downe a forme of wordes, which are not in Iustine, Apoll. 2. where the matter is spoken of, in such forme as he citeth thē: by which once again you may see, that his great reading of ye doctors was out of other mens notes & collections, & not of his own studie. For it semeth he knew not in which Apologie this matter is spokē of, alleging this saying thus, Cum autē is qui praest gratias egerit, & totus populus approhauerit, 
                           〈◊〉
                         qui vicentur apud nos diaconi, distribuūt vnicui
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , praesenti
                           •
                        a vt participent de pane, in quo gratiae actae sunt, & de vino & aqua, & his, qui non sunt praesentes, deferunt domū. 
                     
                        Whē he that is chefe hath giuen thankes, and all the people hath consented to it, these that with vs be called deacons, doe distribute of the consecrated

bread, and of the wine and water to euerie one that is present to receiue, and to those that be absente they carie it home. But Iustines owne wordes bee these: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     When we haue ended our prayer, there is offered bread and wine and water. And the chiefe minister sendeth forth likewise praiers & thanksgiuing with al his might, and the people giue their consent saying Amen. Then is made distribution and participation of those thinges for which thankes is giuen, vnto euerie one: And to them that are not present there is sent by the deacons. By these worde
                        •
                      it can not be proued necessarily, that the sacrament was sente to them that were absent, but rather part of the breade and wine which was offered in greate plentie, the distribution whereof belonged to the Deacons: and immediatly after mentiō is made of the contribution of the richer sorte. But admitte that they did send the sacrament to such as were sicke, or otherwise to necessarily letted, that they could not be present in bodie, & yet were present in minde, and ioyned in prayer with them, what maketh this for the popishe reseruation to bee worshipped? Euery one that was present there receiued, onely the Priestes receiueth amongest the Papistes, and hangeth vp the rest ouer the Altar. But it is a fine reason of M. Heskins, they carried it, therefore they reserued it: if they reserued it an houre, why might they not reserue it as long as they lift? But they caried it yt it might be receiued presently, they hanged it not vp to bee gazed vppon.
                  
                     S. Basill also witnesseth, that holy men liuing in the wildernesse did reserue the sacrament in their alter. Omnes in Eremis 
                           〈◊〉
                         vitam agentes, vbi non est Sacerdos, communionem domi seruantes, a se ipsis communicant. All that leade solitarie liues in the wildernesse where there is no Priest, keeping the com
                           •
                        union at home, de receiue it of them selues.
                  
                  
                     M. Heskins falsifieth the wordes in translation & sayth: they receiued by them selues, as though they receiued it alone. This fragment of Basils Epistle, argueth an abuse of the reseruation, but it proueth no hanging vp of the sacrament for adoration. That this was an abuse crept in of superstition, it is manifest, for that it was afterwarde by a Godly councell condemned and forbiddē. 
                        Concil. Caesaraugustanum, Capit. 3. Eucharistiae gratiam si quis probatur acceptam non consumpsisse in ecclesia, anathema sit in perpetuum. Ab vniversis Episcopis dictum est, Anathema sit. If any person be proued after he hath taken the grace or gift of the Eucharistie not to haue spent it in the Church, let him be accursed for euer. All the bishops saide, let him be accursed. Moreouer, to prooue a thing to be lawfull, by such an vsage, as they them selues confesse to bee vnlawfull, what abusing of the simple is it? S. Hierome also in his apollogie against Iouinian, testifyeth that the people of Rome in his time vsed to keepe the sacrament in their houses, and receiue it by themselues. In this place I cannot tel whether I should suspect that which hath often been prooued before, that M. Heskins cyteth his authorities out of notebookes and collections, rather then out of his owne readings, and so knowe not what was Hieroms iudgement of this custome of receiuing at home, or else that of fraude to abuse the reader hee hath concealed it. But ye matter of trueth is this. There was a custome at Rome, to receiue euery day, which custome Hierome sayth he doth neither allowe, nor reprehende. But hee appealeth to the consciences of those men that had communicated at home, the same day after they had companyed with their wiues, wherefore they durst not go to the Church. 
                        Quare non ingrediuntur ecclesias? an alius in publico, alius in domo Christus est? quod in ecclesia non licet, nec domi licet. Why come they not into the Churches? Is there one Christ in the publike places, another in their priuate house? that which is not lawfull in the Church, is not lawfull in the house. But howe can M. Heskins proue, that the people vsed to keepe the sacrament in their houses, wherof there

is no worde in Saint Hierome? but rather it is to bee thought, that the Priests did come to them, and minister it in their priuate houses, which Hierome also disalloweth. And howe can he prooue, that they did receiue it by them selues? when Saint Hierome sayeth, communicant, they do communicate. The last discourse prouing by authoritie of Saint Augustine, that vniuersall obseruations of the Church, where the Scripture commaundeth not the contrarie, are to bee holden for lawes, is meerely vaine, seeing he can neuer prooue his reseruation to be catholike or vniuersally allowed and practised of the Church, and we haue proued it, to be contrary to the Scripture.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The eight and twentieth Chapter beginneth to speake of the Prophesies, and first of the prophesie of the priesthood of Christe after the order of Melchizedech.
                  The one halfe of this Chapter is consumed in citing of textes,
                        Fulk.
                      to proue that Christe is a Priest after the order of Melchizedech: and at length, hee deuideth the Priestes office into two partes, teaching, and sacrificing. Then he affirmeth, that Christ was not a Priest after the order of Aaron, but after the order of Melchizedech. Yet in the ende of the Chapter like a blasphemous dogge, hee sayeth, that Christ executed his priesthood after the order of Aaron vppon the Crosse. Where beside his blasphemie, note how hee agreeth with him selfe. But Christ he sayeth, it called a Priest after the order of Melchizedech for the manner of his sacrifice, which maketh the difference betweene the order of Aaron, and the order of Melchizedech. For Aaron offered in bloud, the other in bread and wine. The Apostle to the Hebrues, obseruing many differences, could not finde this. But M. Heskins aunswereth that the cause why the Apostle did leaue out this manner of sacrifice, was, for that his principall purpose was, to shewe the excellencie of Christ and his priesthood, aboue Aaron, and his priesthood, which could not bee by shewing that he sacrificed breade and wine, for the Iewes sacrifices

were more glorious then bread and wine. By this wise reason, he giueth vs to deeme, that the Apostle of subtiltie suppressed this comparison, because they were weake, as though they knewe not what the sacramentes of the Church were. But if Christe sacrificed his bodie and bloud twise, he could not better haue shewed his excellencie aboue Aaron, then in declaring, that Christe did not onely offer him self in bloud on the Crosse, but also in bread & wine, after the example of Melchizedech. For if offering of sacrifice were one of the chiefe partes of a Priestes office, and breade and wine had beene the sacrifice of Melchizedech, the Apostle neither would, nor coulde haue dissembled the comparison of his sacrifice with the sacrifice of Christe, which would infinitely haue aduaunced his priesthood aboue Aaron. For else the Hebrues, whom M. Heskins imagineth would haue obiected their sacrifices to be more glorious then bread and wine, might more probably haue replyed, that the Apostles compared Melchizedech with Christe in small matters, and omitted the chiefest parte of his office, which was this sacrifice: so that if he were inferiour in the chiefe, it was little to excell in the small matters.
                  But M. Heskins taketh vppon him to aunswere our obiection that we make against this sacrifice of breade and wine, which is this: as the Apostle to the Hebrues speaketh nothing of it, no more doeth Moses in Genesis. For it is sayed there, that Melchizedech brought foorth breade and wine, but neuer a worde, that he did sacrifice breade and wine. This obiection he wil aunswer, both by scripture and by the eldest learned men of Christes parleament. Concerning the parleament men, as it is true, that many of them did thinke Melchizedech to be a figure of Christ in bringing foorth bread and wine: so when we come to consider their voyces, it shall appeare, that they make little for transubstantiation, or the carnall presence.
                  But now let vs heare the scripture. The scripture to proue

that Melchisedech did sacrifice this bread and wine saith: that he was a Priest of the most high God, to whome is belongeth, not to bring foorth, but to offer bread and wine, so that the verie connexion of the Scripture and dependants of the same, enforceth vs to take this sense, and none other can be admitted. This is a verie peremptorie sentence, plumped downe of you M. Heskins, not as from your doctours chaire, but euen as from Apolloes three footed stoole. But if it may please you to heare: is it not also scripture, that he was King of Salem? and wil not the verie connexion and dependance of the Scripture leade vs to thinke, that as an example of his royall liberalitie, he brought foorth bread & wine, to refresh the hungrie and wearie souldiers of Abraham, which being such a multitude, could not easily be prouided for by a priuate man?
                  And where Moses sayeth, he was a priest of the highest God, hee addeth also an example of his priestly holynesse, that he blessed Abraham, & praysed God, and that Abraham gaue him tythes of al. And lest you should exclame, as your manner is, that this is a newe exposition, Iosephus in the firste booke & tenth Chapter of his Iewishe antiquities, doth so expounde it: Hic Melchisedechus milites Abrahami hospitaliter habuit, nihil eis ad victum deesse passus &c. This Melchisedech gaue verie liberall intertainment to the souldiours of Abraham, & suffered them to want nothing vnto their liuing. But if M. Heskins wil obiect that Iosephus was a Iewe, then let him heare the author of Scholastica historia a Christian and a Catholike, as M. Heskins will confesse, allowing of the same exposition Chap. 46. in these wordes. 
                        At verò Melchizedech rex Salem obtulit ei panem & vinum: quod, (quasi exponen
                              •
                            Iosephus) ait: ministrauit exercitui Xenia, & multam abundantiam rerum opportunarum simul exhibuit, et super epulas benedixit deum qui Abrahae subdiderat inimicos. Erat enim sacerdos Dei altissimi. But Melchizedech King of Salem offered vnto him bread and wine, which Iosephus, (as it were expounding of it) sayeth: he ministred to his armie the dueties of hospitalitie, and gaue him great plentie of

things necessary, & beside the feast, or at the feast, he blessed God which had subdued vnto Abraham his enimies. For he was a priest of the high
                           •
                         so God. Thus farre he 
                           〈◊〉
                         M. Heskins for his connexion perchaunce will vrge the Coniunction enim, erat enim saterdos, &c. in the vulgar Latine text, to make it to be referred to the former clause, but neither the Hebrue, nor the Greeke text hath that Coniunction. To be short, if the bringing foorth of bread and wine, perteined to his priestly office, there is nothing in the text to expresse his Kingly office: but Moses, as he calleth him, both a King, and a priest, so doth he distinctly shewe, what he did as a King, and what he did as a Priest. Yet Maister Heskins goeth on, and will proue, That if Christ were a Priest after the order of Melchizedech he offred a sacrifice after that order: but he neuer made any mo oblations then two, the one on the crosse, after the order of Aaron: the other in his last Supper after the order of Melchisedech except we will say that Christe altogether neglected the priesthoode appointed to him of God. Marke here (Christian Reader) how many horrible blasphemies, this impudent dogge barketh out against our Sauiour Christ, directly contrarie to his expresse worde. First he affirmeth, that Christ made two offerings of himselfe, whereas the holy Ghost saith. Heb. 9. not that he should oftentimes offer himselfe, as the high priest, &c. For then he should haue suffered oftentimes since the beginning of the world. And Heb. 10. He offered but one sacrifice for sinnes, and is set downe at the right hand of God for euer, &c. For by one only oblation, he hath made perfect for euer them that are sanctified. And in the same Chapter: where there is forgiuenesse of sinnes, there is no more sacrifice for sinne. Whervpon it followeth that if Christes sacrifice at his supper, tooke away sinnes, he offered no sacrifice vpon the crosse.
                  
                  
                     Secondly, he affirmeth that Christe was a priest after ye order of Aaron, which he denied before, and is in plaine wordes denied by the holy Ghost Heb. 7. which place M. Heskins himselfe setteth downe in this Chapter: if perfection had beene by the Priesthoode of the Leuites (for

vnder it the law was established to ye people) what needed it further, that another priest should arise after ye order of Melchisedech, &c not to be called after ye order of Aaron.
                  
                  Thirdly, he affirmeth, that the sacrifice of Christ vpon the crosse, was after the order of Aaron. Wherevpon it wil follow, that it was not an eternall redemption purchased by it, but transitorie, as the priesthoode of Aaron was. Whereas the holy Ghost saith, that by his owne bloud he entred once into the holy place, and found eternall redemption, which could neuer be obteined by any sacrifice after the order of Aaron.
                  Fourthly, he affirmeth, that Christ altogether neglected the priesthoode appointed to him of God, except he did offer sacrifice in his supper of bread and wine.
                  By which, he denieth, that the once offring vp of himselfe, by his eternall spirite on the crosse, was any parte of his priesthoode appointed him by God, then the which there can be no more diuelish blasphemie. And yet the beast is not ashamed to challenge and write, If not then 
                           •
                         let the aduersary shewe, when and where Christ did sacrifice after the order of Mechizedech. 
                     Euen then, and there, thou enimie of the crosse of Christ, when and where he was made obedient to the death of the crosse, and hauing learned obedience by the thinges he suffered, he was consecrated, and made the authour of eternall saluation vnto all them that obey him, and is called of God an high priest, after the order of Melchizedech. Heb. 5. Hauing an euerlasting priesthod, by which he is able perfectly to saue them, that come vnto God by him, seeing he euer liueth to make intercession for them. For such an high priest it became vs to haue, which is holy, harmelesse, vndefiled, separated frō sinners, and made higher then the heauens, which needed not daily, as these high Priestes, to offer vp sacrifice, first for his owne sinnes, and then for the peoples: for that he did once when he offred vp himself. Heb. 7. But beside his detestable blasphemies, see his ridiculous vanitie. If the priesthoode of Melchizedech standeth in his offering of bread and wine, then Christ also offered bread and wine,

as he saide before, Christ offered in bread and wine: as Aaron did in bloud. If bread & wine be Christes offring, or any part of it, then there is bread and wine in the sacrament, & what is becomme of transubstantiation? If there was no bread & wine in ye sacrifice of Christe, then where is Melchisedeches priesthoode, by his owne diuinitie? Againe, if he say, there be the shewes, or accidents of bread & wine, then Melchizedeches bread and wine, was a figure of the accidents of bread and Wine, & then the figure was better, then ye thing figured, contrarie to his worshipfull rule, giuen in the 15. Chapter. If he say, yt Melchizedeches bread & wine, figured not the Accidents, but the bread & wine before it be consecrated, then he breaketh his rule once againe: for Melchizedeches bread, if it were not hallowed, was as good: if it were hallowed, as it was, if it were offred, it was better then ye vncōsecrated bread & wine. Finally, if he say, it figured, neither ye vncōsecrated bread & wine, nor the accidents of the same consecrated, but the body and bloud of Christ vnder these accidēts: beside that he makes it a figure of a figure or signe, which he said could not be, he denieth that Christ did that, wherein he affirmed the priesthoode of Melchizedech to stand: namely, that he offred bread and wine. And so thou seest M. Heskins hanged in his owne halter.
               
               
                  The nine and twentieth Chapter proceedeth to prooue the same by S. Cyprian, and Isychius.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  
                     I confessed before, that diuers of the olde fathers, were of opinion, that the bread and wine,
                        Fulk.
                      which Melchisedech brought forth, was sacrificed by him, and that it was a figure of the sacramēt, which they vnproperly called a sacrifice, meaning nothing else, but that it was a holy signe, and a thankesgiuing, offered to God for the passion of Christe: as it is manifest by diuers places in their writings. But they were farre from those blasphemies, which M. Heskins hath vttered in ye Chapter before, as to make Christes passion a sacrifice after the order of Aaron, to make Christ offer two sacrifices, and the better sacrifice, yt was after the order of Melchizedech, in the sacrament, &c.
                  
                     But now let vs consider the places of Cyprian, whether such poyson may be drawen out of them, as M. Heskins hath sucked out of his own poysoned brayne. The words of the first place are these: The sacraments signified of old, since the time that Melchisedech came forth,
                     
                        Serm. de coena Dom.
                      
                     & to the sonnes of Abraham that do his workes, the high priest bringeth foorth bread and wine. This (sayth he) is my body. They had eaten and dronken of the same bread, according to the visible fourme, but before those wordes, that common meate, was profitable only to nourish the body. But after it was saide by the Lorde, do this in remembrance, This is my flesh, & this is my bloud. As oftē as it is done with these wordes, and with this faith, that substantiall bread, and cuppe consecrated with a solemne blessing, profiteth vnto the life and health of the whole man, being both a medicine, (Et Holocaustum) and a burnt offering, to heale infirmities, and purge iniquities. There is also declared the difference betweene spirituall meate, and corporall meate: namely, that it was one thing that was first set before them, & another thing, which was giuē & distributed by their Maister. First it is graunted, yt Cyprian thought the bread & wine brought foorth by Melchizedech, to be a figure of the sacrament, and that herein also he resembled the priesthoode of Christ, which we are neither afraide, nor abashed to denie, because the Apostle (an older doctor then Cyprian, & such an one as in his writings could not erre) could finde no such resemblance betweene Melchizedech and Christ. Concerning the sacrifice of bread and wine, I wil speake hereafter, in answere to the other places of Cyprian. But now let vs examine M. Heskins two notes, for the reall presence, as he calleth it. The first is, that this cōmon meate being consecrated is profitable for the whole man, as a medicine to heale infirmities, and a sacrifice to purge sinnes, but neither our faith in Christ crucified, nor the merites of his passion are the sacrifice, but his very body: therefore this meate is his very body.
                  
                  The Maior of this argument is ambiguous: and therefore it must be distinguished: for this worde sacrifice, is either taken properly, or vnproperly, and figuratiuely: if it be taken figuratiuely for a sacrament, or a memoriall of a sacrifice, as Cyprian meaneth, the proposition

is true, but if it be taken for a sacrifice in the proper sense, it is false. For Christe offered but one sacrifice, and that but once, neuer to be repeated, which was on the crosse. Nowe, to proue that Cyprian vsed the word sacrifice, vnproperly for this time, I will shewe no more, but his owne word Holocaustum, which signifieth a whole burned sacrifice, for M. Heskins will graunt, that the sacrifice of Christ is vnproperly called a burned offering.
                  The second note that he gathereth, is of the Propertie of this word, Aliud: in the Neuter gender it signifieth an other substance forsooth: as we may say, Alius pater, alius filius, but not aliud pater, aliud filius. And then the rule is extended to vnum, for Christ saith, ego & pater vnum sumus, & hij tres vnum sunt. This he would beare men in hand, to be the determination of learned men, and so the bread before consecration was aliud, that is one substance, but after consecration it is aliud, that is an other substance, and so the body of Christe. This is an high point in a lowe house, but the young pettites in the Grammer schoole, can teach him that aliud in the Neuter gender put absolutely, must bee resolued into alia res, an other thing, and so doth Maister Heskins him selfe translate it. And Cyprian sheweth what other thing it is, after consecration, when he saith: here is declared the difference betweene the spirituall meate and the corporall meate, namely that it was one thing when it was first set before them, that is corporall meate, and an other thing which was giuen by their maister, namely spirituall meate. The same substance remaining, it is spirituall meate that before was corporall meate: as in baptisme the same substaunce of water remayning, it is a spirituall lauer, that before was a corporall lauer. This is the greate diuinitie of aliud and aliud. But I maruell that Maister Heskins, which seeth such high mysteries, in aliud, can not see that Cyprian saith, they did eate of the same breade before, after the visible forme, which they did afterward eate, being conuerted into spirituall meate, so that it was the same breade before and after, although it had nowe a

newe vertue giuen it by the wordes of Christ, to nourish the whole man, which before nourished only the body.
                  The next place which he alledgeth out of Saint Cyprian is Lib. 2. Ep. 3. ad Caecitium. Where he leaueth out the beginning of the matter, bicause it expoundeth all the rest of the place against him: but I will be so bold as to add it for the better vnderstanding of S. Cyprian, and the discharging him of M. Heskins blasphemies. 
                        Item in sacerdote Melchisedech sacrificij dominici sacramentum praefiguratum videmus, secundùm quod scriptura diuina testatur & dicit: & Melchisedech &c. Also in the Priest Melchisedech we see that the sacrament of our Lordes sacrifice was prefigured, according to that the scripture testifieth, and saith. 
                     And Melchisedech king of Salem brought foorth bread and wine, and he was a Priest of the highest God, and blessed Abraham. And that Melchisedech did beare the figure of Christ, the holy Ghost declareth in the Psalmes, saying in the person of the father vnto the sonne: Before the day starre I haue begotten thee. The Lorde hath sworne, and it shall not repent him, thou art a Priest for euer after the order of Melchisedech; which order verily is this comming of that sacrifice, and from thence descending, that Melchisedech was a priest of the most high God, that he offered bread and wine, that he blessed Abraham. For who is more the priest of the highest God then our Lord Iesus Christ, which offered vp a sacrifice to God his father
                     ▪ 
                     
                        And offered the selfe some thing that Melchisedech offered, that is, bread and wine, euen his body and bloud. And concerning Abraham, that blessing going before, perteined to our people. For if Abraham beleued God, and it was imputed to him for rightuousnesse: so likewise who so euer beleueth God liueth also by faith, is found righteous, and long agoe shewed to be blessed and iustified in faithfull Abraham, a
                           •
                         S. Paule the Apostle proueth, saying: Abraham beleeued God, and it was imputed to him for righteousnesse. Ye knowe therefore, that they which are of faith, euen they are the sonnes of Abraham. Wherefore the scripture foreseeing that God iustifieth the Gentiles by faith, foreshewed to Abraham, that all nations should be blessed in him. Therefore they that are of faith, shall be blessed

with faithfull Abraham. Wherevpon in the Gospell we find that many are raised vp of stones, that is, yt the sonnes of Abraham are gathered of the Gentiles. And when the Lord praised Zacheus, he answered and saide, This day is saluation happened to this house, bicause this man is also made the sonne of Abraham. Therefore that in Genesis the blessing about Abraham might duely be celebrated by Melchisedech the priest, the image of the sacrifice goeth before, ordeined in bread and wine.
                      
                     Which thing our Lord perfecting and fulfilling, offered bread and the cup mixed with wine, and he that was the fulnesse, fulfilled the truth of the image that was prefigured. Thus much Cyprian. In cyting this place, note what falshood M. Heskins vseth: first of all he leaueth out the beginning, where Cyprian calleth the supper, the sacrament of the Lordes sacrifice, by which it is plaine what he meaneth, when he calleth it afterward, an oblation or sacrifice. Secondly he falsifieth his wordes, where Cyprian saith, Fuit autem sacerdos, that is, and he was a Priest, Maister Heskins chaungeth it into Fuit enim sacerdos, for hee was a Priest. Thirdly, where Cyprian compareth Christ to Melchisedech in three thinges distinctly, in that he was the Priest of the highest GOD, in that he offered breade and wine, and in that hee blessed Abraham, shewing, that Christe was the Prieste of the highest GOD, when hee offered his sacrifice to his father, meaning in his passion▪ that hee offered breade and wine as he did, meaning in his supper: and last of all, that he blessed his people as Melchisedech did Abraham. Maister Heskins confoundeth the first with the second, by putting out the interrogatiue point, that is after obtulit, and ioyning the next sentence to it, and the last he omitteth, by cutting off the dicourse that Cyprian maketh thereof. As though Cyprian had spoken of no resemblance of Melchisedech vnto Christe, but in offering bread and wine, as he before saide most blasphemously, that the execution of that Priesthoode lay onely therein.
                  But now let vs looke to his collectiōs out of this place. First that Melchisedech was a figure of Christ. That shall easily▪
                     
he graunted. Secondly, that Melchis
                           •
                        dech was a figure of Chris
                           •
                         in three pointe
                           •
                        , and the
                           •
                         the Authour doth applie them all to Christ, namely a Priest of the highest GOD, in offering sacrifice to his father, and that he offered the very same that Melchisedech did, which was bread and wine. But these two Master Heskins▪ you would make all one, when you expound the sacrifice that he offered to his father, to bee the bread and wine that he offered in the supper, and so there shall not be three pointes. Besides that you are enforced to confesse that Christ offered bread and wine to his father, the very same that Melchisedech did offer, which I am sure was no accidents, and so you doe flatly ouerthrowe your owne dearling, transubstantiation. Your next cauil is of obi
                           ••
                        
                        lie & protulie whereas both the text and Cyprian haue protili
                           •
                        
                      he brough
                        •
                      foorth, although he seemeth to thinke, that he brought it out eo offer. And therefore to the impudencie that you charge your aduersaries withall, will sit still in your owne brasen forehead. For although he thinketh that Melchisedech offered the bread and wine, which he brought foorth, yet he cyteth the scripture truly: And Melchisedech brought foorth bread and wine, and he was a priest of the highest GOD: which you haue most impudently falsified, as I shewed before, saying, for he was a Priest.
                  
                  Your third glose you bring to proue, that the sacrifice which Christ offered, was but on the crosse, but at the supper is, that the image of the sacrifice went before, which the Lord perfected and fulfilled, offering bread and the cup mixed with wine. An
                        •
                      though that sacrifice may not be referred to his sacrifice on the crosse, bicause ye image thereof was ordeined in bread and wine, and yet he fulfilled the trueth of the prefigured image; when hee offered bread and wine in the supper, as a sacrament of that sacrifice which he offered on the crosse, as Cyprian in the first sentēce of this place, doth cal it. And for most cleare demonstratiō, that Cyprian by sacrifice meaneth a sacrament, signe, and memorial of the passion of Christ, & not a sacrifice properly, consider his owne wordes in the same

Epistle. Et quia passionis eius mentionē in sacrifioijs omnibus facinous, (pastio est enim domini sacrificium quod offerimus) nihil aliud, quàm quod ille fecit, facere debemus. And because wee make mention of his passion in all our sacrifices (for the sacrifice which wee offer is the Lordes passion) wee ought to doe nothing, but that he did him selfe. This one place will aunswere all that can bee brought out of Cyprian, or any olde doctour for the sacrifice of the Lords supper. The sacrifice which wee offer, is the Lordes passion (sayth Cyprian) what, was Christe crucified in their sacrifices? or were their sacrifices nothing els but a sacramēt of thankes giuing for the passion of Christe? You see by this place howe vnproperly they spake, but yet so as of reasonable men they might well inough bee vnderstoode, and they them selues do often expounde them selues. Wherfore thou seest (reader) what iniurie the papistes doe vnto ye doctors, when they faine such monsters to be begotten by them, while they interprete literally, which the doctors did write figuratiuely.
                  But to ye testimonie of Isychius, which is a curious allegorie of sacrifices, wherin no merueyle,
                        In Leui. lib. 6. Cap. 23. if he vse the name of sacrifice figuratiuely or vnproperly, his wordes are these. And what is this sacrifice? Two tenth deales of fine flower sprinkeled with oyle. For w
                           •
                        e must knowe to contemper the perfect manhoode and the perfecte Godhood, that it, to come together into one in oyle, that is, by that comparison which hee hath towarde vs. For so the sacrifice is founde a sweete sauour to our lord, when wee vnderstande of him thinges that bee worthie. In what thinges the sacrifice whiche is the oblation of the intelligible lambe, is, and by whome it is done, howe it is celebrated, that whiche followeth declareth. For neither by vnreasonable beastes doth God receiue sacrifice of vs, as the wordes that followe-doe plainely shewe 
                           •
                        or, hee saith, and the drinke offering of it, shall bee of wine, the fourth part of an Hi
                           •
                        , bread & Polentant (M. Heskins calleth it) parched corne. Because peraduenture it might haue been doubtfull by whome the mysterie of the sacrifice, (whiche is by Christs, that wee spake of before) is celebrated: behold thou hast the oblation of intelligible. Melchisedech which is perfourmed in

breade and wine, in which the fourth parte of an Him is offered in drinke offeringes of wine, that by the fourth part hee might signifie the tradition or deliuerie of the Gospell which is in foure bookes▪ by the drinke offering, the Lordes worde, when hee saith, This is my bloude which shall bee shedde for you: for it seemed good to the lawe giuer without diminishing to signifie the mysterie of Christe.
                  
                  And then againe hee saith: The oblation of these present giftes which we haue shewed to bee the mysterie of the onely begotten sonne, hath reconciled vs to God, and giuen vs the meate of the newe parched corne. Nowe to M. Heskins collections, Wee must learne here, that Melchisedech did not only bring forth, but also offer bread and wine. In deed wee learne that Isychius thought so: And that Christ the intelligible Melchisedech did sacrifice in breade and wine. Yea, but this sacrifice was a mysterie of that sacrifice, whiche hath reconciled vs to God, for so saith Isychius also, and that no man offered this sacrifice but hee himselfe, for that hee saith also. Reade ouer the place if you doubte of my collection. By which it is plaine, it was not the sacrifice of the masse that euerie hedge priest may offer. But that wee shoulde not say that it was bare breade that hee sacrificed, he sheweth what breade it was, saying, by the drinke offering hee woulde signifie that of which hee saide, this is my bloude. See this impudent falsarie: the writer saith, hee woulde signifie Dominician sermonem, the Lordes worde, and hee saith, that of which he saide &c. Where is then the breade that the mysterie might bee fullie signified? Is it not that which he calleth the tradition of the Gospell which is in foure bookes? I dispute not howe well he applyeth these thinges, but it is more then manifest, that he speaketh so figuratiuely, that no argument can be fastened of his wordes, for the carnal presence. And whereas M. Heskins shrinketh in his hornes about the oblation of bread and wine, saying it was not bare breade, but he sheweth what bread it was. Let him aunswere me plainly, if he dare for his eares. Was it verie bread and wine, which Christ did sacrifice or no? If he say, it was verie bread and wine, then he denyeth transubstantiatiō. If he say it was not verie bread & wine which Christ

did sacrifice, then he denyeth ye resemblance vnto Melchisedechs sacrifice, and hath Cyprian against him, who as we heard before, saith, Obtulit hoc idem, quod Melchisedech obtulerat, id est, panem & vinum, suum scilicet corpus & sanguinē. He offered yt selfe same thing yt Melchisedech had offered, that is to say, bread & wine, euen his body & bloud. Note here that Melchisedech and Christ offering both the verie selfe same thing, they both offered bread and wine: and likewise they both offered the body and bloud of Christ. Whereby not onely transubstantiation, but also the carnal presence is vtterly ouerthrowne. And to presse him harder by his owne weightes, euen to death, If aliud signifie an other substance, as he taught vs before, then hoc idem, signifieth the same substance, and much rather. Therefore wh
                        •
                     n Cyprian saith that Christ offered hoc idem quod Melchisedech, it followeth that Melchisedech offered the same substance which he expoundeth bread and wine, his body and bloude. And this two forked reason, will hold down all the papistes noses to the grindstone, that they shall not be able to auoide it for their liues.
               
               
                  The thirtieth Chapter treateth of the same matter by S. Hieronyme and Theodoret.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The place of Hieronyme which M. Heskins doth so triumph vpon, is vpon the 110. Psalme,
                        Fulke.
                      but those cōmentaries, both by Erasmus and by Bruno Amerbachius, are vtterly denyed to be Hieronymes doing. But seeing they be falsly intituled to him, we are cōtent to take this place, as thogh it were Hieronymes writing in deed. The words vpon the fourth verse are these. It is superfluous for vs to goe about to make an exposition of this verse, seeing the holy Apostle to the Hebrues hath most fully treated thereof. For hee saith, this is Mechisedech without father, without mother, without generation. And of all ecclesiastical men it is said, that he is without father as concerning the flesh, and without mother as concerning his godhead. This only therefore let vs interpret: thou art a priest for euer after the order of Melchisedech, let vs only see wherfore he said, after the order. After the order: that is, thou shalt not be a priest according

to the sacrifices of the Iewes: but thou shalt be a prieste after the order of Melchisedech: For as Melchisedech kinge of Salem offered breade and wine: so shalt thou offer thy bodie and thy bloud, true bread and true wine. This Melchisedech hath giuen vs these mysteries which we haue. He it is that hath saide, he that shall eate my fleshe and drinke my bloude. Hee hath deliuered to vs his sacrament according to the order of Melchisedech. What can be saide more plainely in exposition of this writer, then that hee him selfe saith? that hee hath giuen vs these mysteries, that he hath deliuered to vs his sacrament after the order of Melchisedech, by which he expresseth, what his meaning was by offering his bodie and bloud, verie bread and verie wine, or true bread and true wine, not in the proper sence of a sacrifice, but in a mysterie, in a sacramēt. But nowe let vs see howe M. Heskins insulteth vppon vs, for this counterfete Hieronyme. First that he taketh vpon him to expound, that which was left vnexpounded by the Apostle to the Hebrues, namely that Christ was a prieste, which is altogether false, for the Apostle doth not onely speake of his eternall priesthood, but also of his one oblation, by which hee purchased eternall redemption. And although this writer doth refer his order to the similitude of his sacrifice in bread and wine, yet both the prophet in the psalme, and the Apostle to the Hebrues doe sufficiently declare, that the excellencie of Melchisedechs order doth consiste in this, that he was both a Kinge and a Priest, and so a liuely figure of the reall priesthoode of our sauiour Christ.
                  But whereas M. Heskins will controle not only vs, but euen his owne vulgare interpretation of the bible, which saith not, obtuli
                           •
                        
                      hee offred, but protulit hee brought forth, by authoritie of this Hieronyme, who (hee saith) both knewe the olde testament and vnderstoode the Hebrue tongue, he bewrayeth his owne weaknesse, and sheweth, how good a reader he hath been of Hieroms works, when he knoweth not what the true Hieronyme himselfe writeth of this matter in his Epistle to Enagrius, in which, setting downe the verie Hebrue text: 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         doth thus expound it: Et Melchizedech rex Salem protulit panem & vinum. Erat autem sacerdos Dei exelsi. And Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine, and he was a priest of the high God. The same word protulit hath Ambrose, de mysterijs initiandis, and Augustine vppon the title of the 33. Psalme, and Cyprian as we heard in the last Chapter lib. 2. Epi 3. ad Caecilium.
                      
                     Besides this Hierome in the same Epistle sheweth, that the best learned of the Hebrues iudgement, was, that Melchizedech victori Abraham obuiam processerit, & in refectionem tam ipsius, quàm pugnatorum ipsius, panes vinum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            protulerit. Melchizedech came forth to meete Abraham the conquerour, and for refection as well of him, as of his warriours, brought forth breade and wine. And concerning the order of Melchizedech, he saith, that the Greeke writers interpret it many wayes. 
                     As for example, that he alone was both a King and a Priest: and that he was a Priest before circumcision: that he was not annoynted with the oyle of the Priestes, but with the oyle of gladnesse: that hee offered not sacrifices of flesh and bloud, and tooke not the bloud of beastes and their bowels, and what soeuer is in them more then meate: Sed pane & vino simplici puro
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            sacrificio, Christi dedicauerit sacramentum, but with breade & wine being a simple and pure sacrifice, he dedicated the sacrament of Christ. This the true Hierome writt, and yet in the ende, will determine nothing of his owne iudgement.
                  
                  But M. Heskins repeting againe a parcell of Cyprians saying, vttered in the Chapter before: Who is more properly the Priest of the high God, then our Lord Iesus Christe, which offered a sacrifice to God his father? and offered the selfe same thing that Melchizedech had offered, that is, bread and wine, euen his bodie and bloud, compareth it with this saying of Hierome: As Melchizedech offered bread and wine so shalt thou offer thy bodie and thy bloud, the true breade and the true wine.
                  
                  And not content with this, hee noteth in the margent a plaine place for M. Iuel. Howe plaine it is to confute

M. Heskins, I haue shewed abundantly in the last part
                        •
                      of the Chapter next before this, whether I remit the reader, and passe to Theodoret, who in his second dialogue writeth thus. Godly Moses writing the olde genealogie hath taught vs, that Adam, when hee was thus many yeres old begat Se
                           •
                        h, and when he had liued so many yeres, he made an ende of his life. Euen so also he sayth of Seth and Enos with other. As for the beginning of the generation of Melchizedech, and the ende of his life he ouerpasseth it in silence. Wherefore, if the historie bee looked on, he hath neither beginning of dayes, nor end of life. So in deede the sonne of God neither hath beginning of his being, neither shall haue ending. Therefore in these most great and verie diuine things was Melchizedech a figure of Christ our Lord. And in his priesthood, which agreeth rather to man then to God, our Lord Christ was an high Priest after the order of Melchizedech. For Melchizedech was an high Priest of the Gentiles. And our Lord Christ offered a holy and healthfull sacrifice for all men. If I sayde neuer a word (as I neede not to say many) yet the indifferent reader would see, that here is no comparison of Melchizedechs bread and wine with the sacrament of the Lordes supper. Yea, he would easily see, that he speaketh of the sacrifice of his death which our sauiour offered for all men, both Iewes and Gentiles. And much more plainly by that place which M. Heskins addeth out of the first dialogue. If therefore it appertaineth to Priestes to offer giftes, and Christ concerning his humanitie is called a Priest, he offered none other sacrifice but his owne bodie. This speaketh Theodoret expressely of the true sacrifice of his death, and not of the fained sacrifice of his supper, nor yet of any sacrament or figure of his onely true sacrifice, which the olde writers (as I shewed before) do often call a sacrifice, oblation, burnt offring, &c: But that M. Heskins cannot gaine by the doctours wordes, he will winne by reason. First, if wee denye that Melchizedech was a figure of Christe his Priesthood, saying, he was a figure onely of his eternitie, then wee ioyne with Eutyches, who graunted the diuinitie of Christe, and denyed his humanitie, vnto which his priesthood properly perteyned.

But who tolde M. Heskins, that wee denye Melchizedech to be a figure of Christs Priesthood? when wee most constantly affirme, that he was a figure of his eternall Priesthood, vnlesse Maister Heskins thinke the humanitie of Christe, hauing once conquered death, is not nowe euerlasting. It is not our exposition, that mainteineth the heresie of Eutyches, that the nature of Christes bodie is absorpt into the diuinitie, but it is your heresie of vbiquitie and carnall presence (Maister Heskins) that mayntaineth it most manifestly in verie deede, though in wordes you will say the contrarie.
                  But Maister Heskins followeth his reason, and vrgeth vs, that it is the office of a Priest to offer sacrifice, wherefore, if Christe resemble Melchizedech in Priesthood, he must resemble him in sacrifice, and that is the sacrifice of breade and wine, for other sacrifice wee reade none that Melchizedech offered. I aunswere, as wee reade of none other, so wee read not in the Scripture one worde of that sacrifice of breade and wine, as hath beene often declared at large. And seeing the scripture expresseth not what sacrifice Melchizedech offered, wee are content to be ignorant of it, satisfying our selues with so much as the scripture affirmeth, that Christ offering him selfe once for all on the Crosse, was in the same called a Priest for euer after the order of Melchizedech, as wee haue shewed at large before out of Hebr. 5. & 7.9.10.
                  But it is a sport to see, how M Heskins skippeth to & fro, as it were one whipped at a stake, when hee woulde reconcile his transubstantiation, with this counterfet sacrifice of breade and wine. Christe sacrificed in breade and wine. In breade and wine I say, a kinde of foode more excellent then the breade and wine that did figure it, I meane with Theodoret and Hierome the true bread and wine, that is the bodie and bloud of Christ, that is to say, no bread nor wine. But if you giue him a lash on the other side, and saye: if Christ sacrificed not naturall bread & wine, then he answered not your figure, he wil leap to the other side, & say with Cyprian, &

Isychius, that Christe offered the selfe same thing that Melchizedech did, and in one place he sayeth, he occupyed bread and wine in his sacrifice: so did he a table and a cuppe, and other things, but was any thing his sacrifice that he occupyed therein, sauing onely that which he offered? he will say no. Did he offer bread and wine? hee dare not aunswer directly, and so the poore man to vpholde two lyes, the one contrarie to the other, is miserably tormented.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The one and thirtieth Chapter concludeth this matter of Melchizedech by S. Augustine and Damascene.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     S. Augustine is alledged vppon the 33 Psalme, whose wordes are these: The sacrifices of the Iewes were before time, after the order of Aaron, in offrings of beastes, and that in a mysterie. The sacrifice of the bodie and bloud of our Lord, which the faithfull, and they that haue read the Gospell do knowe, was not yet, which sacrifice is nowe diffused throughout all the worlde. Set before your eyes therefore two sacrifices, both that after the order of Aaron, and this after the order of Melchizedech. For it is writen, the Lord hath sworne, and it shall not repent him. Thou art a Priest for euer, after the order of Melchizedech. Of whom is it saide, thou art a priest for euer after the order of Melchizedech? of our Lord Iesus Christ. For who was Mel
                           •
                        hizedech? The King of Salem And Salem was that Citie which afterward (as the learned haue declared) was called Hierusalē. Therefore, before the Iewes reigned there, this Melchizedech was Priest there, which is written of in Genesis, the Priest of the high God. He it was that mett Abraham when he deliuered Loth from the hande of his persecutors and ouerthrewe them of whom he was helde, and deliuered his brother. And after the deliuerie of his brother, Melchizedech mett him (so great was Melchizedech of whom Abraham was blessed) he brought forth breade and wine and blessed Abraham. And Abraham gaue him rythes. See ye what he brought forth, and whome he blessed? And it is sayed afterwarde: Thou art a Priest for euer after the order of Melchizedech. Dauid sayed this in the spirite, long after Abraham. Nowe Melchizedech was in the time of Abraham. Of whome sayeth he in an
                           •
                        
                        
                        
                           •
                        her

place▪ Thou ar
                           •
                         a Priest for euer after the order of Melchizedech, 
                           〈◊〉
                         of him whose sacrifice you knowe? Here saith Maister Heskins, is sacrifice auouched, and the sacrifice of the body, and bloud of our Lorde: who saith nay? But this is not the sacrifice of the masse, but the sacrifice of CHRISTES death, whereof the holy sacrament is a memoriall.
                  But Augustine saith farther: The sacrifice of Aaron is taken away, and them beganne the order of Melchizedech. Very well, but once againe this sacrifice is the sacrifice of Christes death, the remembraunce whereof is celebrated in the Lordes Supper: where let the Reader obserue, that he doeth yet againe denie the sacrifice of Christes passion, to be a sacrifice, after the order of Melchizedech, contrarie to the expresse worde of God; & affirmeth that it was after the order of Aaron, saying, that The sacrifice after the order of Melchizedech, was onely as the Supper.
                  
                  Here note that he maketh the sacrament more excellent then the sacrifice of Christes death, by so muche, as the Priesthoode, and sacrifice of Melchisedech, is more excellent then the sacrifice, and priesthoode of Aaron. But Augustine hath more yet, if it will helpe, vpon the same Psalme. Con. 3. Before the kingdome of his father, he chaunged his 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and left him, and went his way: because there was the sacrifice, according to the order of Aaron: And afterwarde he himselfe by his body and bloud, instituted a sacrifice, after the order of Melchizedech. Therefore he chaunged his countenance in the priesthoode, and left the nation of the Iewes, and came to the Gentiles. By this we must needes vnderstand, that Christe did institute a sacrifice of his body and bloud, after the order of Melchizedech. Yea verily. But howe doe wee vnderstand, that this was in the sacrament? Therefore for any thing that is here shewed, it is no slaunder that the Pope hath turned the holy sacrament into a sacrifice, to obscure the glorie of Christe, and his onely sacrifice, once offered on the crosse. For although the Fathers did sometimes call the sacrament, a sacrifice, yet they meant nothing but a memoriall, or sacrifice of

thankesgiuing, for that one sacrifice, offered once, on the crosse for the redemption of the whole worlde. Whereof none other shalbe a better witnesse, then Augustine himselfe, and in his exposition of this selfe same Psalme: 
                        Saginantur ergo illo Angeli sed semel ipsum exinaninit, vt manducaret panem angelorum home: formam serui accipiens in similitudinem hominum factus: & habitu inuentus vt homo. The Angels therefore are fead with that bread (meaning the diuinitie of Christe) But he emptied himselfe, that man might eate the bread of Angels, taking the shape of a seruant, beeing made like vnto men, and in his habite was found as a man. Humilianit se factus obediens, vs
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ad mortem, mortem autem crucis, vt iam de cruce commendar
                              •
                           tur nobis car
                              •
                            & sanguis Domini 
                              〈◊〉
                            sacrificium: quia mutauit vultum suum coram Abimelech, id est, eoram regno patris. He humbled himselfe and was made obedient to the death, euen the death of the crosse, that now the body and bloud of our Lorde might be commended to vs from the Crosse, beeing the new sacrifice, because he chaunged his countenaunce before Abimelech, that is, before the kingdome of his Father. By this it is manifest, that Augustine referred the sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech, vnto the crosse of Christ, whereof we are made partakers in the holy mysteries of his blessed supper. So that as well, the body and bloud of our Lorde, as the newe sacrifice in those mysteries are commended to vs, to be participated from the crosse, where they were truely and essentially offered vnto God by the eternall spirite of our sauiour Christ, wherby he procured euerlasting redemption.
                  
                     
                        The same Augustine in his Ep. 23. to Bonifacius. Nonne semel immolatus est Christus in se ipso, & tamen in suet 
                           〈◊〉
                         non sobèr
                           •
                         per omnes paschę solennitates, sed omni die populi
                           •
                         immolatur, nec vbi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         mentitur, qui interrogatus eum respondarit immolari? Si enim sacramenta quandam similitudinem 
                           •
                        arum rerum quarū sacramenta sūt non haberēt, omnino sacramenta non essent. Ex haec autem similitudine plerun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         etiam ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt. 
                     Sicut ergo secundum quendam modum, sacramentum corporis Christi, corpus Christi est, sacramentum sanguinis Christi,

sanguis Christi est, ita sacramentum fidei fides est. 
                     Was not Christe once onely offered vppe by himselfe? And yet in a sacrament▪ not onely at euery solemnitie of Easter, but euerie day he is offered for the people, neither doeth he lye, which being asked the question answereth that he is offered. For if sacraments had not a certeine similitude of those thinges, whereof they are sacramentes, they should not be sacramentes at all. And of this similitude oftentimes they take the names euen of the very thinges themselues. Therfore, as after a certeine maner the sacrament of ye body of Christ, is the body of Christ, the sacrament of the bloud of Christ is the bloud of Christ: so the sacrament of faith is faith. What can be vttered more plainely, either against the Popishe sacrifice, or against their carnal presence? This one place may expound whatsoeuer in Augustine, or any other olde writer is spoken of the sacrifice of the Lordes supper, and of the presence of Christes body and bloud therein.
                  After Augustine M. Heskins citeth Chrysostome in Mat. 26. to proue that the sacrament is now of the same force that it was, when it was first ordeined by Christe at his last supper. These workes are not of mans power, what thinges he did then in that supper, he himselfe doth nowe worke, he himselfe doeth make perfect. We holde the order of Ministers, but it is he himselfe, that doeth sanctifie and chaunge these thinges. With my disciples (saith he) doe I keepe my Passeouer. For this is the same table, and none other. This is in nothing lesser then that. For Christ maketh not that table, and some other man this, but he himselfe maketh both.
                  
                  Hieronyme followeth a vaine discourse, against, I wote not what Petrobrusians, and Henricians, that denied the body of CHRISTE to be consecrated, and giuen by the priestes, as it was by Christe him selfe: Whome peraduenture Petrus Cluniacensis, Maister Heskins Author, doeth slaunder, when they saide none otherwise, then Chrysostome saide before, and that which Maister Heskins himselfe affirmeth, That Christ and not man doth consecrate: But by this place also are confuted the Oecolampadians,

and Caluinistes, if we will beleeue Maister Heskins: who first rauing against Cranmer, vrgeth the worde of sanctification of the bread and wine, that Chrysostome vseth, charging Cranmer to haue saide, that the creatures of bread and wine cannot be sanctified. Which no doubt, that holy Martyr spake of the substance, and not of the vse in the sacrament. Then he snatcheth vppe Chrysostomes wordes, Transmutat, he doeth transmute, and change them. This is easily aunswered. He chaungeth the vse, but not the substance. But for more confirmation, Origen is called to witnesse Lib. 8. Cont. Celsum: We obeying the creator of all thing
                           •
                        s, after we haue giuen thankes for his benefites, which he hath bestowed vpon vs, doe eate the bread which is offered which by prayer and supplication is made into a certeine holier bodie, which truly maketh them more holie, which with a more sound minde do vse the same. Here by Origens playne wordes, the vse doth sanctifie the worthie receiuers. And though you adde to Ambrose his phrase De pane fit corpus Christi, of the bread is made the body of Christ, yet the interpretation of spirituall receiuing, which both Origen and Ambrose doe at large testifie, (as in due place hath and shall be more declared) doeth take away your grosse imagination. And that you doe not reiect the spirituall receiuing in the sacrament, you doe well: but you doe fondely, when you oppose it against reall receyuing, where you should say corporall or carnall, for Spiritus & Res be not opposite, but Spiritus & Car
                           •
                        , or Corpus, are.
                  And here I would haue the Readers to note, how Maister Heskins confesseth, that The receiuing of Christe really, (whiche is all that he striueth for) profiteth not, without the receiuing of him spiritually. But it is certeine by the scripture, that the spirituall receiuing profiteth without that, which he calleth the real receiuing. For Christ doth dwell in our hearts by faith. And whereas he saith No man can receiue Christ spiritually, which beleeueth not that he receiueth him really: I demaund of him, whether infants, and such as dye without the participation of the sacrament

may not receiue Christe spiritually, without receiuing of him corporally? He must needes answere, yea, or else by Christes word they haue no part of eternal life: and then his assertion is false. If I should obiect the fathers of the olde testament, who did all eate Christ spiritually, before he had a naturall body, perhaps he would answere, that he speaketh of men in these dayes. But seing the Apostle 1. Cor. 10. saith, they receiued the same spirituall meat and drinke that we do, euen Christ, it is manifest, that Christ both now & then is eaten spiritually only, and not carnally.
                  To match with Augustine, for default of a Lorde of the higher house, he bringeth in Damascene a Burgesse of the lower house, whose authoritie although I do little esteeme, yet will I set downe his wordes, that you may see, how little helpe he hath out of them, but by racking and wresting. Melchisedech with bread & wine did receiue Abraham returning frō the slaughter of the strāgers,
                     
                        Li. 4. de Orthod. fid.
                      
                     which was a priest of the highest God. That table did prefigurate this mysticall table, as that priest bare the figure and image of Christ the true priest. Thou art (saith he) a priest after the order of Melchisedech.
                  
                  First Damascene is plaine, that Melchisedech did not offer bread and wine, but he did entertain Abraham therwith at his table, & that Melchisedechs feast was a figure of Christes feast, but not of his sacrifice, which is the matter in controuersie. But you shal see how M. Heskins setteth his words on the tenter, to stretch them to a sacrifice. I wold that the aduersarie did note, that the table of Melchisedech, which al men of learning do know, is taken for the sacrifice. Who shall be able to stand before M. Heskins, which hath the iudgement of all men of learning on his side? Yea and yt which is more▪ 
                     S. Paule taketh it so: ye cannot be partakers of the table of God, and the table of diuels also, that is, of that which was offered to God, & of that which was offred to diuels. O learned expositiō! But he must remember that S. Paul reproueth not the Corinthians for offring sacrifice to the idols, but for sitting downe at the feastes, in whiche that meate that had bene offered was eaten. So that a table is still a

table, and for a feast, not for a sacrifice. The conclusion of this chap, if he durst openly vtter it, containeth a most detestable blasphemie: namely, that euery hedge Priest, that saith Masse, is a Priest after the order of Melchisedech. As though Christs Priesthood could not be perpetual, except it were cōtinued by succession of yt greasie order of shauelings, wheras it is expresly said Heb. 7. that his Priesthood according to the order of Melchisedech, resteth only in his owne person, bicause he liueth for euer, and that it can not passe by succession. Vpon which place (to cōclude this matter) and the Papists own graunt, I will reason thus. Christs Priesthoode after the order of Melchisedech, resteth in his owne person, and passeth not by succession: The Popish Priesthood consisting in the sacrifice of bread and wine, is continued in the world by succession: therfore the Popish Priesthood consisting in the sacrifice of breade & wine, is not the Priesthood of Christ after the order of Melchisedech.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The 32 Chapter to proue the sacrifice of our shewe bread, to be a continuall sacrifice, as the old shew bread was, alledgeth the prophesie of Daniel, and reiecteth the false expositions of the aduersaries.
                  The shew bread is here brought in for a meere shew, for there is no matter at all in it for his purpose,
                        Fulke.
                      except it be this, yt he saith The reseruation of that bread was a figure of the reseruation of their blessed bread. Which if it be true, it is not lawful for ye priest to eat his cōsecrated hostes, vntill they be a seuen nights old. For the shew bread, was of necessitie to stand on yt table, frō Sabbath to Sabbath. But of ye cōtinuāce of their sacrifice, not only Malachie; but also Daniel hath prophesied, who in ye 9. & 12. of his prophesie, foresheweth ye taking away of ye daily sacrifice, which (he saith) ye holy Fathers do expound to be done by Antichrist. As there be many prophesies in Daniel, very hard to interpret, so there is none more cleere, either in him or in any other prophet, for ye time when it should be fulfilled, then this of taking away ye daily sacrifice, & placing ye abhominatiō of desolation, for asmuch as our sauiour Christ him self Mat. 24. doth refer it to ye destructiō of Hierusalem & ye tēple. For then ye daily sacrifice, not of ye shew bread, but

of ye morning & euening oblatiō, was vtterly taken away in act, as it ceassed in effect, when our sauiour Christe by his true sacrifice had taken away all figuratiue oblations. For as Hierom saith very well, whatsoeuer was afterward sacrificed by ye vnbeleuing Iewes in the temple, was not the sacrifice of God, but the worship of the diuel. But notwtstanding this, M. Hesk. wil needs haue it meant of ye daily sacrifice of ye Christians, & for yt purpose alledgeth ye iudgement of Petrus, ye Monk (I trow) of Clunie, yt there be foure principal sectes in ye world, yt is of ye Iewes, Sarazens, Pagans, and Christians, of which ye Iewes, Sarazens, & Pagans offer no sacrifice, but only ye Christians. But he is fowly beguyled, for ye Sarazens or Mahumetans offer sacrifice for the dead, after the maner of the Gentiles. And where this Peter acknowledged no Pagans, but such as dwell farthest in the North, it seemeth he hath not heard of so many nations as in all quarters be discouered to be Idolaters, especially those of Calechut, who beside the bloud of a cocke which they sacrifice to the Idole of the diuel, do offer vnto it all meat that the king eateth. Wherfore the conclusion of P. Cluniacensis is a very vain & foolish collectiō. And wheras M. Hes. maketh so smal account of ye sacrifice of thanksgiuing, praises, prayers, & obedience, that he calleth them but common thinges, he sheweth what religion is in his brest. But where Daniel saith, then daily sacrifice shalbe taken away, he wil proue that there must be a daily sacrifice, and that of the Christians, by Hieronyms authoritie. Whose words are cited thus by him: Hos mille ducentos nonaginta dies Porphyrius in tempore Antiochi, & in desolatione templi dicis completos, quam & Iosephus & Machabęorum (vt dixintus) liber, tribus tantùni annis fuisse commemorant. Ex quo perspic
                           •••
                         est, tres istos & semis annos de Antichristi dici temporibus, qui tribus & semis annis, hoc est mille ducentis nonaginta diebus sanctos perseq
                           ••
                        turus est, & postea, ceciderit in monte inclyto & sancto. A tempore igitur quod nos interpreta
                           •
                        i sunus iuge sacrificiū quando Antichristus vrbem obtinens Dei cultum interdixerit, vs
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad internecionem eius, tres & semis anni id est, mille ducenti nonaginta dies complebuntur. These thousand two hundreth and ninetie

dayes Prophyrius saith, th
                           ••
                         were fulfilled in the time of Antiochus, and in the desolation of the temple, which both Iesophus and the booke of Machabees, (as we haue said) do testifie to be d
                           •
                        n in three yeares only, whereby it is plaine these three yeares and an halfe to be spoken of the times of Antichrist, who by the space of three yeres and an halfe, that is a thousand two hundreth and ninetie days, shal persecute the holy and faithfull Christians, and after shal fall downe in the famous and holy hill. From the time therefore that we bene interpreted the daily sacrifice, when Antichrist shal forbid the seruice of God, vnto his destruction there shall be fulfilled three yeres and an halfe, that is to say, a thousand two hundreth and ninetie dayes. 
                     We haue often seene before, what an impudent falsarie M. Hesk. is of the Doctors, and here, I know not for what cause, except it were to trouble the sense of Hieronymes words, both in ye Latine & in his English translation, he hath left out the Greeke word yt Hieronyme vseth in this sentence, A tempore iginer 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , quod nos interpretati sumus iuge sacrificium &c. Therefore from the time of the perpetuitie, which we haue interpreted the perpetuall sacrifice, &c. At least wise he should haue noted in the margent Graecum est, non potest legi But to the matter, although Hierom, contrarie to the exposition of our sauiour Christ referre this taking away of the daily sacrifice, to the time of Antichrist, yet doth he interprete the same sacrifice, to be but the worship and seruice of God, which Antichrist should forbid. But Nicholas Lyra is a Doctour for M. Heskins tooth, for he expoundeth it of the sacrifice of the altar. And M. Heskins will proue it by reason. For it can not be meant of a spiritual sacrifice of praise, prayers, mortification, repentance, &c. For these can not be put downe, but shalbe frequented, euen vnder his flames and sword, therfore it must needes be the daily sacrifice of the altar. And yet M. Heskins thinketh, that shal not be cleane put downe, but secretly be vsed of godly disposed people, so that he were best to conclude, that there shal none at al be put downe. But may not the outward seruice of God be put downe, as Hieronyme saith, But it must of necessitie be the sacrament of the altar? O easie necessitie, that so lightly is auoyded! Well, beside this rushie

cheine of M. Heskins necessitie you shall heare matter of congruitie.
                  
                     If the fathers of all ages knewe that externe sacrifice did please God, should not christians much more, which liue in the cleare light, acknowledge the same? O profounde diuine! He hath forgotten that the true worshippers must nowe worshippe: God in spirit and trueth: Ioan. 4. Yet more. If those sacrifices were a sweete sauour to God, for his sake whom they figured, howe much more is our sacrifice, offering Christe him selfe vnto him? But sir, their sacrifices were commanded, & Christ by his eternall spirite hath offered himselfe once, to ende all such sacrifices. For no man is worthie to offer him to God, but euen himself. If they giue not onely sacrifice of laude and thankes, but also externall sacrifice of thankes, shall not Christians which haue receiued greater benefites then they, offer like, or rather greater thankes? Yes good M. Doctor, but by such meanes as God hath appoynted, and not by setting vp an other Altar and sacrifice, to deface the crosse and sacrifice of Christ. Althoughe nothing can bee feyned more leaden, and blockishe then these reasons bee, yet the illuminate doctor cryeth out agaynste his obcęcate and blind enemies, that cannot see ye congruitie of these matters, as it were a light shining through a milstone.
               
               
                  The three and thirtieth Chapter openeth the Prophecie of Malachie.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The Prophete Malachie towarde the latter end of the first chapter of his Prophecie, writeth thus:
                        Fulk.
                      
                     I haue no pleasure in you saith the Lorde of hoastes, neither will I accept an offering at your hand. For from the rising of the sunne, vntill the going downe of the same, my name is great among the Gentiles, and in euerie place incense shall bee offered vnto my name, and a pure offering: For my name is great among the heathen. This text (saith M. Heskins) hath greatly tormented the protestantes: for they wrest it into diuerse senses, because it proueth inuincibly the sacrifice of the masse.
                  Therefore Oecolampadius expoundeth this sacrifice of the obedience of all nations, to the faith: Bucer, of

faith and the confession of the same: Bullinger, of the land and prayse of God: Vrbanus Rhegius, of mortification and inuocation of Gods name. Al which M. Heskins him selfe that firste cryeth out of their discord, confesseth to agre in this, that they vnderstand the prophesie of the spirituall sacrifice of prayse and thanksgiuing. But these hereticall expositions, he saith, cannot stande. And why so▪ forsooth because these spiritual sacrifices be not new, but were offered by the godly, euen since Abel, who (he saith) was the first that offered sacrifice to God, and that of the fruites of the earth: whereas it is not to be thought, that Adam offered no sacrifice al that time before: and the text is plaine, that Abell offered the fruit of his cattell. But although the spirituall worship of God is not newe, yet it was newe to the Iewes, that the father shoulde bee worshipped from the time of Christ, neither in the moūt Garizim nor at Ierusalem, but of all nations in spirite and trueth,Iohn. 4. that is, without all externall and figuratiue sacrifices. An other reason is of the purenesse of the newe sacrifice, aboue the olde. For the olde sacrifices were pure by participation, the newe is pure by nature, and therefore nothing else but the bodie of Christe. But by his fauour the prophet in calling the newe sacrifice pure, doeth not charge the old with imperfection, if they had been offered according to their institution, but reproueth the priestes, that they had polluted the Lords sacrifices, with their couetousnes and hypocrisie, and in punishment of their pride (which thought God could not bee serued except it were by them) threateneth that he will reiect them and the people that were partakers of their sinnes, and set vp the spirituall pure worship of his name, among the Gentils in all partes of the worlde, which shoulde better please God (as ye Prophete saith) then a bullock that hath hornes & hooffes. And as for the purenes that M. Heskins requireth in the new sacrifices, wee haue a sufficient warrant of the holy Ghost Heb. 13. that by Iesus Christ wee offer the sacrifice of prayse always to God, that is, the fruites of the lippes which confesseth his name, doeing good

and not forgetting to distribute, for with such sacrifices God is pleased. By which place you may see that the expositions of the godly before rehearsed, are grounded vpon the word of God, and not the deuise or imagination of man. It is meruell yt M. Heskins (as the rest of ye papistes do in this place) doth not builde much vppon the worde 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      which properly doth signifie a sacrifice made of flower, and so a kinde of bread: but then he lacketh wine, and the other worde which the prophete vseth 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      which signifieth an incense or perfume, both excludeth that phantisie, and also sheweth that the Prophet, according to the common custom of other Prophets, speaketh after the capacitie of the people, in discribing the spirituall state of Christs Church by the external-figures & ceremonies of Moses law. And so there is no place in ye scripture, maketh lesse for the sacrifice of the masse, then this text of the prophete Malachie.
               
               
                  The foure and thirteth Chapter expoundeth the prophesie of Malachie by Martialis and Ireneus.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  M. Heskins desirous to expounde this prophesie by two verie auncient barrons of the high house of parleament, beginneth with one Martialis,
                        Fulk.
                      whom to make him seeme more reuerend and auncient, he hath adorned with Parleament Robes, affirming that he was the disciple of Christ himselfe, and after his Maisters death kepte companie almost continually with the Apostle Peter, & therfore willeth euerie man to giue audience to his speache. Now whether euer there were any such disciple of Christ, & companion of the Apostle, as the scripture maketh nomention of him so I will affirme nothing. But for as much as the Church neuer heard of any such writer, neither by Eusebius, or by Hieronyme, nor by Gennadius, all which gathered the names of all the writers yt had ben in ye Church of Christe, that were knowen in their times, and seeing that many hundreth yeares after, there is no mention of any such writer, and writinges in anye approued authour, I will playnely affirme, that the authour of such Epistles, is more worthie to stand on the

pillerie for an impudent counterfeiter, then to sit in the Parleament house among ye Apostles of Christ and ye holy doctors of the Church. If there were nothing else to confute him, but the title that he giueth himselfe, it were sufficient to prooue him a shamelesse forger. Martialis Apostolus Christi, he tearmeth himselfe (in the Diuels name) as though the scripture had not defined both of the number and of the calling of the Apostles. If any man liste to heare his absurde speach, that hee maketh for the sacrifice of the masse, let him resorte to M. Heskins swynetrough, for I will not vouchsafe to defile my penne and paper to carie awaye such draffe, of such pseude-apostles and counterfeit doctors. Leauing therefore M. Heskins with his groyne serching in that swill, I will chase him away from routing in the holy auntient garden of Irenaeus, of whom M. Heskins confesseth, that hee is not to be suspected of truth, therby insinuating that his Martiall, was not so honest, but that his credite might come in question. But Irenaeus lib. 4. Chapter 32. writeth thus: Sed & suis discipulis dans consilium &c. But also giuing counsell to his disciples, to offer the firste fruites vnto God of his owne creatures, not as to one hauing neede, but that they might be neither vnfruitefull nor vnthankefull: he tooke that bread which is of the creature, and gaue thankes, saying, this is my bodie: and likewise the cup which is of the same creature that is with vs, hee confesseth to bee his bloude, and taught the newe oblation of the newe Testament, whiche the Church receiuing of the Apostles, offereth to GOD in all the world, to him which giueth food vnto vs, the first fruites of his owne giftes in the new Testament, of which Malachias amonge the twelue Prophetes hath foreshewed: I haue no pleasure in you, (saith the LORD Almightie) and I will receiue no sacrifice at your handes, &c.
                  
                  Here M. Heskins I knowe not for what subtiltie, had translated verie absurdly primitias munerum suorum, the firste fruite of his sacrifices. But to the matter. What can bee more playne, then that Irenaeus speaketh here of the sacrifice of obedience and thankesgiuing, celebrated in the sacrament of the Lordes supper?
                  
                     For he sheweth the end of the institution to be, that they should neither be vnfruitefull nor vnthankfull, which oblation the Church obserueth throughout all ye world, according to the Prophesie of Malachie, in the celebration of the Lordes supper, although not onely therein. M. Heskins cauill, of the newnesse of the oblation, I haue answered before, that it is newe in the manner of the offering, which is without such sacrifices & ceremonies as the lawe prescribed. And whereas the incense and the pure oblation, that the Prophet sayeth, should be sacrificed to God, be both of one nature, Irenaeus doth in plaine wordes expound the incenses for spirituall sacrifice, namely, the sacrifice of prayers. Which exposition M. Heskins doth so obstinately contemne lib. 4. Chap. 33. 
                        Quoniam ergo nomen filij proprium patris est, & in Deo omnipotente Iesum Christum offert ecclesia, bene ait secundum vtra
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            & in omni loco incensiū offertur nomini meo & sacrificium purum. Incensa autem Ioannes in Apocalypsi orationes ait esse sanctorum. Therefore, for as much as the name of the same perteineth to the father, and in God almightie the Church offereth Iesus Christ: he sayeth well according to bothe, and in euery place, an incense is offered to my name, and a pure sacrifice. Nowe S. Iohn in the reuelation sayth, that the incense are the prayers of the Saintes. The one being a spirituall sacrifice, the other is also of the same nature: by which it is euident, howe the Church offereth Iesus Christ in God almightie: namely, when shee rendreth moste humble and hartie thankes to God, for her redemption by Iesus Christe. To which intent, much more might be alledged out of Irenaeus, but for prolixitie, and the same places shall afterwardes be cited for other purposes.
               
               
                  The fiue & thirtieth Chapter proceedeth to the exposition of the same Prophet by S. Augustine & Eusebius.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Out of S. Augustine is alledged a long saying lib. Aduersus Iudaeos, but not so long in wordes,
                        Fulke.
                      as short of his purpose. Dominus omnipotens dicit, &c. The Lorde almightie sayeth, I haue no pleasure in you, neither will I receiue sacrifice of

your hands. Certainly, this you cannot denie ô ye Iewes that not o
                           •
                        
                        ly he doth not take sacrifice as your handes, for there is but one place appointed by the lawe of the Lord, where he hath commaunded sacrifices to be offered by your handes, beside which place, he hath altogether forbidden them. Therefore seeing you haue lost this place according to your deserts, the sacrifice also, which was lawfull to be offered there onely, in other place
                           •
                         ye dare not offer. And it is altogether fulfilled which the Prophet saith: And sacrifice will I not receiue at your handes. For if the Temple and the Altar remained to you in the earthly Hierusalem, you might say this were fulfilled in them, whose sacrifices, (being wicked men abiding among you) the Lorde doth not accept: but that he accepteth the sacrifice of other that be of you and among you, which keepe the commaundements of God. But this cannot be saide, for asmuch as there is not one of you all, which according to the lawe, which proceeded from mount Sinay, may offer sacrifice with his handes. Neither is this so forespoken & fulfilled, that the sentence of the Prophes will suffer you to a
                           •
                        nswere: because wee offer not flesh with our hands, with our heart and mouth we offer praise, according to that in the Psalme: Sacrifice to God the sacrifice of praise. From this place also he speaketh against you which sayth: I haue no pleasure in you, &c. Moreouer, that you shuld not thinke that seeing you offer not, and that he taketh no sacrifice at your hands, therefore no sacrifice is offered to God, whereof truely hee hath no neede, who needeth not the goods of any of vs, yet because he is not without a sacrifice, which is not profitable for him, but for vs, be adioyneth and sayeth: For from the rising of the Sunne vntil the going downe of the same, my name is made honourable among all the Gentiles, and in euery place a sacrifice is offered to my name, euen a pure sacrifice, because my name is greate among the Gentiles saith the Lorde Almightie. What aunswere yee to these things? open your eyes at the length, & see from the sunne rising to the going downe thereof, that not in one place, as it was appointed among you, but in euery place, the sacrifice of the Christians is offered, not to euery God, but to him that spake these things afore hand, euen to the God of Israel. Wherfore (in another place) he sayth, to his Church: and he that hath deliuered thee, the same God of Israel shalbe called the God of the whole earth. Search

ye the Scriptures, in which you thinke to haue eternall life, and truely you should haue, if in them you could vnderstand Christ and hold him. But search them through and euen they beare witnesse of this pure sacrifice, which is offered to the God of Israel: not of your nation alone, of whose hands he saide he would receiue none, but of all nations which say: come let vs go vp into the hill of the Lord, neither in one place, as it was commaunded in the earthly. Hierusalem, b
                           •
                        t in euery place, euen in Hierusalem it selfe▪ neither after the order of Aaron, but after the order of Melchizedech.
                  
                  First we must see how M. Heskins note booke deceiued him: for where the words of Augustin in the beginning of this sentence are these: Locus enim vn
                           •
                        to est lege domini constitutus, &c. that is▪ there is but one place appointed by the lawe of the Lord. M. Hesk. hath falsified and set downe locus enim vnus est loco domini constitutus, which he translateth: For there is one place in ye place of God appointed. But this is not the first corruption that we haue bewrayed by a great many. Nowe to the matter Maister Heskins still harpeth vpon one string, that the sacrifice in this saying spoken of cannot be the sacrifice of praise and thankesgiuing, because that is not peculiar to the Christians, but was offered of the Iewes before Christe, and may be yet, if they be conuerted. But I haue more than once or twise declared, that here is no such peculiaritie in the matter of the offering, but in the maner of the oblation. And Augustine speaketh not halfe a worde, by which we might deeme, that he refuseth the spirituall sacrifice of the Christians to be the pure sacrifice prophesied in Malachie. If you vrge that he sayeth, it is offered after the order of Melchisedech, and so hath relation to the offering of breade and wine in the Sacrament, although it be no necessarie conclusion: yet Augustin him selfe will tell vs, that it is a spiritual sacrifice of laude and thanksgiuing. And M. Heskins him selfe directeth vs to the booke saying: As notable a saying as this hath S. Augustine in an other place also, (and quoteth, lib. 1. Cont, aduersariū legis & Prophetarum) who so listeth to reade, shall finde that, that shall not repent him of the reading.
                  
                  
                     What place M. Heskins meaneth I knowe not, but in the same booke I read & in the 18. Chapter, that he calleth the death of Christ 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         singuler and onely was sacrifice. If that sacrifice be but one singuler, and the onely true sacrifice, what manner of sacrifice is the sacrifice of the Masse, which setteth vp a newe altar to ouerthrowe the crosse of Christ? And that you may knowe what sacrifice S. Augustine meaneth, when he nameth the sacrifice of the Church, or the sacrifice of breade and wine, or any such like phrase, he speaketh this in the twentieth Chapter of certeine apocryphall writings, falsly intituled to the Apostles Andrew & Iohn.
                  
                     
                        Qua fillorum essent, receptae essent ab ecclesia, quae illorum temperibus per Episcoporū succes
                              •
                           iones certissimas vs
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ad nostra & deincap
                              •
                            tempora perseuera
                              •
                           , & immolat Deo in corpore Christi sacrificium 
                              •••
                           dis: Which if they had bene theirs, they should haue bene receiued of the Church, which from their times, by most certeine successions of Bishope, continueth vnto our times and after, and sacrificeth to God in the bodie of Christ, the sacrifice of lawde and prayse. And let this suffice to discharge Augustine from M. Heskins and the Papistes blasphemous cauelling. Now must we come to Eusebius: which lib. 
                     
                        •
                     . Euang. Demonst. cap. 10. writeth thus: The Mosaical sacrifices being reiected he doth by diuine reuelation declare our ordina
                           •
                        ies that was to 
                           〈◊〉
                        , saying: For from the rising of the 
                           〈…〉
                         the going down of the s
                           ••
                        e my name is glorified among the nations, & in euery place 
                           〈◊〉
                         is offred to my name, & a pure sacrifice. Wherefore our sacrifice to the most high God, is the sacrifice of praise. Wee sacrifice to God a full, 
                           〈◊〉
                         & holie sacrifice. We sacrifice after a newe maner, according to the new testament a pure sacrifice, &c. M. Heskins asketh vs, if we do not see that Eusebius expoundeth the Prophet of the sacrifice of Christes bodie? but wee may well bid him shore vp his eyes, & see, if he do not in plain words expound him of the sacrifice of praise? But because he calleth this sacrifice horrorem adferens, bringing horror, meaning, not a slauish, but a reuerent feare, as is meant to be in all matters of religion, which ought to

be handled with feare, and reuerence of Gods Maiestie, vnto whom they apperteine: he will needes haue it the body of Christ, and first, he alledgeth a saying of Dionysius, whom he falsely calleth the disciple of Saint Paule, although he be a writer of good antiquitie: Eccle. Hier. part. 1. cap. 3. Neither is it almost lawfull for any mysterie of the priestly office, to be done, except that his diuine, and most noble sacrament of thankesgiuing doe fulfil is. What he picketh out of this saying, as he noteth not, so I am not of his counsell to knowe, neither why (after his accustomed boldenesse) he translateth, Sacramentum Eucharistiae, the sacrament of Christe. From Dionyse he flitteth to the hyperbolicall amplifications of Chrysostom, which Lib. 6. De Sacerdotio, calleth the sacrament, That sacrifice most full of horror and reuerence, where the vniuersall Lorde of all thinges is daily felt with handes. And de prod. Iud. Hom. 30. The holy and terrible sacrifice, where Christ that was slaine is set foorth. He that will not acknowledge these and such like, to be figuratiue speeches, must enter action against Chrysostom for many heresies: or rather Chrysostome may enter action against him of slaunder and defamation. In the same treatise De Sacerdotio Lib. 3. speaking of the same sacrifice, he sayeth:
                  
                     You may see the whole multitude of people died and made redde with the precious bloud of Christ. 
                     But to shewe that all this is spirituall, he demaundeth, if you thinke your selfe to stand vpon the earth, when you see these thinges, and not rather that you are translated into heauen, and casting away all cogitations of the flesh, with a naked soule, and pure minde you beholde those thinges that are in heauen. Therefore to conclude, neither Augustine nor Eusebius haue spoken any thing to the furtherance of Maister Heskins bill, of the carnal presence.
                  
               
               
                  The sixe and thirtieth Chapter, endeth the exposition of Malachie, by Saint Hierome, and Damascen.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  S. Hierome vpon ye Prophet Malachie writeth thus:
                        Fulke.
                      
                     Ergo propriè nūc ad sacerdotes Indeorū sermo sit domini, qui offerūt, caecū & clandū & languidū ad immolandū vt sciant carnalibꝰ victimis

spirituales victimas successuras. Et necquaquam tantorum hircerùmque sanguinem: sed thymiana, hoc est, sanctorum orationes Domino offerendas: & non in vna orbis prouincia Iudaea, nec in vna iudaea vrbe Hierusalem: sed in omni loco offerri oblationem: nequaquam immundam, vt a populo Israel: sed mundum, vt in ceremonijs Christianorum. Now therefore the word of the Lorde is properly spoken to the Priestes of the Iewes, which offer the blinde and lamue, and feeble, to be sacrificed, that they might knowe that spirituall sacrifices, should succeede those carnall sacrifices. And not the bloud of bulles and goates, but an incense, that is to say, the prayers of the Sainctes should be offered to the Lord: and that not in one prouince of the world Iewry, neither in Ierusalem one citie of Iewry, but in euery place an oblation is offered: was vncleane, as of the people of Israel, but cleane, as in the ceremonies of the Christians. Doest thou not maruell (Gentle Reader) that Maister Heskins alledgeth this place, which in euerie point is so directly contrarie to his purpose? He saith that among the ceremonies of the Christians, none can be properly called the cleane sacrifice, but the sacrifice of the body and bloud of Christ. O shamelesse begger, that craueth no lesse then the whole controuersie to be giuen him! And that contrarie to Hierome, whose name he abuseth, which expoundeth this place of spirituall sacrifices, and more expressely of the prayers of the saintes, whiche are not vsed in one, but in all the ceremonies of the Christians. But to set some colour vpon ye matter, he bringeth in an other saying of Hierome, which is written before this in exposition of another place, perteining nothing to this prophecy of ye pure sacrifice: but wher by analogie or like reason, (as the prophet rebuketh the priestes of the Iewes) he doeth reprehend also the Bishops, Elders, and Deacons of the Church for their negligence: Offertis inquit &c. You offer, saith he, vpon mine altar bread polluted. We pollute the bread, that is to say the body of Christ, when we come vnworthily to the altar, and we beeing filthie doe drinke cleane bloud, and say the Lordes table is contemptible, &c. Here forsooth, we vnderstand that the body of Christ is, the sacrifice of the Christians, yea, but according to the former sentence, so offered,

that it is a spirituall sacrifice.
                  But what else? Here we are taught that we doe not take one thing: videlicet bread, and do iniurie to another thing, that is the body and bloud of Christ, as the sacramentaries say, but receiuing the very body and bloud of Christ we do iniury to the same. But vouchsafe to heare the same teacher, speaking of the same matter, and in the same place, in fewe wordes to satisfie the reasonable, and to stoppe the mouthes of quarrellers. 
                        Dum enim sacramenta violantur, ipse cuius sunt sacramenta violatur. For while iniurie is done to the sacramentes, iniurie is done to him whose sacraments they are. He sheweth a reason against them that demaunded proudly, wherein they had polluted God, when they had but polluted his sacraments? Leauing therefore Hierome at open warre with M. Heskins, I will passe to Damascen, who for lacke of a Greeke auncient Baron, beeing an auncient burgesse of the lower house, Maister Heskins, is bolde to matche with Hironyme, though farre inferiour to him in antiquitie and credite, whose wordes are these:
                        Libr. 4. 
                     This is that pure and vnbloudy sacrifice, which our Lord speaketh by the Prophet to be offred to him, from the rising of the sunne, to the going downe of the same, namely the body and bloud of Christ, vnto the vnconsumed, and vncorrupted establishment of our body and soule, not going into secesse, (God forbid, that any such imagination should be) but it is a purgation of al manner filth, and a reparation of all manner of hurt, vnto our sustentation, and conseruation. This place saith Maister Heskins is so plaine, that a childe may perceiue it: for it is sufficient for him, if he heare once body and bloud named. Howbeit, if either Damascens authoritie were of weight, or the corruption of the time in which he liued vnknowen, there is nothing, in this saying, which might not easily, and without any wresting, be referred to the spirituall sacrifices, & to the spirituall manner of sacrificing the body and bloud of Christ, which we haue learned out of the elder fathers.
               
               
                  The seuen and thirtieth Chapter, maketh a brieefe recapitulation of thinges before written, with the application of them to
                        Hesk.
                     
                     
the proclamation of the aduersarie, and so concludeth the first booke.
                  It were but vaine labour, especially for me, that professe such breuitie,
                        Fulk.
                      to repeate the answers and declarations made before, that not one of these Lordes of the higher house, whom he nameth, fauoureth his bill, of the carnall presence, or the sacrifice of the masse in such sense, as he and his fellowes take it. But whereas he is so loftie once againe, to ioyne issue with the proclaymer, & that as he hath done alwayes hitherto, vpon the negatiue, I will not refuse him. And yet by the way I must admonish the Reader, how vnreasonably he dealeth, that ioyneth all his issues vpon the negatiue, whiche sometime is harde, sometime is vnpossible to be proued, whereas the Bishop, whom he calleth the proclaimer, ioyneth issue with them vpon the affirmatiue, which if euer it was holden, is more probable to finde proofe in antiquitie. Whereas if I might haue libertie to ioyne vpon the negatiue, I would bring in fiue hundreth propositions, that are false, and yet neuer a one expressely denied of the olde writers, because there neuer happened any controuersie aboute suche matters in their times. But to his issue. If he can bring any one sufficient authoritie, that shall directly say, that the Church may not offer the body of Christ, in such sorte as it doeth, I will giue him the victorie.
                  
                  First here he reiecteth the authoritie of the Apostle to the Hebrues, saying, it is but wrested, which is as direct, as nothing in the worlde can be more direct, that Christ offered himselfe, and that but once, and by that one oblation hath made perfect for euer, them that are sanctified. But he shal heare Chrysostome vpon the same scripture Hebr. 10. Aufer
                              •
                            primum, vt sequens statuat, &c. He taketh away the former, that he might establish that whiche followeth. Beholde againe the aboundance. This sacrifice sayeth he, is but one, but those sacrifices are many: for therefore they were not strong, because they were many. But tell me what need is there of many,

when one is sufficient? Therefore whereas they were many, and alwayes offered, he sheweth, that they were neuer purged. For as a medicine when it is strong and effectuall to giue health, and able to driue away, all sicknesse, being but once laide to, worketh the whole at once. If therfore being but once laide to it hath wrought the whole, it sheweth the vertue thereof, in that it is not laid to any more: & this is the effect of it, yt it is laid on no more but once. But if it be always laid to, it is a manifest token, yt it preuailed nothing. For this is the vertue of that medicine, yt it is but once laid on, and not oftentimes: euen so in this case. By what meanes were they always healed, by ye same sacrifices? For if they had ben deliuered from al their sins, there should not haue bene offered sacrifice throughout euery day. For they were appointed, yt they should be always offred for al the people, both at euening & in ye day. Therfore, that was an accusation of sinns, not a discharge: for ther was made an accusatiō of weaknes, not a shewing of strength. For bicause ye first sacrifice was of no force, the second was likewise offered, & bicause that also profited nothing, an other was offered also: wherefore this is but a conuiction of sinnes. For in yt they were offered, there is a conuiction of sinnes, but in that they were always offred, there is a conuiction of infirmitie But contrariwise in Christ, the sacrifice was but once offered. For what neede was there of medicines, when there is no more wounds remaining? For this cause, you wil say, he cōmanded that it should always be offered, bicause of infirmitie, that there might be also a remēbrance of sinnes: What then do we
                           •
                         Doe we not offer euery day? we offer truely, but for a remembraunce which we make of his death, and this is but one sacrifice, not many. Howe is it one and not many? Bicause it was offered but once, and it was offered in the holy of holies: but this sacrifice is an exemplar of that, we offer the same alwayes. For we do not nowe offer one lamb, to morrowe an other, but the same thing alwayes. Therfore this sacrifice is but one. For else by this reason, bicause it is offred in many places, are ther many Christs?
                     
No, but one Christ is euery where, both here being perfect and there being perfect, euen one body. For as he which is euery where is one bodie, and not many bodies: so also it is one sacrifice. And hee is our highe Priest, which offered the sacrifice which purged vs: the same do we also offer nowe, which then truely being offered, can not be consumed. Howbeit, that which we doe nowe, is done truely, in the remembraunce of that which was done then. For this do ye (saith he) in remembraunce of me. We make not an other sacrifice as the high Priest, but alwayes the same, but rather we worke the remembrance of the same. This place of Chrysostome sheweth, both that the Church neither doth, nor may offer the body of Christ in such sort as the Papistes say, that is really and carnally, and for the sinnes of the quicke and the dead: and also howe the Church is saide to offer the sacrifice of Christes body, namely, when she celebrateth the remembrance thereof.
                  After this holy issue ioyned, M. Heskins rayleth vpon Cranmer, which in his first booke hath not one Doctour or Counsel to alledge, but only a litle false descant vpon a scripture or two, as the proclamer in his Sermon. What reading Cranmer and Iewell, were able to shewe in the Doctours and Counsels, is so well testified by their owne learned workes vnto the world, that it can not by such an obscure doctour as M. Hesk. is, be blemished or darkned.
                  But M. Heskins hath such store of testimonies for the sacrifice of the Masse, to proue that Christ is offred therin, yt beside those which he hath alredy cited, he wil ad three or foure to this recapitulation. First he nameth Iustinus Martyr, in his dialogue against ye Iewes. Where he alledgeth his wordes truncatly, leauing out the beginning▪ which declareth that Iustine maketh all Christians Priestes and offerers of the sacrifice of thankesgiuing in the celebration of the Lordes supper. His wordes are these. 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Euen so we which by the name of Iesusas al (shal be one man in God the maker of al things) hauing put off our filthy garments, that is, our sinnes, by the name of his first begotten sonne, and being set on fire by the word of his calling, are a right kinde of high priests of God, as God himself doth witnes, That in al places among the Gentiles, acceptable & pure sacrifices are offred to him.
                      
                     But God receiueth no sacrifice of any but of his Priestes. Wherefore God before hand doth testifie, that he doth accept all them that offer by this name the sacrifices, which Iesus Christe hath deliuered to be made, that is in the Eucharistie or thankesgiuing of the bread and the cuppe, which are done in euery place of the Christians. By these words it appeareth not, that Christ was offered, but thankesgiuing in ye sacrament, not of the priest alone, but by all Christians. And yet more plainely in the wordes of his, that are in the same Dialogue: 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     And as concerning those sacrifices which are offered to him of vs Gentiles in euery place, that is of the breade of thankesgiuing, and the cup likewise of thankesgiuing, hee foresheweth saying, that we do glorifie his name, and that you do prophane it. In which saying what can we see, but the sacrifice of thankesgiuing in the bread and cup? And to proue that the Church hath none other sacrifice but of prayers and thankesgiuing, he saith within few lines after the place cited by M. Heskins; 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . For I my selfe do affirme, that prayers and thankesgiuing made by worthie persons, are the only perfect and acceptable sacrifices to God. For these are the only sacrifices that Christians haue receiued to make, to be put in minde by their drie and moyst nourishment, of the passion which God the son of God is recorded to haue

suffered for them. This place doth not onely shewe, what the only sacrifice of Christians was in his time, but also teacheth, that in the sacrament is drie and moyst nourishment, that is, bread and drinke, not bare accidents as the transubstantiators affirme. How little Iustinus maketh for the sacrifice of the Masse, these places doe sufficiently declare.
                  The second place hee citeth, is out of Hierom in his booke of Hebrue questions. Quod autem 
                           •
                        it, &c. whereas he sa
                           •
                        th, thou art a Priest for 
                           •
                        uer after the order of Melchisedech: in the word (order) our mysterie is signified, not in offering vnreasonable sacrifices by Aaron, but in offering bread and wine, that is, the body and blood of our Lord Iesus Christ. We haue shewed sufficiently before, howe the olde writers vsed the worde of sacrifice licentiously, when there was no such heresie, as fined is sprung vp, of the sacrifice of ye Masse, for the memoriall of the sacrifice of Christes body and bloud, in which was offered the spirituall sacrifice of prayers and thanksgiuing: which reasonable men might wel ynough vnderstand, though heretiques do nowe drawe it to their meaning. As when Hierom calleth this offering of bread and wine a mysterie, euery indifferent reader may vnderstand, that he speaketh not properly in calling it the body and bloud of Christe, and a sacrifice of the body and bloud of Christe. But as to a sicke man of the ague, all drinkes seeme bitter, so to a popish heretique, all sayings of the Doctours seeme popish and hereticall.
                  The third place he alledgeth, it is out of Ambrose his preparatiue prayer to Masse, I will not vouchsafe to rehearse it, bicause it is a meere bastard and counterfet writing, out of which it is cyted, hauing as much of S. Ambrose in it, as M. Heskins hath witt and honestie in alledging it. If any man will obiect, that then I must bring arguments to disproue it, or else I may likewise denye any authenticall writer: I answere, it were too long to do in this shortnesse that I must vse, and not necessarie, when they are notorious and well knowne already to euery man of meane reading in the Doctors, and Erasmus in

his censure doth plainly reiect it.
                  The fourth is Isydorus li. 1. ca 18. de off. which althogh he be somwhat wtout ye cōpasse of 600. yeares after Christ, yet because he is an auncient writer, & nere that time, I will consider his speach which is cited by M. Heskins in these wordes, The sacrifice that is offered to God by the Christians, our Lorde and maister Christ did first institute, when hee commended to his Apostles his bodie and bloude, before hee was betraied, as it is redd in the Gospell: Iesus tooke the bread and the cup and blessing them gaue the same vnto them. Here beside the vsuall phrase of sacrifice (which we haue often declared what it did signifie, and whence it came) is nothing to quarrell at. For Isydore ment no doubt, the spirituall sacrifice of thankesgiuing, which is offered in the celebration of the Lords supper, & not the propitiatorie sacrifice of the popish masse, of which scarce the foundations were begonne to be laide in his time, of certaine odde stones of vnproper speach, and licentious phrases of sacrifices and oblations.
                  As for Haymo and Cabasila, I will neuer trouble my self to examine their speaches, they are but late writers, & therefore of small credite in these causes. And whereas M. Heskins glorieth that he hath aunswered foure members of the proclamation in this booke: the scriptures in the vulgar tongue, the reseruation of the sacrament, the offering of Christe to his father, and the presence of his bodie and bloude in the sacrament: let the iudgement reste with the indifferent readers, whether although hee hath some of the lower house to fauour his billes, & more might haue, if hee woulde aske their voyces, yet I haue proued by this short aunswere, that of the higher house, he hath not one that hath giuen a voyce with thē, but many that haue spoken directly against them.
               
               God be praysed.
            
            
               
               THE SECOND BOOKE OF HESKINS PARLEAMENT repealed by W. Fulke.
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The first Chapter declareth the offices of the olde lawe, and the benefites of the newe lawe, with an exhortation to submit our vnderstanding to the knowledge of faith, and therewith to the beleefe of the sacrament.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     
                     HOW vnsauerly he discourseth vpon the two offices of the lawe, it were too long to examine in euerie pointe. Onely this let the reader obserue, that when he hath made the first office of the lawe, to giue them knowledge of sinne, and to restrayne them from it: The other office hee saith was, by lineamentes of figures and shadowes to leade the people to Christe: as S. Paule sayth, the lawe was our scholemaister to Christ, &c. As though the lawe was not a Schoolemaister to bring vs to Christe by shewing vs our sinnes and condemnation, but onely by shadowes and figures. After this hee maketh him selfe a ioly hunter, That with great trauell and some pleasure hath passed through the bushes and thickets of the lawe, and nowe being come into the faire land of the Gospell, forgetting his former trauels, with freshe delight will followe on his game. So that hee is nowe belike gone out of the parleament house, where matters are grauely intreated of, and hath betaken him selfe to the wilde forest, where hee may disporte himselfe in his games with Robin hoode, and his merie mates. And verilie if he had not tolde vs him selfe of his lustie hunting, wee might well haue thought, he had not beene at home, but wandering in the woodes so wilde, when in his exhortation vnto faith in the sacrament, hee will persuade vs, that none can vnderstande the scriptures, except they haue founde faith in the veritie of the Sacramente. Which happeneth to all those that wil not be with Christ in the breaking of the breade, as the two disciples were that went to Emans, to whome Christe was a straunger, vntill he came to the breaking of the breade. But leaste

this vaine allegorie shoulde seeme to bee founde out only in M. Heskins chase, hee trauelleth to finde it in S. Augustin, & Theophylact, but al in vaine. For first to giue vs a tast what synceritie and trueth he will vse in the rest of this booke, the verie first sentence he alleadgeth out of any Doctor, is corruptly and vntruly rehearsed. For thus hee maketh Augustine to speake in his treatise De consensu Euangelistarum, not naming in what booke or Chapter, whereas that which he writeth of this matter, is Lib. 3. Cap. 25. Non enim incongruenter accipimus hoc impedimentum in oculis eorum a Satana fuisse, ne agnosceretur Iesus, sed tantùm a Christo propter eorum fidem ambiguam facta est permissio vs
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad sacramentum panis, vt vnitate corporis eius participata, remoueri intelligatur impedimentum inimici, vt Christus possit agnosci. We doe not take it incongruently, that this impediment in their eies was of Sathā that Iesus shold not be knowen, but only it was permitted of Christ for their doubtfull faithes sake, vntill they came to the sacrament of bread, that the vnitie of Christs body being participated, it might be perceiued, that the impediment of the enimie was remoued, that Christ might be knowen. In this place beside yt he turneth autem into enim, and leaueth out factum after fuisse, he addeth of his owne propter eorum fidem ambiguam, for their doubtfull faiths sake. Which words are not Augustins. Wherby it appeareth that hee redde not this place out of Augustine himselfe, but followed some other mans collection as he doth almost euerie where. But Augustine in that place comparing the wordes of Marke and Luke together, sheweth that there was no alteration in the shape of Christes bodie, but onely that the two disciples eyes were helde, that they could not knowe him, but in breaking of the bread which signified the vnity of ye Church. For this he writeth: 
                        Neque quisquam se Christum agnouisse arbitretur, si eius corporis particeps non est, id est ecclesię; cuius vnitatem in sacramento panis commendat Apostolus dicens, vnus pànis vnum corpus multi sumus: vt cum eis benedictum panem porrigeret apperirentur oculi eorum & agnoscerent cum. Neither let any man thinke that he hath knowen Christ, if he bee not partaker of his body, that is, of the Church, whose vnitie

the Apostle cōmendeth in the sacrament of the bread saying: One bread, we being many are one bodie: yt when he reached vnto them the blessed bread, their eyes were opened and they knew him. This is Augustines collection of this matter, nothing agreable with M. Heskins allegorie of ye soūd faith in ye veritie of the sacrament, but much against it, teaching ye true participation of ye body of Christ in ye sacrament, which is the mystical coniunction of him vnto his Church. Moreouer euen in ye place by him alledged, I meruell M. Heskins cannot see yt Augustine calleth it the sacramēt of bread, which agreeth not with his transsubstantiation, and if he think ye participation of the vnitie of Christes bodie doth helpe him, Augustine in the same place sheweth the contrarie, vnderstanding the bodie of Christ to be his Church, as is before shewed. But what saith Theophylact of the same? Another thing also is here insumated, namely that, that their eyes which take this blessed bread are opened that they may knowe him. For the fleshe of our Lorde, hath a great and vnspeakable strength. What is there here in these authorities, either for M. Heskins bil of the reall presence, or for his fond allegorie? It pleaseth him excedingly, that Theophylact saith the flesh of Christ is of vnspeakeable power, which we doe most willingly admitte, & euen in receiuing of the sacrament, it worketh mightily, but hee will not see at all, yt Theophylact with Augustine, calleth the sacrament blessed bread, by which they both do shew, that ye substance of bread remaineth, although it be blessed & consecrated vnto an other vse then for bodily food.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The second Cha. expoundeth the sixt of S. Ioh according to the letter
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     The summe of this literal exposition is this, that three sundry breades are mentioned by Christe in this sixte of Iohn, that is, ye bread Manna, the bread the sonne of God, and the bread the flesh of Christ, and yt these three breads are distincted both in nature and in time, in whiche they were giuen. For Manna was a corporall food giuen of old time in the wildernes. The second bread, the godhead of Christ, being an eternall and spirituall substance, Christ

saith his father doth giue, in the present tence, and that he is the bread of life, and requireth beleefe in him which is proper to God onely. The third breade, is the fleshe of Christ, which he will giue for the life of the world, speaking in the future tence, and is meant of the sacrament. And this he dare auouch, to be the natiue & true vnderstanding of this scripture. But sauing his authoritie, there are but two breades spoken of in this Chapter, namely Manna, and the bread of life, which is not the diuinitie of Christ separated from his flesh, nor his flesh separated or distincted from his godhead, but euen his quickening & spiritual flesh, which being vnited to his eternal spirit, was by the same giuen for the life of the world, not in ye sacrament, but in the sacrifice of his bodie & bloud on the crosse, and is daily sealed and testified vnto vs by the sacrament of his bodie and bloud ministred according to his holie institutiō. And this I dare auouch to be the true & natiue sense of this scripture, both by the plain circumstances of the same, and by the iudgement of the best approued ancient writers. And first to take away as wel the vain supposed distinction of time, in which the two later breads are said to be giuen, as also to proue that they are but one bread: our sauior Christ him selfe after he hath promised to giue the bread, which is his flesh, for the life of the world, and declared what fruite commeth to them that eate his fleshe, and drinke his bloude, &c. in the 58. verse he concludeth and sayeth plainly: that it is the same breade that came downe from heauen, and that who so eateth of this breade, shall liue eternally. Secondly, that the promise of giuing his flesh, is not to be restrayned to the giuing of the sacrament: his wordes are plaine, that he will giue his fleshe for the life of the worlde, which all true Christians will acknowledge to haue beene perfourmed in the sacrifice of his death, and not at his last supper. Finally, that his flesh must not bee separated from his spirit, nor his spirit from his flesh, he doth as plainly teach vs, when he affirmeth yt it is the spirite yt quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing, & yt except

we eate the fleshe of the sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, we haue no life in vs. For neither the flesh profiteth, but as it is made quickening by the spirite, neither do we participate the life of his spirite, but as it is communicated vnto vs by his fleshe, by which we are made fleshe of his fleshe, and bone of his bone: which holie mysterie, is liuely represented vnto vs in the blessed sacrament. And this your aduersaries confesse (Maister Heskins) not denying (as you charge them) that any one worde of that Chapter perteineth to the sacrament, but affirming the sacrament to bee a seale of the doctrine, which is deliuered in that Chapter, and not otherwise. The iudgement of the olde writers consonant to this vnderstanding, shall followe afterwarde in confutation of M. Heskins vngodly and hereticall distinction, not of the two natures in Christ, but of participation of the one without the other, which hee maketh by his two last breades.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The thirde Chapter proueth by the doctours, that the sixt of S. Iohn speaketh as well of the bread Christes fleshe in the sacrament, as of the bread his godhead.
                  Chrysostom is alledged in Ioan 6. Hom. 44. Iam in mysteriorum &c.
                           Fulke.
                         Nowe will he come to the setting forth of the mysteryes, and first of his godhead, he sayeth thus: I am the breade of life, this was not spoken of his bodie, of which about the ende he sayeth: The breade which I will giue is my flesh: but as yet of his godhead: for that is bread because of God the worde, euen as this bread, because of the spirite comming to it, is made heauenly breade. Maister Heskins asketh if we do not here plainely see a distinction of breades. I answere, no forsooth: but a distinction of two natures in one breade. Againe, he asketh: Doth not nowe the sixt of S. Iohn speake of the bodie of Christ in the Sacrament? I aunswere, that no such thing appeareth by these wordes of Chrysostome, otherwise then as the sacrament is a liuely representation of that his bodie, which he gaue for the life of the world. And that Chrysostome meaneth not to diuide Christe into

two breades, as M. Heskins doth, he teacheth, speaking of the same mysterie of his coniunction with vs by his fleshe Hom. 45. 
                        Vester ego frater esse volui, & communicaui carnem propter vos, & sanguinem, & per quae vobis coniunctus sum, ea rursus vobis exhibui. I would be your brother, and so I tooke parte of fleshe and bloud for you, and the same things I haue giuen you againe, by which I was ioyned vnto you. So that not the godhead of Christ alone, nor his flesh alone is giuen vs as two breades, but Christ by his flesh is ioyned vnto vs as one bread of life. Let vs nowe see what S. Augustine sayeth, who expounding the same text writeth thus: Our Lorde determineth consequently howe he calleth him selfe bread, not onely after his godhead which feedeth all things, but also after his humaine nature which is assumpted of the worde of God, when he sayeth afterwarde: And the bread which I will giue is my flesh, &c. Once againe M. Heskins asketh whether Augustine teach not a plaine difference of the bread of the Godhead of Christe, and the bread of his manhood? And once againe I aunswer, not so, but he teacheth directly the contratie, namely, Christe God and man to be one breade, and not two breades. And that the doctrine of this Chapter, is not to be restrained vnto the sacrament, the same Augustine in the same place teacheth abundantly, while hee maketh no mention of the Lordes supper vntill he come to the ende, and then sheweth, that the mysterie of this fleshe and bloud is represented in the supper, when it is celebrated of the Church in remembrance of his death & passiō. 
                        Huius rei sacramentum, id est, vnitatis corporis & sanguinis Christi, alicubi quotidie, alicubi certis interuallis dierum in Dominica mensa praeparatur, & de mensa Dominica sumitur quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium. Res verò ipsa cuius sacramentum est, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium quicun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            eius particeps fuerit. The sacrament of this thing, that is, of the vnitie of the bodie and bloud of Christ, in some places euery day, in other some at certeine space of dayes betweene, is prepared in the Lordes table, and is taken at the Lordes table of some vnto life, of some vnto

to destruction. But the thing it selfe, whose sacrament it is, to all men is to life, and to no man for destruction. whosoeuer shalbe partaker thereof. Note here also the distinction betweene the sacrament, and the thing wherof it is a sacrament, and that the sacrament may be receiued to destruction, but not the thing or matter of the sacrament, which is the bodie and bloud of Christ.
                  To these Barones he wil ioyne two Burgesses, and the first shalbe Theophylact, one of them which he sayeth is well towarde a thousand yeare olde. Hee woulde fayne get him credite by his antiquitie, but he ouer reacheth too farre, to make him so auncient, which cometh nerer to fiue hundred, then to a thousande yeares. But let vs consider his speache in 6 Ioan. he writeth thus: Manifestè &c. He speaketh manifestly in this place of the communion of his bodie. For the bread (sayeth he) which I will giue is my flesh, which I wil giue for the life of the world. And shewing his power, that not as a seruant, nor as one lesse them his father, he should be crucified, but voluntarily, he sayeth: I will giue my flesh for the life of the world. Note (sayth M. Hesk.) that Christ spake manifestly of ye communion of his bodie. Who doubteth or denyeth that? but that he spake not of the communion of his bodie, which we receiue in the sacramēt. Note saye I, that Theophylact speaketh manifestly of his crucifying, and nor of the communion in the sacrament. After this, he interlaceth a fond excourse of the authoritie of the later writers, whome he affirmeth, and wee confesse to haue written plainly of his side, whereas hee sayeth, the olde writers did write obscurely: and then he taxeth Bullinger, for alledging Zwinglius, whome he slaundereth to haue beene slaine in a sedition raysed by him, where as the worlde, knoweth it was in warre, that was helde in defence of his countrie. The like foolish quarell he hath, for putting out of Polycarpus out of the Calender, & placing Thomas Hutten in his stood all which as vnworthie any aunswer, I passe ouer it is sufficiently knowen, what Bullinger esteemed of m
                        •
                     ns authoritie, & what Fox (if he meane him) iudged of the old

Martyrs diuinitie. The other reasons following, I could scarse read wtout loathsomnesse, that preachers must ceasse if writers may not be receiued vnder 1000 yeres antiquitie & more, that speaking & writing are of like authority, and such like blockish stuffe. The elder writers are allowed, not for their age, but for their agreement with the worde of God, the later preachers are beleeued, not for yt their speaking is better then Papistes writing, but because they speake thinges consonant to the word of God, the touchstone and triall of trueth. And therefore we receiue not the testimonie of Nicholaus de Lyra the second Burgesse, because it is contrarie to the word of God, and the consent of the elder Doctours, that Christ speaketh of the sacrament, when he saith the bread which I will giue is my fleshe: which wordes Theophylacte, euen nowe affirmed to be spoken of the passion of Christ.
               
               
                  The fourth Chapter beginneth a further proofe of the former master by S. Cyprian, and Euthymius.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  For proof of the two breads, & that the text,
                        Fulk.
                      The bread which I will giue is my flesh, &c. is ment of ye sacrament, Cyprian is alledged, although ye place be not quoted, but it is in ye sermon vpō ye Lords prayer in these words: Panis vitae Christus est. &c. Christ is the bread of life, and he is not the bread of all men, but our bread: And as we say our father, because he is the father of thē that vnderstand, & beleeue, so we call it our bread, because Christ is our bread, which touche his body. And this bread, we pray to be giuen vs daily, least we that are in Christe, and daily receiue the Eucharistie to the meate of health, some greeuous offence comming betweene, while beeing separated, and not communicating, we be forbidden from that heauenly bread, we be separated from the body of Christ, he himselfe openly saying and warning: I am the bread of life, which came downe from heauen, if any man shall eate of this bread, he shall liue for euer, and the bread which I will giue, is my flesh for the life of the worlde. Howsoeuer M. Hesk. would falsly gather out of this place, Cyprian maketh not two breades, but one bread of life, Christ God & man, as for ye two respects of his Godhead, & manhoode,

that he prateth of, cannot make Christ to be two breads, but one true foode of our soules. And that Cyprian doth apply this text to the sacrament only, it is utterly false, (in that he saith:) we must pray for this daily bread Christ, to feede vs, although for some greeuous offence, we be restrained from the sacrament, as is also euident by these words that follow. 
                        Quando ergo dicit in aeternum viuere, si quis ederit de tius pane, vt manifestum est cos vinera, qui corpus eius 
                              〈◊〉
                           , & Eucharistitum 
                              ••
                           re cōmunicationis accipiunt: ita contrae timendū est & erandum, ne dam quis abstentus separatur a Christi corpore, procul remaneat a salute, comminante ipso & dicente: Nist ederitis carnem f
                              •
                           ij hominis, & biberi
                              •
                           is sanguinem eius, non habebitis vitam in vobis. Et ideo panem nostrium, id est, Christum dari nobis quo
                              •
                           idie petimus, vt qui in Christo manemus & vinimus, a sanctificatione & corpore eius non recedamus. Therefore when he saith, that he liueth for euer, whosoeuer shal eate of his bread, as it is manifest that they do liue, which touch or come neare, vnto his body, and by the right of communication receiue the sacrament of thankesgiuing: so contrariwise, it is to be feared, and to be prayed for, lest while any being sequestred, is separated from ye body of Christe, he remaine farre from health, he himselfe threatening & saying: except ye shal eate the fleshe of the sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, you shall haue no life in you. And therefore we pray daily, that our bread, yt is to say, Christ may be giuen to vs daily, that we which remaine & liue in Christ, go not away from sanctification, and his bodie. In these wordes, as in the former, Cyprian directly referreth that text to our spirituall communication with the body of Christ, by right of which communication, we receiue the sacrament thereof. And this participation of Christ he calleth Contingere & attingere corpus Christi, & not to touch his body with our teeth or mouth in yt sacramēt as M. Heskins dreameth. Here followeth Euthymius, of whose antiquitie we haue spoken in the first booke. Neuerthelesse we wil examine his saying, which is this In 6. Ioan. Duobus modis, &c. Christ is saide to be bread two wayes, that is after his godhead, and after his manhood, therefore when he

had taught the manner, which is after his godhead, now doeth he also teach the manner, which is after his manhoode. For he did not say, which I do giue, but which I will giue, for he would giue it in his last supper, when thankes being giuen, he tooke bread, and brake it, and gaue it to his disciples and saide: take, eate, this is my body. M. Heskins maruelleth that the aduersaries cheekes waxe not redd for shame, to see so plaine a sentence against them. But if we knew not that Maister Heskins had beene as impudent as a frier, we might maruell, that he was not ashamed, first to alledge Euthymius, as a writer within 6. hundreth yeares after Christ, who liued about the yeare of our Lorde 1180. And secondly to make two breads of that which Euthymius saith, to be one bread after two manners. Finally, although Euthymius referred this text to the sacrament, yet saith he nothing for the carnall presence, in as much as it is manifest, that Christ spake there of a spiritual communication of his fleshe, or else all infantes are damned that receiue not the sacrament.
               
               
                  The fift Chapter proceedeth vpon the same text, by S. Augustine, and Chrysostome.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  S. Augustine is alledged De Agricultura agri Dominici, a treatise of no account for the authoritie,
                        Fulke.
                      being falsely intituled to Augustine, which was the worke of a farre later writer. The wordes neuerthelesse are these: The table of thy spouse hath whole bread, and a holy cuppe, which bread although we haue seene broken and brused in his passion, yet he remained whole in that his indiuided vnity with his father. Of this bread and of this cup, our Lorde himselfe saide: The bread which I will giue is my fleshe for the life of the world, and the cuppe which I wil sanctifie is my bloud which shalbe shed for you vnto remission of sinnes. This place is falsly & truncatly cited by M. Hesk. thus: Quem panē etsi fractum cōminutum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            vidimus, integer tamen cum ipso suo patre manet in coelis. De quo pane dicit: panis, quem ego dabo, caro mea est pro mundi vita. Which he Englisheth thus: which bread although we haue seen brokē & brused on ye crosse: yet it abideth with yt his father whole in heauen: of the which bread he saith, &c. Wheras ye very

wordes are quem panem etsi fractum comminunum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            vidimus in passione, integer tamen mansit in illa sua indiuidua vnitate.
                      
                     De isto pane, & de isto calice dicebat ipse Dominus. Panis quem ego dedero caro 
                           〈◊〉
                         est pro saeculi vita, &c. Although this writer as it is manifest to any man that will reade his treatise, speaketh onely of the vnitie of the Godhead of Christ, with his Father and the holy Ghoste, notwithstanding, the breaking of his body in his passion, which is represented in the sacrament: yet M. Heskins, vpon his owne falsification, inferreth, that the body of Christ was and is in three sundrie places, on the Table or Altar, on the Crosse, and in heauen with his father. Yea, & he appealeth to the grammarian for the nature of a Relatiue, That the same bread is on the table, which was broken on the crosse, and that which was broken on the crosse, is it which is whole sitting in heauen. Which, how vaine a reason it is, when it is vrged of yt thing which hath two natures vnited in one person, as our Sauiour Christ hath, I appeale from all grammarians to al Catholike diuines: as in ye saying of Christ, no man hath ascended into heauen, but he that came downe from heauen, euen the sonne of man, which is in heauen, Ioan 9. Let M. Hesk. with ye grāmarian vrge the relatiue in this place, & he shal proue him selfe both an Anabaptist, & a Marcionist. For Christ cōcerning his humanitie came not down out of heauen, neither was he in heauen according to his humanity when he was on ye earth. But what stand we trifling about this testimonie? Seeing Augustine both in ye interpetation of this whole chapter is so copious, & vpon the Psal. 98. in exposition of this text is so plain & direct against the carnal presens of Christs body in ye sacrament: Nisi quis &c. acceperunt illud stulte, carn
                           •
                        liter illud cogitauerunt, & puta
                           •
                        erūt quòd praecifurus esset Dominus particulas quas dā de corpore suo & daturus illis, &c. Ille autē instruxit eos, & ait illic, spiritus est qui vinificat, caro autē nihil predest. Verba quae loquatu
                           •
                         sū vobis, spiritus est & vita. Spiritualiter intelligite, quae loquatus sum. Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis, & bibituri illum sanguinem, quem fusuri sunt, qui me crucifigent: sacramentum aliquod vobis commendati: spiritualiter intellectum viuificabit vos▪
                        
                        
                           •
                        t si necesse est illud visibiliter celebrari, oportet tamen inuisibiliter intelligi. Except a man eate the flesh &c. They tooke it folishly, they imagined it carnally, and thought that our Lorde would haue cut off certaine peeces of his 
                              〈◊〉
                            and haue giuen them, &c. But he instructed them, and 
                              〈◊〉
                            vnto them, It is the spirite that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing.
                      
                     The wordes which I haue spoken to you, are spirite and life. Vnderstand you spiritually that which I haue spoken. You shall not eate this body which you see, and drinke this bloud which they shall shed which shall crucifie me: I haue commended vnto you a certaine sacrament or mysterie, which beeing spiritually vnderstoode, shall quicken you. Although it is necessarie that the same be celebrated visibly, yet must it be vnderstood inuisibly. Likewise In 6. Ioan. Tr. 27. Illi enim putabant eum erogaturum corpus suum, ille autem dixit se ascensurum in Coelum vti
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            integrum. Cum videatis filium hominis ascendentem vbi erat priùs: certè vel tunc videbitis quia non eo modo, quo putatis, erogat corpus suum: certè vel tunc intelligetis, quia gratia eius non consumitur morsibus. (He speaketh plainely if they will vnderstand him.) For they thought yt he would giue his body, but he said that he wold ascend whole into heauen. Whē you shal see the sonne of man ascend vp where he was before, surely then at the least you shall see, that hee giueth not his body after that maner that you think, surely then at the length you shall vnderstand, that his grace is not cōsumed with bitings. If these places were not most manifest, euen to the first eye yt looketh vpon them, I might spend time in obseruing and noting out of them.
                  
                  We come nowe to Chrysostome, who in his 45. Hom. in Ioan. vpon those wordes, The bread which I will giue is my flesh, saith, The Iewes that time tooke no profite of those sayings, but we haue taken the profite of the benefite. Wherefore it is necessarily to be saide, howe woonderfull the mysteries be, and wherefore they were giuen, and what profite there is of them. And immediatly after, We are one body and members of his flesh and of his bones: and yet more plainely, And that we might be conuerted into that flesh, not onely by loue, but also in deede, it is

brought to passe by the meat which he hath graunted vnto vs. He addeth also an other cause of the giuing of this mysterie: When hee would shewe foorth his loue toward vs, hee ioyned him selfe 
                           〈…〉
                         his body, and brought him selfe into one with vs, that the 
                           〈◊〉
                         might be vnited with the head. Finally he adioyneth a plaine place for the proclamer: I would be your brother, and for your sakes I tooke flesh and bloud with you, and by what things I was conioyned vnto you, those things againe I haue giuen vnto you. Here he triumpheth, as though the game were his, when in deede there is nothing for his purpose, but much against it: For no one word of all these sentences proueth, that the sixt of Iohn must be vnderstoode of the supper otherwise, then as it is a sacrament of that feeding and coniunction of vs with Christ, which is therein described. And wheras he argueth vpō the last sentence, Christ gaue vs that flesh by which he was ioined to vs, but he was ioyned to vs by very substantiall flesh, therfore he gaue vs his very substantiall flesh. I confesse it to bee most true, for he gaue his very substantiall flesh to be crucified for vs. If he vrge yt he gaue his flesh in yt sacrament, although Chrysostome saith not so in this place directly, yet the manner of the participation of his flesh must be such, as is the maner of his coniunction with vs, but yt is spiritual, by which he is the head, and we the members, and yet vnited in one very substantiall flesh: therefore the manner of participation of his flesh in the sacrament, is also spirituall and not carnall. Maister Heskins reiecteth this participation to bee the fruition of the benefites of his body and bloud crucified, bycause that (saith hee) is common to all the sacraments, and not proper to this. But that the substaunce of all sacramentes is one, and the difference is in the manner of dispensation of them, wee haue shewed sufficiently in the first booke, which were tedious nowe to repeate. Wherefore we must now set downe what Chrysostome speaketh of the bloud of Christe. This bloud maketh that the kinges image doth flourish in vs. This bloud doth neuer suffer the beautie and nobilitie of the soule, which it doth alwayes water and nourish, to fade or waxe

faint. For bloud is not made of meate soudenly, but first it is a certaine other thing. But this bloud at the first doth water the soule, and indue it with a certaine great strength. This mysticall bloud driueth diuelles farre off, and allureth Angels and the Lorde of Angels vnto vs. For when the diuelles see the Lordes bloud in vs, they are turned to flight, but the Angels runne foorth vnto vs. This bloud being shed did wash the whole world, whereof Paule to the Hebrues doth make a long proces. This bloud did purge the secrete places, and the most holy place of all. If then the figure of it had so great power in the temple of the Hebrues, and in Aegypt, beeing sprinkled vpon the vpper postes of the doores, much more the veritie. This bloud did signifie the golden altar. Without this bloud the chiefe priest durst not goe into the inward secret places. This bloud made the priestes. This bloud in the figure purged sinnes, in which if it had so great force, if death so feared the shadowe, how much I pray thee will it feare the truth it selfe? This bloud is the health of our soules, with this bloud our soule is washed, with it she is decked, with it she is kindled. This bloud maketh our minde cleerer then the fire, more shining then golde. The effusion of this bloud made heauen open. Truely the mysteries of the Church are woonderfull, the holy treasure house is woonderfull. From Paradise a spring did runne, from thence sensible waters did flowe: from this table commeth out a spring, which powreth foorth spirituall flouds. Chrysostome in these wordes doth extoll the excellencie of the bloud of Christe shed vpon the crosse, the mysterie whereof is celebrated and giuen to vs in the sacrament, and therefore hee saith, it is Mysticus sanguis mysticall bloud which wee receiue in the sacrament, which word Mysticall, M. Heskins a common falsarie, hath left out in his translation, to deceiue the vnlearned reader. Hee laboureth much to proue that Chrysostome spake in this long sentence of yt sacrament, which is needlesse, for as he spake of the sacrament, so spake he of the passion of Christe, and of the sacrifices and ceremonies of the olde lawe, and all vnder one name of bloud. By which it is more then manifest, that hee vseth the name of bloud figuratiuely, and ambiguously, therefore nothing can bee gathered thereout, to fortifie M. Heskins

bill of the naturall bloud of Christ to be in the challice. The honourable titles of the sacrament, proue no transubstantiation nor carnal presence in this sacramēt more then in the other.
                  The same Chrysostome vpon Cap. 9. ad Heb. Hom. 16. sheweth howe the bloud of Christ that purged the old sacrifices; is the same which is giuen vs in the sacrament of the new testament. 
                        Non enim corporalis erat mundatio, sed spiritualis, & sanguis spiritualis, Quomodo hoc? Noune ex corpore manauis? Ex corpore quidem, sed a spiritu sancto. Hoc vos sanguine non Moses, sed Christus aspersit, per verbum quod dictum est, Hic est sanguis noui testamenti, in remissionem peccarorum. For that was no corporall cleansing but spirituall, and it was spirituall bloud. Howe so? Did it not flowe out of his body? It did in deede flowe out of his body, but from the holy spirit. Not Moses but Christe did sprinkle you with this bloud, by that worde which was spoken: This is the bloud of the newe testament for the remission of sinnes. Thus let Chrysostome expound him selfe, touching the mysticall or spirituall bloud of Christe, which both was offered in the old sacrifices, and nowe feedeth vs in the sacrament: if it were in the olde sacrifices naturally present, then is it so nowe, if the vertue onely was effectuall, so is it also to vs, and no neede of transubstantiation or carnall presence.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The sixt Chapter proceedeth in the opening of the vnderstāding of the same text of S. Iohn, by Beda and Cyrillus.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     Although Beda our countriman were far out of ye compasse of 600. yeres, and so vnfitly matched with Cyrillus a Lord of the higher house, yet speaketh he nothing for ye corporal presence of Christes body in the sacrament, but directly against it, His words vpon this text of Saint Iohn are these: Hunc panem Dominus dedit, &c. This bread our Lord gaue, when he deliuered the ministerie of his body and bloud vnto his disciples, & when he offered him selfe to his father on the altar of the crosse. And where he saith, for the life of the world, we may not

vnderstand it for the elementes, but for men that are signified by the name of the worlde. In these wordes Beda according to the custome of the olde writers, and the doctrine of the Church of Englande in his time, and long after, calleth the sacrament, the mysterie of the body & bloud of Christ, and not otherwise. Yet M. Heskins pythely doth gather, that as he calleth the flesh of Christ on the crosse, breade, and yet it is verie flesh; so the fleshe of Christ in the sacrament is called bread, & yet it is verie flesh. Alas, this is such a poore begginge of that in question, videlicet, that the fleshe of Christ is in the sacrament according to his grosse meaning, that I am ashamed to heare it. Why might he not rather reason thus? the fleshe of Christe on the crosse is called bread, and yet it is not naturally bread: euen so the bread of the sacrament is called flesh, & yet it is not naturall fleshe. It is plaine that breade, in that texte of Iohn is taken figuratiuely for spirituall foode, and so the flesh and bloud of Christ on the crosse is our food, and the same is communicated to our faith in the sacrament.
                  Cyrillus in 6. Ioan. by M. Heskins alledged, speaketh neuer a worde either of the sacrament, or of Christes corporall presence therein. Antiquus ille panis, &c. The old bread was onely a figure, an image and a shadowe, neither did it giue to the corruptible bodie any thing, but a corruptible nutriment for a little time. But I am that liuing and quickening breade for euer. And the breade which I will giue is my fleshe, which I will giue for the life of the worlde. Thou seest howe by little and little, he more and more openeth him selfe, and doeth set foorth this wonderfull mysterie. Hee saide, hee was the liuing and quickening breade, which shoulde make the partakers of it without corruption, and giue them immortalitie. Nowe he saith his fleshe is that breade, which hee will giue for the life of the worlde, and by which hee will quicken vs that are partakers of the same: for truely, the quickening nature of the WORD beeing ioyned to it by that vnspeakeable manner of vnion, maketh it quickening, and therefore this flesh doth quicken them that are partakers of it. For it casteth foorth death from them, and vtterly expelleth destruction.
                     
Maister Heskins alledgeth two reasons to proue that Cyrillus speaketh of the sacrament, and neither of both worth a strawe. First, bicause he calleth it a woonderfull mysterie, as though the incarnation of Christ whereof he speaketh expresly, were not a woonderfull mysterie. Secondly, By that he saith the flesh of Christe giueth life to the partakers. For the proper partaking of Christes flesh, is in the receiuing of this holy sacrament. As though we are not partakers of Christes flesh by faith, according to that saying of Augustine vpon the same place, Vt quid paras dentes & ventrem? crede & manducasti. Why doest thou prepare thy teeth and thy bellie? Beleeue and thou hast eaten &c. you see it is a poore helpe that he hath out of Cyrillus, when hee speaketh neuer a woorde for his cause nor of his cause.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The seuenth Chapter endeth the exposition of this text by Theophylact and Lyra.
                  A short aunswere shall serue this Chapter, these two Burgesses of the lower house being late writers, speake fauourably for Maister Heskins bill.
                        Fulk.
                      But their authoritie is so small, that wee make none account of their speach, seeing not onely many in the lower house haue spoken against it, but all the whole vpper house is manifestly contrarie vnto it. And whereas hee chargeth Oecolampadius for adding this worde tantùm, onely, in his translation of Theophylact, I doubt not but Oecolampadius followed either a truer copie, or a better reason then Maister Heskins in so many additions, detractions, and falsifications of Doctors, which hee hath vsed in this worke. Finally, where he chargeth the aduersaries with cauilling and slaundering; when they say that Popish Priestes make God: he himselfe slaundereth his aduersaries, for we haue learned of their owne writers, & namely of S. Bonauentura, that a Priest is, creator sui creatori
                           •
                        , the creator of his creator, and that Christ is his prisoner on the altar.
               
               
                  
                  The eyght Chapter declareth, by whose authoritie and power, the sacrament is consecrated & Christes bodie made present.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  As though such blasphemous speaches as I haue touched imediatly before, had neuer ben vttered by Papists,
                        Fulk.
                      M. Heskins stomaketh the matter, & rayleth throughout this Chapter against his aduersarie, for charging ye priests with such arrogancie, as though they tooke vpon them to make God. Nowe concerning the purpose of the Chapter we agree, that God & no man, Christ and not the minister, doth consecrate the sacrament, and make Christes bodie and bloud to be present. I might therefore passe ouer his authorities, but that out of some of them he gathereth also his corporall presence & transubstantiation. The first is Damascen: De Orth. Fid. Lib. 4. Ca. 14. If thou aske now how the bread is made the bodie of Christ, and the wine and water the bloud of Christ? I also answere thee: The holy Ghost euer shadoweth, and worketh these things aboue speech and vnderstanding: The bread and wine are transsumed. This place Maister Heskins noteth for a plaine place, both for the presence and for transubstantiation. If it were as plain as he would haue it, yet is Damascen but a Burgesse of the lower house, out of the compasse of the challenge. But whatsoeuer his opinion was of the presence, certaine it is that he knew not transubstantiation, which the Greekes long after did not acknowledge. And though we take the word of transuming for changing, turning, transmuting, or transelementing, which wordes the olde writers doe sometimes vse, yet meane they not chaunge of one substance into another, but of the nature and propertie of the foode to be chaunged from corporall to spirituall and not otherwise.
                  Next followeth Chrysostome in 2: Tim. Ho. 2. Volo quiddam, &c. I will adde a certeine thing plainely wonderfull, and maruell ye not, neither be you troubled. And what is this? The holy oblation whether Peter or Paul, or a Priest of any maner of life do offer it, is euen the same, which Christ gaue vnto his disciples, and which the priestes do now make. This hath nothing lesse then that. Why so? because men do not sanctifie it but Christ which had hallowed

it before. For as the wordes which Christ spake are the same which the priests do now pronoūce so also is the oblation. Here M. Hesk. cutteth of ye taile of this sentence, for Chrysostoms wordes are: Ita & oblatio eadem est, eadem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         baptismi ratio est, adoe omnia in fide consistunt. So the oblation is the same, and the same reason is of baptisme, so all thinges consist in faith. Marke here that M. Heskins conceleth that the change and consecration is the same yt is in baptisme, and the thing is receiued onely by faith as in baptisme. And nothing else meaneth Chrysostome in the seconde place by M. Heskins cited, Hom. 30. de prod. The same Christ is nowe present which did beutifie that table, hee doth also consecrate this. For it is not man, which by consecration doeth make the thinges set foorth on the table, the bodie and bloude of our Lorde, but euen Christ which was crucified for vs, The wordes are spoken by the mouth of the Prieste, but by the power & grace of God they are consecrated. This is (saith hee) my bodye, with this worde the thinges set foorth are consecrated. Here we must note that Christ maketh the bread and wine his bodie and bloude. Wee acknowledge he doth so, for the faith of the worthy receiuer, as in the former sentence it is manifest.
                  Nowe commeth S. Ambrose De benedict. Patr. c. 9. Who is then rische, but he in whome is the depth of wisdome and knowledge? This rich man then is the treasure of this fatte breade, which who shall eate, he cannot hunger. This breade he gaue to his Apostles, that they should deuide it to the beleeuing people. And now hee giueth the same to vs, which hee beeing the Priest doeth consecrate with his owne wordes. This bread then is made the meate of the Sainctes. 
                     Here againe M. Heskins cutteth off that which liketh him not for it followeth: Possumus & ipsium Dominum accipere qui suā carnem nobis dedit. Sicut ipse ait, ego sunt panis vitae. Ille enim accipit qui scipsum probat: qui autem accipit, non moritur peccatoris morte, quia panis hic remissio peccatorum est. Wee may receiue euen the Lorde himselfe which hath giuen vs his fleshe, euen as he himselfe saith, I am ye bread of life. For he receiueth him, yt examineth himselfe, & he which receiueth him dyeth not the death of a sinner, for this bread is the remission of sinnes.
                     
This place doth first ouerthrowe M. Heskins dreame of two breades. Secondly, the Papistes assertion, that wicked men receiue the bodie of Christ. And thirdly teacheth, that to eate Christ & his fleshe, is to receiue forgiuenesse of sinnes, which M. Heskins and the Papistes denye.
                  Another place of Ambrose is alledged. li. 4. de sacra. Ca. 4. Let vs then teach this. How can that which is bread be the bodie of Christ? By consecration. By what and whose wordes then is the consecration? Of our Lorde Iesus. For all the other things that be sayed, praise is giuen to God, petition is made in prayer for the people, for Kings, and for the rest: but when it is come to that, the honourable sacrament is made, now the Priest vseth not his owne wordes, but he vseth the wordes of Christe. Therefore the worde of Christ maketh this sacrament. This is noted to be a plaine place for M. Iuell, but for what purpose, I cannot tell, except it be to proue that he will not denye, that the sacrament is consecrated and made the bodie of Christ to the worthie receiuer, by the wordes of Christe, as before. Eusebius Emissenus hath the next place in Hom. Pasc. The inuisible Priest with his worde, by a secreat power, turneth the visible cratures into the substance of his body & bloud. This place being more apparant for his transubstantiation then any that he hath alledged, he vrgeth not, nor gathereth of it, but onely that Christ is the author of the consecration and conuersion. As for ye conuersion, I thinke his conscience did tell him, that it was not of the substance, but of the vse of things, a spirituall and not a corporall change, as both Eusebius and other writers do sufficiently expound what maner of mutation it is. The last man is Cyprian De Caen Dom. It were better for them a milstone to be tyed to their neckes, and to be drowned in the Sea, then with an vnwashed conscience to take the morsell at the hande of our Lorde, who vntil this day doeth create, and sanctifie, and blesse, and to the godly receiuers diuide this his most true, and most holy bodie. Here M. Heskins vrgeth, that he createth not an imaginatiue bodie, but his moste true bodie. But ye blinde man seeth not, that either

this creation is figuratiue, or else it ouerthroweth transsubstantiation. For to create, is not to change one substance into another, but to make a substance of nothing. Secondly, that Christ diuideth his bodie, but to ye godly receiuers. Finally, in the same Sermon he saith: that all this mysterie is wrought by faith. Haec quotie
                              •
                            agimus, &c. So often as we do these things, wee do not sharpen our teeth to byte, but with a syncere faith, we breake and deuide this holy breade.
                  
                  To conclude this Chapter, seeing M. Heskins hath laboured so well to proue that Christ onely & not ye priest doth consecrate, and so often chargeth vs with slaundering them, to make God & the bodie of Christ, I would demaunde, wherefore the Bishop, when he giueth them the order of Priesthood, giueth them power to consecrate, saying: Accip
                           •
                         potestatem consecrandi, & offerend
                           •
                         pro vinit & defunctis: Take authoritie to consecrate, to offer for the quick and the dead. If the Priest cannot consecrat, whereto serueth this power? If the Priest take vpon him to consecrat Christ God and man, howe are we charged with slaundering of them?
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The ninth Chapter expoundeth the next text that followeth in Saint Iohn.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     The text which he taketh vpon him to expound in this Chapter is this: The Iewes stroue among them selues, saying: How can this fellowe giue vs his flesh to eat? And first he sayth, that they being carnall, could not vnderstande the spirituall talke of Christe, wherein as he saith truely, so hee speaketh contrarie to him selfe. For he will haue those words to be spokē carnally. They could not vnderstand, (sayth he) because they did not beleeue, & therefore they questioned how it might be, euen as the Pseudochristians do. How can the bodie of Christ be in the sacrament vnder so litle a peece of bread? &c. But the aunswere to all their questions is, that they be don by the power of God. And if you proceede, to enquire of his will, he hath declared it in these wordes, the breade which I will giue is my fleshe, not a fantasticall,

nor a mathematicall, or figuratiue flesh, but that same flesh
                           •
                         that I will giue for the life of the worlde. But if wee proceede to demaund further, how he proueth, that he will giue yt flesh to be eaten with our mouth, carnally in the sacrament: then is he at a staye; he can go no further. Wee doubt not of the power of God, we will extend his will no further then his worde. For to eat the fleshe of Christe is not to eat it with our mouthes, but with our hearts, by faith, as Augustine vppon the same text teacheth vs. 
                        Hoc est ergo manducare illam escam, & illum bibere ponum, in Christo manere, & illum manentem in se habere. Ac per hoc qui non manet in Christo, & in quo non manet Christus, procul dubio nec manducat spiritualiter carnem eius, nec bibit cius sanguinē, licèt carnaliter & visibiliter premat dentibus sacramentum corporis & sanguinis Christie sed magis tantę rei sacramentum ad iudicium sibi manducat & bibit. This is therefore to eate that meate, & to drinke that drinke, to abide in Christe, and to haue him abyding in them. And by this, he that abydeth not in Christ, and in whome Christe abydeth not, out of doubt doth neither spiritually eat his flesh, nor drinke his bloud, although carnally, & visibly he presse with his teeth the sacrament of the bodie and bloud of Christ: but rather he eateth and drinketh the sacrament of so great a thing to his owne condemnation. Thus Augustine teacheth, how the flesh of Christe is eaten, and by whome, and what difference betweene the flesh & bloud of Christ, and the sacrament thereof, in all those points directly contrarie to the Papistes, which affirme, that the flesh of Christ is eaten with the mouth, and that it is eaten of the wicked, and last of all, that the sacrament of the flesh of Christ, & his flesh is all one.
                  
               
               
                  The tenth Chapter prouing against the aduersaries that the bodie of Christ may be & is in moe places then one as once.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  M. Heskins taketh occasion of the doubtful (how) of ye Iewes, to answer ye proclaimers (how) that is,
                        Fulke.
                      how Christs body may be in a thousand places & moe at once: & first he trifleth of ye number of places, as though hee required no lesse then a thousand: then he bableth against natural

Philosophie, as though our faith were buylded therevpon, whereas the Papistes, and especially the schoolmen, (euen to lothsomnesse) do reason out of natural philosophie in the greatest mysteries of faith. But to put him out of doubt, we buyld vpon the Scripture our faith, of the trueth of Christes bodie, that it cannot bee in more places then one, because the Apostle sayth, that in respect of his humaine nature, he was made like to his brethren in all things, sinne excepted: Heb. 2. And therefore, where as he will aunswere vs first by Ambrose, De inition. Myst. Cap. Quid hic, &c. What seekest thou here the order of nature in Christes bodie, seeing the selfe same our Lorde Iesus besides nature was borne of a virgin? I say, he aunswereth nothing to the purpose: for neither doth Ambrose speak of the presence of his bodie in more places then one, nor of any carnall presence in the sacrament, but of a mysticall, diuine, and significatiue presence, as is manifest by his wordes that followe immediatly, which M. Heskins, as his custome is, hath craftely suppressed. Vera vti
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           , car
                              •
                            Christi, que crucifixa est, quae sepulta est: verè ergo carnis illius sacramentum est. Ipse clamat Dominus Iesus: Hoc est corpus meum: Ante benedictionem verborum Coelestium alia species nominatur, post consecrationem corpus Christi significatur. Ipse dicit sanguinem suum: ante consecrationem aliud dicitur, post consecrationem sanguis nuncupatur. It was the true fleshe of Christ which was crucified, which was buryed: therefore it is truely, the sacrament of that fleshe. Our Lorde Iesus him selfe cryeth: This is my bodie: before the blessing of the heauenly wordes, it is called another kinde, after the consecration, the bodie of Christe is signified. Hee him selfe sayth, it is his bloud: before consecration it is called another thing, after consecration it is called bloud. By this place you see, that ye Lords supper is the sacrament of his true fleshe that was crucified, and that the bodie of Christ is signified by it. Here is no one worde sounding either to the carnall presence▪ or to the presence in many places.
                  His second proofe is out of Augustine, that Christ was

both in his owne hands, & in his twelue Apostles hands, in Psal. 33. And he was borne in his owne hands. But brethren, howe may this be done in man, who can vnderstande? who is borne in his owne hands? A man may be carried in thè handes of other men, in his owne handes no man is borne. Howe it may be vnderstanded in Dauid, according to the letter, we find not. But in Christ we finde it. For Christ was borne in his owne hands, when he commending his owne body sayd: this is my bodie. I passe ouer, that he translateth, comendans ipsum corpus, giuing forth the selfe same bodie. 
                     But howe fraudulently he abuseth the authoritie of Augustine, it is manifest by that which followeth, & ipse se portabat quodam modo cum diceret, hoc est corpus meum. And he carried him selfe after a certein maner, when he sayde: this is my bodie. These wordes declare, that Augustine woulde not teach, that Christe absolutely did beare him selfe in his hands, as M. Heskins would beare vs in hand, but after a certeine maner. And no man writeth so plainly, of the necessitie of Christes bodie to be in one place, as he. I will cite one onely short place, to auoide tediousnesse: 
                        In Ioan. Cap. 7. Tr. 30. Sursum est Dominus, sed etiam hîc, & veritas Dominus. Corpus enim Domini, in quo resurrexit, vno loco esse potesti veritas eius vbi
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            diffusa est. The Lord is aboue, and he is also here, and the Lorde is trueth. For the Lordes bodie, in which he rose againe, can be but in one place, but his truth is spread ouer all places. This saying, beside that it limitteth the bodie of Christe to one place, will expound the other sayings, which he bringeth out of Chrysostome, Basil, &c. that Christ is both in heauen and on earth.
                  
                  The next proofe is out of the Liturgies of Basil and Chrysostome, which he calleth their masses, although writen by neither of them. The wordes in effect are all one, and therefore it were vaine to rehearse them both: Looke ô Lorde Iesu Christ our God, from thy holie habitation, and from the seat of the glorie of thy kingdome, and come to sanctifie vs, which sittest aboue with thy father, and art present with vs beneath inuisibly, vouchsafe with thy mightie hande to giue vnto

vs thy immaculate bodie and precious bloud, and by vs to all thy people. The distinction of the two natures in Christ, will soone aunswere this presence of Christe, both in heauen and in earth, as in the late rehearsed sentence of Augustine. And Basil him selfe, in his booke de Spiritu Sancto Cap. 22. prooueth the Holie Ghoste to be God, because he is reported in Scripture to be present in diuerse places at once, so that, except wee will with Eutyches ouerthrowe the trueth of Christes bodie, wee must holde that it is in one onely place at one time, and not in many places, or euery where.
                  But Chrysostome (I trowe) shall helpe him In 10. Heb. Hom. 17. This sacrifice is an exemplar of that, we offer the selfe same alwayes. Neither do we nowe offer one Lambe, and tomorrow another, but the selfe same thing alwayes. Wherefore this sacrifice is one. Or else by this reason, because it is offered in many places, there are many Christes. Not so, but one Christ is euery where, both here being full, and there full, euen one bodie And as he, that is euerie where offered, is one bodie, & not many bodies: Euen so also is it one sacrifice.
                  
                  First, M. Heskins here, I knowe not for what cause, peruerteth the order of Chrysostomes wordes, for where he sayeth: Alioqui hac ratione, Heskins setteth them down vn
                           •
                        m est hoc sacrificium hac ratione. Alicqui, &c. 
                     Secondly, which is no newe thing in him, he leaueth out that which is the resolution of all this doubtfull disputation, namely, that which followeth: Hoc autem quod facimus in commemorationem quidem fit eius, quod factum est. Hoc enim sacite, inquit in meam commemorationem. Non aliud sacrificium sicut Pontifex, sed idipsum semper facimus, magis autem recordationem sacrificij operamur. But this which we do is done truely in remembrance of that which was done before. For do this (sayeth he) in remembrance of mee. We do not offer another sacrifice, as the high Priest, but the selfe same alwayes, but rather wee exercise the remembrance of the sacrifice.
                  
                  Here is nowe that sacrifice which is offered euery where, by a necessarie correction, brought to the remembrance

of that sacrifice, which was once offered on the crosse, but is celebrated euery where in the ministration of the sacrament. And the same wordes afterward falsely ascribed to Ambrose, haue the same interpretation. The other place vpon the 38. Psalme, differeth not in sense, That Christ is offered on earth, when his bodie is offered. For he speaketh but of a remembrance, or commemoration of the sacrifice of Christe, euen as Chrysostome, and as he him selfe teacheth, lib. 4. Chap. 5. de Sacram. The wordes of the Priest in the celebration. 
                        Fac nobis (inquit) haenc oblationem ascriptam, rationabilem, acceptabilem: quod est figura corporis & sanguinis Domini nostri Iesu Christi. Make (sayeth he) this oblation vnto vs ascribed reasonable, acceptable: which thing is the figure of the bodie and bloud of our Lorde Iesus Christ. This was the Priest wont to say in the celebration of the supper in Saint Ambrose time. 
                     And againe Chap. 6. Ergo memores gloriosissimae eius passionis, & ab inferis resurrectionis, & in Caelum ascensionis, offerimus tibi hanc immaculatam hostiam, rationabilem hostiam, incruentam hostiam, hunc panem sanctum, & calicem vitae aeternae, &c. Therefore being mindfull of his most glorious passion and resurrection from hell, and ascention into heauen, we offer vnto thee this vndefiled sacrifice, this reasonable sacrifice, this vnbloudie sacrifice, this holie bread, and cup of aeternall life. Wee see therefore, that the sacrifice was a remembrance and thanksgiuing, for the onely true sacrifice of Christ once offered by him selfe for all.
                  
                  To conclude, because I will omitt Bernard a late writer, not to be heard in this controuersie: Chrysostome in his booke de Sacerdotio, lib. 3. speaketh not contrarie to him selfe in other places, saying: O miracle, O the goodnesse of God, he that sitteth aboue with his father in the same point of time, is handled with the handes of all, and deliuereth himselfe to them that will receiue him and imbrace him. 
                     Wherefore, this hyperbolical exclamation proueth no more, yt Christes bodie is both in heauen & on earth: then these words of his proue that our bodies are both in heauen & earth,

                        ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 55. Morduca me, dixi, bibe me, & te sarsum habeo, & deorsum tibi connector. I sayde eate me, drinke mee. I haue thee both aboue, and am knitt to thee also beneath. Hitherto therefore nothing is brought to proue that Christes bodie may be in more places then one.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The eleuenth Chapter proueth, that as two bodies may be in one place: so the bodie of Christ being one, may be in diuerse places.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     M. Heskins in this Chapter like a monsterous Gyant, cryeth open battel against naturall Philosophie & reason, and thinketh he hath a sure shield to fight vnder the omnipotencie of God. But for as much as the lawe of nature is the lawe and ordinance of God, he doeth nothing else, but set the power of God against his will and decree, in making whereof did concurre, his power, wisdome, and goodnesse. God hath decreede that one body can be but in one place at one time, and that two bodies cannot occupie one proper place at once, nor one body without comixtion of partes, be in another bodye. And therefore both Cranmer and Oecolampadius haue truely sayed, that it is vnpossible those thinges should be otherwise, then God hath decreed them. Now riseth vp this Gargantua, and will proue by scripture, that one bodie may be in another, and two bodies in one place, & alledgeth the text Ioan 20. that Iesus came, the dores being shutt, and stoode in the middest of them and saide, peace be with you, and this being testifyed for a miraculous comming in of Christ, proueth that he so comming in passed through dore or wall, as his pleasure was to do. Although the wordes of the texte 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      after the dores were shutt, doth not inforce vs to acknowledge any miracle, but that he might be let in of the porter at euen, after the dores were shutt vp for feare of the Iewes soudein breaking in vppon the Disciples that were gathered together in that place: yet I will willingly acknowledge a miraculous comming in of Christe, but no passing through the bordes of the dore, or stones of the wall: but that by his diuine power,

he did either open the dore and shutt it immediatly after he was passed through, or else at the vttermost, that the substance of the dore or wall gaue place to his diuine presence, and immediatly returned to his naturall state and place.
                  And whereas M. Heskins, no lesse impudently then vnlearnedly, doth charge Cranmer with falsifying the Scripture, where he affirmeth, that Christ might as well come into the house when the dore was shutt, as the Apostles coulde go out of prison, the dore being shutt, Act. 5. he doth nothing else but bewray his great folly, ioyned with no lesse malice against the trueth. Cranmer was not ignorant, that the Angell opened the dore to the Apostles, and yet shutt it againe so close, that it could not be perceiued that it had beene opened, euen 
                        •
                     o might the Angell doe at the passage of our Sauiour Christe. What absurditie or repugnance is here, but in such an absurde persons eare, as Heskins is, that ouerthroweth all lawe & order of nature to establish his brutish, and monstrous errour.
                  But nowe we shall heare these monsters brought forth of the doctours, which Scripture hath not, and nature abhorreth: And firste shalbe Chrysostome Hom. de Ioan. Bapt. Sancta Maria, beata Maria, &c. Holy Maria, blessed Marie, both a mother, and a virgine. Shee was a virgine before birth, a virgine after birth. I marueile at this, howe of a virgine, a virgine should be borne, and after the birth of a virgine▪ the mother should be a virgine. Will you knowe howe he was borne of a virgine, and after the birth, how shee was both a mother and a virgine? The dores were shutt, and Iesus entred in. No man doubteth, but that the dores were shutt, he that entred by the dores that were shutt, was no phantasie, he was no spirite, he was verily a body. For what sayd he? looke and see, that a spirite hath no flesh and bones, as ye see mee haue. He had flesh, he had bones, and the dores were shutt. How did fleshe and bones enter when the dores were shutt? The dores are shutt, and hee doth enter, whome wee sawe not goe in. How did he go in? all things are close, there is no place by the which he might go in,

and yet he is within, which entered in. Thou knowest in howe it was done, and doest referre it to the omnipotencie of God. Giue this also to the omnipotencie of God, that he was borne of a virgine. In these wordes Chrysostome saith, that Christe might as well bee borne of a Virgine, as hee entered into the house after the doores was shut, this was not without a miracle, and no more was that. But for two bodies in one place at one instant, hee speaketh nothing as yet. No more doth Hieronyme In Apol. cont. Iouin. Respondeant mihi &c. Let them aunswere me howe Iesus entered in, the doores being shut, when he shewed his handes to bee felt, and his side to be considered, and shewed both flesh and bones, least the trueth of his body should be thought to be a fantasie: And I will aunswere howe Saint Marie is both mother and a Virgine, a Virgine before birth, a mother before she was knowne of man.
                  
                  Vpon these places Maister Heskins doth inferre, that if the doores did open as the going in of Christ, which (hee saith) is a shaddowing of the miracle, and a falsifying of the scriptures, as though it were not miraculous ynough, except it tooke away the trueth of Christes body, and ouerthrewe the immutable decree of GOD, then his entering In, could not proue that the clausures of the virginitie (I vse his owne wordes) of the mother of Christ notwithstanding his birth remained alwayes closed, which the Doctours intended to proue. I would not for shamefastnesse, enter into discourse of the secrets of virginitie, & last of all the high mysteries of the incarnation and natiuitie of our sauiour Christe, of the immaculate Virgine Marie, in any such Physicall questions, but that I am driuen vnto it by this shamelesse aduersarie. And yet will I onely alledge the authoritie of the scripture, referring the collection to the reuerent & shamefast consideration of the honest reader. Saint Luke writeth of his presentation at Hierusalem. As it is written in the lawe of the Lorde, euery manchilde that first openeth the matrice, shall bee called holy to the Lorde. Luke 2. According to this text, the miracle of his natiuitie preseruing her virginitie,

and of his entering in, the doores beeing shut, are verie like in deede, and agreeable to the Doctours meaning.
                  But hee proceedeth with Chrysostomes authoritie, Hom. 86. in Ioan. Dignum autem dubitatione est &c. It is woorthie of doubt, howe the incorruptible body did receiue the fourme of the nayles, and could be touched with mortall hande. But let not this trouble thee. For this was of permission. For that body being so subtile and light, that it might enter in the doores being shut, was voyde of all grossenesse or thicknesse: but that his resurrection might be beleeued, he shewed him selfe such a one. And that thou mightest vnderstand, that it was euen he that was crucified, that none other did rise for him, therefore he roase againe with the tokens of the crosse. Except wee vnderstand Chrysostome fauourably in this place, where hee denyeth the glorified body of Christe to haue any thicknesse, but that it might pearce through all thinges as a spirite, wee shall make him author of a great heresie, both concerning the body of Christe, and concerning our bodyes which after the resurrection, must bee made conformable to his glorious body, Philip. 3. But in an other place, as wee shall heare afterwarde, hee doeth eyther expound or correct him selfe in this matter. And yet this that hee saith here, helpeth not Maister Heskins one whit, and that for two causes, one, for that hee speaketh heere of the glorified bodye of Christe, who instituted his sacrament before his bodye was glorified.
                  An other cause, for that hee doeth not heere make two bodyes in one place, or one bodye in an other, but to auoyde that absurditie, doeth transfourme the bodye of Christe into the subtiltie and thinnesse of a spirite. But in an other sentence, De resurrect. Hom. 9. he is of an other minde concerning the bodye of Christe. Non est meum ludificare phantasmate, vanam imaginem visus si timet, veritatem corporis manus & digitus exploret. Potest fortassis aliqua oculos caligo decipere, palpatio corporalis verum corpus agnoscat. Spiritus, inquit,

carnem & ossa non habet sicut me videtis habere: Quod Ostia clausa a penetrani, sola est virtus Diuini spiritus, non sola carnis substantia. It is not my propertie to delude my disciples with a fantasie, if your sight feare a vaine image, let your hand and fingers trie out the trueth of my body. Some myste peraduenture may deceiue the eyes, let bodily handling acknowledge a true body. A spirite (saith he) hath neither flesh nor bones, as you see mee to haue. That I pearced through the doores beeing shut, it is the onely power of the diuine spirite, not the onely substaunce of the flesh. In these wordes, hee ascribeth it to the onely power of his diuine spirite, that he passed through when the doores were shut, and not to the subtiltie of his glorified body, as in the former sentence. Likewise in Ioan. Hom. 90. 
                        Qui intrauit per ostia clausa, non erat phantasma, non erat spiritus, verè corpus erat. Hee that entered in by the doores beeing shut, was no fantasie, hee was no spirite, hee was a body truely and in deede. But wee must passe ouer vnto Saint Ambrose, in Luc. lib. 10. cap. 4. 
                     Habuit admirandi causam Thomas &c. Thomas had a cause to maruell, when hee sawe all thinges being shut vp and closed, the body of Christe by clausures without all wayes for body to enter, the ioyntes beeing vnbroken, to bee entered in amongest them. And therefore it was a woonder, howe the corporall nature passed through the impenetrable body, with an inuisible comming, but with inuisible beholding, easie to be touched, hard to bee iudged. In these woordes of Saint Ambrose, nothing can bee certainely gathered, bycause hee doth not him selfe determine after what manner the body of Christe came in, but onely sheweth what cause Thomas had to doubt and maruell, sauing that in an other place, I finde him write suspitiously of the trueth of the body of Christe, and of the true properties thereof. For in his booke De mysterijs initiandis Cap. 9. hee hath these woordes, speaking of the body of Christ: Corpus enim Dei corpus est spirituale, Corpus Christi corpus est diuini spiritus. The body of GOD is a spirituall body. The body of Christe is the body of a diuine spirite. These sayinges for reuerence of the Authours, may haue a gentle construction, but otherwise

they are not directly consonant to the Catholique confession of the trueth of Christes body, and the properties thereof, remayning euen after his Assention, as hath bene discussed by the scriptures, especially after the Church was troubled with the heresies of the Eutychians and Monotholites.
                  Nowe followeth Saint Augustine, De agone Christiano Cap. 24. Nec eos audiamus &c. Neither let vs giue eare to them that denye, that the body of Christe is risen againe of such qualitie, as it was put into the graue. Neither let is moue vs that it is written that hee appeared soudenly to his disciples after the doores were shut, that therefore we should denye it to bee an humane body, bicause wee see that contrarie to the nature of this body, it entered by the doores that were shut, for all thinges are possible to GOD. For if hee could before his passion make it as cleare as the brightnesse of the Sunne, wherefore could he not after his passion, also in a moment of time, bring it into as much subtiltie as hee would, that hee might enter in by the doores that were shut.
                  
                  Here first of all Maister Heskins according to his accustomed manner of falsification, translateth tale corpus, the same body, as though there were no difference betweene substaunce: and qualitie. Secondly it is manifest, that Augustine in this place, iudgeth (as in other places most plainely) that the body of Christe nowe glorified, retayneth not onely the substaunce, but also the properties and qualities of a true body, which hee had before he suffered. Although for that moment, he supposeth the body of Christe might be subtiliated, by his Diuine power, to passe through the doores being shut, and yet affirmeth nothing directly, that it was so, but rather that it might bee so. Whereas more probably hee might haue thought, that eyther the doore opened: or the nature of the boordes gaue place, then that the body of Christe for the time was altered.
                  The like place hee hath in him Epistle to Volusianus, which I maruell Maister Heskins hath not noted: Ep. 3. 
                        Ipsa virtus per inuiolatae matris virginea viscera membra infantis

dutie, quae posted per clausa ostia membra i
                              •
                           uenis introduxis. The same power brought foorth his body being an infant, by the Virginall bowels of his vndefiled mother, which afterward brought in his body being a yong-man, by the doores that were shut. Of his natiuitie whereunto this Doctour doth compare his comming in, after the doores were shut, I haue shewed before howe it was, out of the scripture. But let vs heare what Cyrillus saith of ye same matter, In Ioan. lib. 12. cap
                     ▪ 53. clausu foribus &c. After the gates were shut, the Lord by his almightie power, the nature of things being ouercome, soudenly entered vnto his disciples: let no man therfore enquire, how the body of our Lord entred in, after the gates were shut, when he may vnderstand that these things are described by the Euangelist not of a bare man a
                           •
                         we be nowe, bu
                           •
                         of the almightie sonne of God. For seeing he is true God, he is not subiect to the lawe of nature, which thing did appeare in other his miracles also. Here Maister Heskin
                        •
                      after his wonted sync
                        ••
                     itie, translateth 
                        〈…〉
                     , through the gates beeing shut, otherwise the place of Cyrill is of our side, that hee chaungeth not the nature of his body, but ouercame the nature of other thinges, and so made a passage for him selfe, although the gates were shut, as in his other 
                        〈◊〉
                      hee chaunged not the nature of his body▪ when hee walked on the waters. 
                        〈◊〉
                      the nature of the waters. Hee altered not the trueth of his bodye, when hee arose out of the sepulchre, but remoued the stone from the doore thereof &. For it stoode Cyrillus vppon: by reason of the Eutychian 
                        •
                     eresie, to preserue in all thinge the true properties of the body of Christ, which in all places he doth 
                        •
                     onstantly affirme. But the elder fathers, before they 
                        〈…〉
                      by that here
                        •
                     ie to search out the trueth did 
                        〈◊〉
                      sometimes 
                        〈◊〉
                      sometimes inconsideratly was beside 
                        •
                     hem, affirmes, that he
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      already 
                        〈◊〉
                     , Hilariu
                        •
                      do
                        •
                     h not onely passed through the Lands walle
                        •
                      with his body, in Psalme. 55. but al
                        ••
                      that his body felt 
                        〈◊〉
                      paine in the time of his passion: In. Psalm. 4
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      and in other p
                        •
                     aces: whiche i
                        •
                      a gro
                        ••
                     e and wicked

errour, wherevnto hee was carried, whyle he studied too much to aduaunce his Diuinitie, in the humane nature.
                  Howe be it the trueth of his naturall bodie by other Doctours was in all times affirmed, especially after Eutyches; had broched his wicked heresie. First Origen, as it is cited by Pamphilus in his apollogie out of his booke Peria
                        •
                     chie translated by Ruffinus, thus writeth: 
                        Corpus assumpfit nostro corpori simile: eo solo differens, quod natum ex virgine espiritu sancto est. He toke vpon him a body like vnto our body: in this point onely differing, that it was borne of a virgine by the holy Ghoste. This place would the rather bee noted, because it conteineth the consent of three auncient Doctours, of seueral ages. Origenes, Pamphilus, and Ruffinus. Afterward in the counsel of Chalcedon, & the sixt of Constantinople, they were condemned heretiques, whiche denied either the trueth of the humane nature of Christ, or the true properties thereof. At in this latter counsell was allowed the Epistle of Leo, Ad Flauianum written in time of the former, wherein he writeth: 
                        Simul suit & altitud
                              •
                            Deitatis, & humilitas carnis, seruante vtraque natura et
                              •
                           am post aditatationem, fine defectu, proprietatem suam. Together be both the height of the Godhead, and the humilitie of the fleshe, both the natures, euen after the adiu
                           ••
                        rion, keeping the propertie without defect. And againe, Nusqu
                              •
                           m 
                              〈◊〉
                            differentia naturarum propter vnitatem, sed potius salua proprietate 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              ••
                           turae in vnum personam, vnam subsistentium concurrente. In no place taking away the difference of the natures, because of the vnitie, but rather hauing the proprietie of both the natures, concurring in one person, one subsistence.
                  
                  Those testimonies 
                        〈◊〉
                      shewe the iudgement of the Church concerning this matter, when iust occasion was giuen, narrowly to search out the trueth in the conclusion of this Chapter, Maister Heskins yeelding a reason of his trauell in this matter, alledgeth two causes, the one that the miracle might not be shadowed the

other, that he might shew the workes of Christe to be aboue nature. And both these might stand without his labour. For it was a miracle aboue nature, that the doores of their owne accorde, opened to our sauiour Christ at his entrie, as when Peter also came foorth of the prison Actes 12. But whereas he bringeth in an example of the eternitie of the worlde, which is held by some naturall philosophers, to proue that Gods workes are aboue nature, he sheweth a grosse capacitie, that can not put a difference betweene the errours of naturall Philosophers, and the true lawe and order of nature made by God himselfe, which is vndoubtedly knowen to all wise men, as in these propositions nowe in question. For it is not the opinion of philosophers we stande vpon, but vpon the trueth of thinges naturall, which either sense or first intellections doth manifestly approue vnto vs. For as Tertullian saith, speaking of the trueth of Christes body: 
                        Non lic
                              •
                           t nobis in dubàm sensus istos reuocare; n
                              •
                            & in Christ
                              •
                            d
                              •
                            side illoru
                              •
                            deliberemus. It is not lawful for vs to call in doubt these senses, least in Christe also we should stand in deliberation of the credit of them. The like is to be iudged of such trueth in naturall causes▪ as Christ the true light hath kindled in the mindes of naturall men, to see the works of God in his creatures, lest beside horrible confusion of all thinges, we be driuen also into blasphemou
                        •
                      errour
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The twelfth Chapter aunswereth certaine obiections tha
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to imp
                        ••
                     ge the Catholique doctrine of this matter.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     In the beginning of this Chapter▪ he saith, there was neuer heretiques but had some shew of argumentes to auouche his heresie, and bringeth in diuerse examples, only the proclaymer, made no argument in his 
                        〈◊〉
                      for yt he would haue the people receiue his bare proclamation. What arguments he vsed, let the world iudge & the Papistes if they can, study to answer him. But Oecolampadius (he saith,) hath heaped vp scriptures to proue the

ascention of Christ, which the Papistes doe graunt, & yet acknowledge his presence on the earth in the sacrament: as though his departing out of the world, and presence in the world concerning his bodily presence, could stand together. Then he flyeth to his diuine power, by which he is able to be present in diuerse places, as well as do such and such miracles as he rehearseth, and wisheth that we should not be so streight and cruell to the body of Christ, as to giue it no greater prerogatiue, then vnto any other body. Verily we do acknowledge as great prerogatiue thereof, as he himselfe hath giuen it, whereof we haue vnderstanding by his holy worde, and otherwise it were madnesse in vs, to take vpon vs to be liberall to him which giueth all thinges. And if we found as good authoritie for the vbiquitie, or pluralitie of placing of his body, as we finde for the feeding vs thereby into eternall life, we would as easily confesse the one, as we doe the other. But we finde not in deede (as M. Heskins saith) that he himselfe hath giuen or would giue his body that prerogatiue, to be euery where, or in more places then one at once. As for the possibilitie, we extend it no further then his will. We know he can do what soeuer he will. And many thinges we know he cannot do, because he wil not. But M. Heskins to assure vs of his will, hath nothing to bring, but yt which is al the controuersie, & which most impudently he affirmeth, that he hath proued both by scriptures and doctours, that Christ hath caused his bodie to be in diuers places at one time, which neither scripture nor any Doctour of antiquitie euer did affirme in proper manner of speaking, otherwise in figuratiue speech, we may truly say we eate in the sacrament the body of Christe, which is in heauen, when to speake properly, and wtout figure, we eate but the bread, which to the faithfull receiuer is a sacrament, and seale of our spirituall nourishment, whiche we receiue of his flesh and bloud, after a diuine and vnspeakable manner vnto eternall life: saith rather lifting vs vp into heauen, then bringing Christes body into the earth.
                  
                     Maister Heskins saith, the scriptures that say Christ is in heauen, speake without exclusiues, or exceptiues, and therefore there is no denial imployed, but that he may be beleeued to be also on the earth in the sacrament:
                  When Peter in the Actes 3. affirmeth that Christ must be conteined in heauen, (which is meant of his humanitie) vntill the time of restoring of all thinges: is not this an exclusion of all other places or beeings of his humanitie? When Paule to the Colossians, Colo. 3. willeth them to seeke those thinges that are aboue, and where Christ is at the right hand of God, to set their mindes on thinges aboue, and not on things vpon the earth: is not the re
                        •
                     son, because Christ concerning his humanitie, is aboue & not vpon earth? Is not this an exclusiue and exception? When Christe sayeth not only, I goe to my father, but also I leaue the worlde Ioan. 16. Whiche saying the Apostles confessed to be plaine, and without all parable. Is not this a manifest exclusion of his bodily presence from the worlde? So that it is manifest, that this ascention and abiding in heauen, concerning his humane nature, in which he ascended, is an excluding and shutting out, and denying of all other places or presences of his bodie, then to be in heauen only. But now that he hath thus tombled vp the authorities of the scripture, he wil take in hand to answer the obiections brought out of the Doctours. And first shalbe the saying of Augustine Ad Dardanum ep. 57. Which place contrarie to his bragg in the beginning, he alledgeth truncatly, & by halfe, beginning at the middest thereof. But this place is in Augustine: Et sic venturus est, illa angelica voce testante, quemadmodum ire visus est in Coelum, id est, in eadem carnis forma atque substantia, cui profectò immortalitatem dedit, naturam non abstulis. Secundùm hanc formam non est putandus vbique diffusus. And he shall come euen so (as that voyce of the Angel doth testifie.) euen as he was seene to go into heauen, that is, in the same fourme and substance of his fleshe, to which truly, he hath giuen immortalitie, but he hath not taken the nature from it. According to this fourme, he is not thought, to be diffused

in all places. All this hath Heskins left out, and beginneth thus: Cauendum est enim, no ita veritatem astru
                           •
                        mu
                           •
                         hominis, vt veritatem corporis auferamus. Non est enim consequens, vt quod no Deo est, ita sit vbique vt Deus. For we must beware that we doe not so affirme the Deitie of the man, that we take away the trueth of his body. For it is no consequent, that, that which is in God, should so be euerie where as God is. Note here, that Saint Augustine doeth not onely flatly denie the vbiquitie of Christes body, but also affirmeth that it reteineth still the nature of a bodie, which is to be conteined in one onely place. Againe he sayeth in the same Epistle Iesus vbique per id quod Deus est: in coelo autem per id quod homo est. Iesus by that he is God is euerie where: by that he is man, he is in heauen. Nowe let vs heare, howe wisely Maister Heskins will auoide this authoritie. First he sayeth, that Augustine in this epistle, speaketh not of the sacrament, and therefore these sentences make not against that matter.
                  But when Augustine speaketh generally of the bodie of Christ, that it reteineth the nature of a body, that it is not euerie where, &c. he doeth not except the sacrament. Although it is false, that Heskins saith, for in the latter end of that Epistle he hath these wordes: 
                        Huius corporis caput est Christus, huius corporis vnitas nostro sacrificio commendatur. The head of this bodie is Christ, the vnitie of this bodie is commended in our sacrifice.
                  
                  By sacrifice (as Maister Heskins will confesse) he meaneth the celebration of the sacrament. Wherefore he forgate not the sacrament in that Epistle, but that he might haue made exception thereof, if he had thought good. The seconde aunswere of Maister Heskins is a balde distinction, that a thing may be at one time in many places two wayes, the one is by nature, the other by gifte. By nature he confesseth that the body of Christe can not be in two places, but by gifte it may be euerie where, or in as many places as hee will: and then bringeth many examples to shewe that CHRISTES body hath many properties by gifte, which it hath not by nature. And in this distinction he triumpheth out of

measure.
                  But the lewde sophister will not see that Saint Augustine denieth to Christes body his imagined gift, and affirmeth his denied nature to remaine. 
                        Cui (saith he) profectò immortalitatem dedit, naturam non abstudit: to which fleshe he hath giuen immortalitie, but not taken away the nature of it. Doeth not Augustine here plainely deny the gift of vbiquitie, affirming the nature to remaine concerning the circum scription of place? You see this very place to ouerthrow his blinde distinction.
                  Nowe followeth another place out of this Epistle to Dardanus, in which he beeing such an impudent falsarie, as we haue so often discouered, yet blusheth not to accuse Oecolampadius for falsifying of Aug. by a subtile addition. Spacia locorum tolle corporibus, nusquaem erunt, & quia nusquam erunt, nec erunt. Tolle ipsa corpora qualitatibus corporum, non erit vbi fint, & ideo non alibi, quàm in caelo corpore fate
                           ••
                        r Christum. Take the spaces of places from bodies and they shall be no where, and because they shalbe no where, they shal not be at al. Take the same bodies from the qualities of bodies, and there shal no place be found, where they may be, & therfore we confesse Christ in body to be no where else but in heauē. These last words: & therfore we confesse Christ in body to be no where but in heauen: as he saith truly they be not in Augustine, so he saith falsly, thei were added by Oecolampadius, otherwise then as a conclusion of his owne, gathered out of Augustines wordes. But he must haue some cauill, to shift of the matter. For his answere is so impudent, that I maruell the beast was not ashamed once to rehearse this obiection, which he could no more colourably auoide: He saith these wordes of Augustine are not spoken of the body of Christe, but of natural bodies vpon the earth: whereas the only purpose of Augustine is, to shewe the naturall propertie of the bodie of Christ to be conteined in one place, according to the nature of al other bodies either in heauen or in earth.
                  But because this olde foole playeth the boy so kindely, let me pose him in his aunswere like a childe. Speaketh

Augustine of all bodies or of some? If of all, then of the bodie of Christ: If of some, then of particulars followeth nothing. But speaketh he of all naturall bodies of the earth? Then aunswere me whether Christes body be vpon the earth? Yes, or else it could not be in the sacrament. Well admitte it be vpon the earth, is it a naturall bodie or no? Take heede what you aunswere. Yea, it is a naturall bodie: why then sir, if Christes body be a naturall body vpon earth, and Augustine speaketh of naturall bodies vpon earth, then Augustine speaketh of Christes bodie also. This childishe kinde of reasoning were good inough for such childish aunsweres as he maketh to so graue authorities.
                  But let vs see another obiection, whiche is out of Augustine also. In Ioan. tract. 30. Sursum est Domimus, sed etiam hîc, & veritas Dominus. Corpus enim Domini, in quo resurrexit, vno loco esse potest. Veritas eius vbique diffusa est. Our Lorde is aboue, hi
                           •
                         also he is here, and our Lord is the trueth. For the bodie of our Lorde, in which he rose againe, can be but in one place, his truth is diffused euerie where. This place is corruptly cited by Maister Heskins, for he setteth it downe thus: Sed etiam hîc est veritas Domini. His translation I wil not deale with, because it is the matter in controuersie. He aunswereth that Augustine saith no more, but that he may be in one onely place at one time, if it please him. A goodly saying, as though euer any man would thinke otherwise, then that it were possible for his bodie to be in one place at one time. But that one place in these wordes, is an exclusiue of all other places: if the opposition of one place and all other places will not serue, at least wise, let the Canon law it selfe beare some sway with Papistes, to expound it, for in the decrees De contract. Dist. 2. prima quidem. Thi
                        •
                      place of Augustine is thus cited. 
                        Corpus enim in quo resurrexit, in vno loco esse oportet, veritas autem eius vbique disfusa est. For his body in which he rose againe must needes be in one place, but his trueth is diffused in all places By this it is euident, that Augustines worde, Potest esse vno loco assigneth his body to one onely place. Nowe as

though there were no more obiections out of Augustine, or any other writer against the vbiquitie of Christes bodie, he endeth with this: concluding after his maner, that faith must ouer rule reason, which is true, where Gods worde hath promised any thing, but we denie that Christ hath promised the presence of his bodie in moe places then one, therefore there is no place for faith where the word hath not gone before. But left the reader should thinke, M. Heskins hath answered all obiections out of Augustine, I thinke good to set downe one or two more, first In Ioan. Tract. 31. 
                        Christus, homo secundum corpus in loco est, & de loco migrat, & 
                              〈◊〉
                            ad alium locum venerit, in eo loco, vnde venit, non est. Deus autem implet omnia, & vbique totu
                              •
                            est, non secundùm spacia tenetur locis, &c. Christe, the man according to his bodie is in a place, & goeth from a place, and when he is come vnto another place, he is not in that place from whence he came, but God filleth all thinges, and is whole in euerie place, he is not helde in places according to spaces or distances.
                  
                  
                     And Tr. 50. Respondent quem tenebo? absentem? Quomodo in coelum maman mittam vt ibi sedentem teneam? Fidem mitte, & tenuisti. Parentes tuitenuerunt carne, no tene corde, quoniam Christus absens etiam presens est. Nisi praesens esset a nobis ipsit toneri non posset, sed quoniam verum est quod ait: Ecce ego vobiscum sum vsque ad consumnationem saeculi: & abijs & his est, & redijt & nos non deseruit. Corpus enim su
                              •
                           n intulit caelo, maiestatem non abstulis mundo. They answere (meaning the vnbeleeuing Iewes) whom shall I holde? Him that is absent? How shall I send vp my hand into heauen, that I may holde him which sitteth there? Send vp faith, and thou hast held him. Thy parentes held him in flesh, holde thou him in heart. For Christ being absent is also present. For except he were present, he could not be held of ourselues, but because it is true which he saith: Beholde I am with you to the end of the worlde, he is both gone away and is here, & is come againe and hath not forsaken vs. For he hath carried his bodie into heauen, he hath not taken away his Maiestie from the worlde. And in the same treatise,

speaking of his presence in the sacrament: Si bonus es & ad corpus Christi pertines, quod significat Petrus, habes Christum in praesenti & in futuro. In presenti per fidem, in praesenti per signum, in praesenti per baptismatis sacramentum, in praesenti per altaris cibum & potum. If thou be a good man, and perteynest to the bodie of Christe, thou hast that which Peter doeth signifie, that is, Christ in present, and in that which is to come. In present by faith, in present by signe, in present by the sacrament of baptisme, in present by ye meate and drinke of the altar. And againe: Loquebatur de praesentia corporis sui. Nam secundùm Maiestatem suam, secundùm prouidentiam, secundùm ineffabilem & inuisibilem gratiam impletur, quod ab eo dictum est: Ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus vsque ad consūmationem saeculi. Secundùm carnem verò, quam verbum sumpsit, secundùm id quod de virgine natus est, secundùm id quod a Iudae is pręhensus est, quod ligno crucifixus, quod de cruce depositus, quod linteis inuolutus, quod in sepulchro conditus, quod in resurrectione manifestatus, non semper habebitis vobiscum. Quare? quoniam conuersatus est secundùm corporis praesentiam quadraginta diebus cum discipulis suis, & eis deducentibus, videndo, non sequendo, ascendit in coelum, & non est hîc. Ibi est enim sedet ad dextram patris: & hic est, non enim recessit pręsentia maiestatis. Aliter secundùm praesentiam maiestatis, semper habemus Christum: secundùm pręsentiam carnis rectè est discipulis, Me autem non semper habebitis. Habuit enim illum ecclesia secundùm praesentiam carnis, paucis diebus modò fide tenet, oculis non videt, &c. That is. He spake of the presence of his bodie. For according to his Maiestie, according to his prouidence, according to his vnspeakable and inuisible grace, it is fulfilled that was saide of him: Beholde I am with you all the dayes vnto the end of the worlde. But according to the fleshe which the worde tooke vpon him, according to that he was born of the virgin, according to that he was taken of the Iewes, that he was crucified on the tree, that he was taken down from the crosse, that he was wrapped in linnen clothes, that he was laied in the sepulchre, that he was openly shewed in his resurrection, you shall not always haue me with you. Why so? because he was conuersant with his

disciples, according to the presence of his body, by the space of 40. dayes, and they bringing him on his way, by seeing, not by following, he ascended into heauen, and is not here. For there he is where he sitteth at the right hand of his father. And he is here also. For he is not departed concerning the presence of his Maiestie, otherwise according to the presence of his maiestie, we haue Christ alwayes. But according to the presence of his flesh, it was well saide to his disciples: but me shall ye not alwayes haue. For according to the presence of his flesh, the Church had him a few dayes, now she holdeth him by faith, she seeth him not with eyes.
                  
                  These places and such like, of which a number might be brought out of diuers authours, I wish the Readers to consider for the presence of his body in the worlde, or in many places at one time, and to see how they will stande with Popish transubstantiation.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The thirteenth Chapter beginneth the exposition of an other text in the sixt of Saint Ioan.
                  The text he meaneth is this: Except ye eate the fleshe of the sonne of man,
                        Fulk.
                      and drinke his bloud, you haue no life in you. That this should be spoken of, in the sacrament of the Lordes supper, he wil proue by this reason: as a man must haue birth and nourishment, so there be two sacraments, baptisme & the supper, by which we are born, and nourished vnto eternal life, and both necessarie: for as Christ speaketh here of the one, so to Nicodemus he speaketh of the other, except a man be borne of water, and of the spirite, &c. But seeing he himselfe denieth, the necessitie of the one and of the other, but in them that are of type age, &c. it is manifest, that neither the one place is of baptisme, nor the of the other supper, but as these sacramentes are seales, to testifie the grace of regeneration, & preseruation. But if his reason faile, the doctours interpretation shall helpe, namely Cyprian, and Theophylacte. The place of Cyprian, hath bene already rehearsed, and

                     
                        •
                     onsidered in the fourth Chapter of this booke,
                        Sermo, de oration. Dom.
                      whether I referre the Reader for breuitie sake. The other place cited by Maister Heskins, to proue that Cyprian by this word Eucharistia meaneth the bodie of Christ, is Lib. 3. Ep. 15. Illi contra legem Euangelij, &c. They contrarie to the lawe of the Gospell, and also your honourable petition, before penance done, and before confession made of their most greeuous and extreeme offence, before hand was laide on them by the Bishop, and the Cleargie for repentance, dare be bolde to offer for them, and giue them the Eucharistie or sacrament of thankesgiuing, that is to prophane the holy bodie of our Lorde. Thus much Heskins rehearseth: but Cyprian proceedeth: Cum scriptum sit, &c. 
                     Seeing it is writen: he that eateth this bread, and drinketh this cuppe of the Lorde vnworthily, shalbe guiltie of the body and bloud of the Lorde. By these wordes which Maister Heskins concealeth, it is apparent, how they did prophane the bodie of Christ, that gaue the sacrament to vnpenitent offenders, namely in that sense, which S. Paule saith they are guiltie of the death of Christ. That Theophylacte vnderstandeth this text of the receiuing of the Diuine mysteries, and requireth faith in the receiuers: although it, make litle for his purpose, yet because he is a late writer I will not spende time about his authoritie.
               
               
                  The fourteenth Chapter expoundeth the same text by S. Augustine, and Cyrill.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Out of Saint Augustine are alledged foure places, one In Ioan. Tra. 36. Quomodo quidem detur, &c. How it is giuen,
                     
                        Fulke.
                      
                     and what is the manner of the eating of this bread, ye knowe not. Neuerthelesse, except ye eate that flesh of the sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, ye shall haue no life in you. This did he speake not to dead carkases, but to liuing men. By this place sayeth Maister Heskins is proued, that the Iewes knewe not the manner of eating of Christes fleshe in the sacrament.
                  
                     And no maruell, for his disciples did not yet knowe it, nor could, before the sacrament was instituted, and therefore Saint Augustine in the same place expoundeth

what this meate and drinke was, saying: Hunc itaque e
                              •
                           
                           bum & potum societatem vult intelligi corporis & membrorum suorum, quod est sancta Ecclesia in praedestinatis, & vocatis, & iustificatis, & glorificatis sanctis & fidelibus eius▪
                         He woulde haue this meate and drinke to be vnderstoode the fellowship of his bodie and his members, which is the holy Church in them that are praedestinated, and called, and glorified, euen his sayntes and faithfull ones. And afterwarde he sayeth: Huius rei sacramentum id est vnitatis corporis & sanguinis Christi, alicubi quotidie, alicubi certis interuallis dierū in Dominica mensa pręparatur. & de mensa Dominica sumitur: quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium. Res verò ipsa cuius sacramentum est omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium quicunque eius particeps fuerit. The sacrament of this thing, that is, of the vnitie of the bodie and bloude of Christe in some places euerie daye, in some places at certeine dayes betweene, is prepared in the Lordes table, and from the Lordes table is receiued, vnto some to life, to other some to destruction. But the thing it selfe whereof it is a sacrament, is to life vnto euery man, and to destruction of none that shalbe partaker of it.
                  
                  These places declare, that the text in hande, is by Augustine expounded not of the sacrament, but of the societie of the members of Christe in his bodie, whereof the communion is a sacrament. So that Master Heskins alledgeth Augustine directly against his playne meaning.
                  The seconde place he citeth out of Augustine is in Psalm. 98. Nisi quis, &c. Except a man eate my flesh, he shall haue no life. They tooke it foolishly, carnally they thought, and they thought that our Lorde woulde cutt certeine peeces from his bodie and giue them. 
                     They vnderstood not (sayeth Maister Heskins) that he woulde giue them his fleshe to be eaten verily in the sacrament. But howe verily, let Saint Augustine tell his owne tale in the same place. Ille autem instruxit eos & ait eis: Spiritus est qui viuificat, caro autem nihil prodest. Verba que loquntus sum vobis, spiritus est & vita. Spiritualiter intelligite quod loquntus sum. Non hoc corpus quod

videtis manducaturi estis▪ & bibituri illum sanguinem, quem fusuri sunt, qui me cru
                              •
                           ifigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis commend
                              ••
                           i spiritualiter intellectum viuificabit vot. Et sinecesse est illud visibiliter celebrari, oportet tamen inuisibiliter intelligi. But he instructed them, and sayeth vnto them: It is the Spirite that quickeneth, the fleshe profiteth nothing. The wordes that I haue spoken to you, are spirite and life. Vnderstande ye spiritually, that whiche I speake: You shall not eate this bodie which you see, and drinke that bloude which they shall shead, that shall crucifie mee. I haue commended vnto you a certeine sacrament, which being spiritually vnderstoode, shall quicken you. Although it be necessarie that the same should be celebrated visibly, yet it must be vnderstoode inuisibly. This saying of Augustine being so plaine, I shall not neede to gather any more of it, then euery simple man at the first reading will conceiue.
                  
                  The thirde place he citeth is, de Doct. Christ. lib. 3. Capitul. 16. which he citeth corruptly and truncately, although I see not what frawde lyeth in his corruption, saue onely he declareth, that he hath not redd the place in Augustine him selfe, but taketh it out of some collectour or gatherer. The woordes of Augustine are these: 
                        Si praeceptiua locutio est aut flagitium aut facinus vetans, aut vtilitatem, aut beneficentiam iubens, non est figurata.
                      
                     Si autem flagitium aut facinus videtur iubere, aut vtilitatem aut beneficentiam vetare, figura est. Nisi manducaueritis (inquit) carn
                           •
                        m filij hominis & sanguinem biberitis, non habebitis vitam in vobis, facinur vel flagitium videtur iubere, figura est ergo, praecipiens passioni Domini esse communicandum & suauiter atque vtiliter recondendum in memoria, quod pro nobis caro eius crucifixa & vulnerata sit. 
                     If it be a speache of commaundement, forbidding any wickednesse or heynous offence, or commaunding any profite or well doing, it is no figuratiue speache. But if it seeme to commaunde a wicked deede, or an heynous offence, or to forbidd any profit or well doing, it is a figure.
                     
                  
                  
                     Except you shall eat (sayth he) the flesh of the sonne of man, &

drinke his bloud, you shall haue no life in you. He fe
                           ••
                        eth to commaund a heynous offence, or a wicked deede: therefore it is a figure, commaunding vs to communicate with the pas
                           •
                        ion of our Lorde, and swetely and profitably to keepe in a memorie, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for vs. Although this place be directly against his purpose, and the purpose of al the Papistes, yet by a fonde glose of one Buitmundus, that wrote against Berengarius, he would seeme to make it serue his turne, and wring it out of our hands. And this forsooth is the shift. The sacrament is not a figure of the bodie of Christe, but of his death. But Augustine in this place calleth not the sacrament a figure, but sayeth that the text in hande, is a figuratiue speach, and sheweth howe it must be vnderstood.
                  The fourth place he rehearseth out of Augustine is Contra aduers. legis & Proph. Cap. 9. he omitteth to quote the booke, but it is in the second booke, and thus he citeth it. Quamuis horribilius videatur humanam carnem manducare, quàm perimere, & humanum sanguinē potare, quàm fundere: nos tamen mediatorem Dei & hominum Iesum Christum carnem suam nobis manducandam, bibendum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         sanguinem dantem fideli corde & ore suscipimus. Although it may seeme to be more horrible, to eate the flesh of man, then to kill a man, and to drinke the bloud of man, then to shed it: yet wee for all that doe receiue the mediatour of God and man Iesus Christ, giuing vs his flesh to be eaten, with a faithfull heart and mouth, and his bloude to be drunken. Thus Augustine. But rather, thus Heskins, the impudent falsifier, truncator, gelder, peruerter, and lewd interpreter of Augustine, and all other doctours that come in his hande.
                  But Augustine him selfe writeth thus: 
                        Sicut duos in carne vna Christum & ecclesiam istis nolentibus fine vlla obscoenitate cognoscimus: sicut mediatorem Dei & homimum, hominem Christum Iesum, carnem suam nobis manducandam bibendum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            sanguinem dantem, fideli corde & ore suscipimus: quamuis horribilius videatur, humanam carnem manducare, quàm perimere, & humanum sanguinem potare qàum fundere. At
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            in omnibus sanctis scripturis, secundùm sanae fidei regulam figuratè dictum

vel factum si quid exponitur de quibuslibet rebus & verbis, quae sacris paginis continentur, expositio illa ducatur non aspernanter, sed sapienter audiamur. Euen as we knowe, though against these mens will, two in one fleshe, Christe and his Church without any filthinesse: euen as with faithfull heart and mouth wee receiue the Mediatour of God and man Iesus Christe, giuing vs his fleshe to bee eaten, and his bloud to be drunken: although it seemeth a more horrible thing to eate the fleshe of man, then to kill him: and to drinke the bloud of man, then to shed it.
                  
                  
                     And in all the holie scriptures, if any thing figuratiuely spoken or done, be expounded, according to the rule of sounde faith, of any things or wordes, which are conteyned in the holie scriptures, let not the exposition be taken contemptuously, but let vs heare wisely.
                  
                  Where is nowe that should pinche the proclaimer by the conscience of receiuing the bodie of Christ with the mouth? Where is that lewd insultation against Maister Horne, whome (he sayeth) he heard in Cambridge, abuse the figuratiue speach, and place it there, where it should not be placed, &c. When S. Augustine maketh this whole text a figuratiue speache.
                  And if Maister Horne (as he sayeth) did not place the figuratiue speach as Augustine doeth: why did not such a doubtie doctour as Maister Heskins is, either in another sermon openly confute him, or in priuate conference admonishe him of it. But such hedgecreapers as he is, that dare not ioyne with a much weaker aduersarie, then that reuerend father is, in any conference or open disputation, can shoote out their slaunderous boltes against them, when they are a farre of, and prate of placing and displacing of Augustine, when he himselfe (as I haue shewed) most impudently peruerted and displaced the wordes and sense of Augustine, euen in this verie sentence, whereuppon he thus taketh occasion to iangle.
                  Out of Cyrill are alledged two places neither of

both any thing to his purpose, but directly against him, the former In 1
                        •
                     . Ioan. Non poterat, &c. This corruptible nature of the bodie could not otherwise be brought to vncorruptiblenesse and life, except the bodie of naturall life were ioyned to it. Doest thou not beleeue mee saying these thinges? I pray thee beleeue Christ saying: Verily, verily, I saye vnto you, except you shall ea
                           •
                        e the flesh of the sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, you shall haue no life in you. Thou hearest him openly saying, that wee shall not haue life, except wee drinke his bloude, and eate his fleshe. He sayeth, in your selues, that is, in your bodie. The same fleshe of life, by right, may be vnderstanded, life.
                  
                  What is there here for the sacrament? or that euery Christian man of our side will not graunt? But belike the second place maketh all playne. Non negamus &c. Wee do not denye, that with right faith and syncere loue, wee are spiritually ioyned to Christe: but that wee haue no manner of coniunction with him after the fleshe, that truely wee do vtterly denye, and that wee saye to be altogether contrarie to the holye Scriptures. For who hath doubted, that Christe is euen so the vine, and wee the braunches, that wee receiue life from thence into vs. Heare Saynt Paule saying, that we all are one bodye in Christ: For although wee be many, yet we are one in him, for wee all take parte of one breade. Or peraduenture doth hee thinke that the power of the mysticall blessing is vnknowen to vs, which when it is done in vs, doeth it not make Christe to dwell in vs corporally, by the participation of the fleshe of Christe? For why are the members of the faithfull, the members of Christ? Knowe ye not (sayeth he) that the members of the faithfull, are the members of Christe? Shall I then make the members of Christ the members of an harlott? In this place Cyrill sayeth, that Christe doth dwell corporally in vs, but howe? by participation of the fleshe of Christe, which as he tooke of our nature, so hath he againe giuen the same vnto vs, to bee in deede our nourishment vnto eternall life, which thing is testified vnto vs by the sacrament, euen as the vnitie wee haue one with another, and all of vs with Christe, is testified in that we all take part of

one breade. Otherwise I see nothing in this place that may help Maister Heskins. For such as our vnitie is, such is our participation of his flesh, and as we are members of his body, so doe we eate his body. This M. Heskins must graunt, if he will allowe Cyrills authoritie, but our vnitie, participation, and coniunction of members, though it be in his body, of his flesh, and vnto him as our head, yet is not after a carnall manner, no more is the eating of his flesh nor the corporall dwelling of him in vs after a carnall or corporall manner, but after a diuine and spirituall manner. The place of Chrysostome hee cyteth, hath bene once or twice considered already.
               
               
                  The fifteenth Chapter continueth the exposition of the same text by Leo and Euthymius.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The place of Leo is cyted out of Serm. 6. de Ieiu. sep. mens. Hanc confessionem &c. This confession most welbeloued,
                     
                        Fulke.
                      
                     vttering foorth with all your heart, forsake ye the vngodly deuises of heretiques, that your fastings and almes may be defiled with the infection of no errour. For then the offering of sacrifice is cleane, and the giuing of almes is holy, when they which performe these things vnderstand what they worke. For as our Lord saith, except ye eate the flesh of the sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, you shall haue no life in you: you ought so to be partakers of the holy table, that you doubt nothing of the trueth of the body of Christe, and of his bloud. For that is taken with the mouth, which is beleeued by faith, and in vaine doe they answere Amen, which dispute against that which is receiued. Leo in these words, as Maister Heskins is enforced to confesse, speaketh against the Eutychian heresie, which denyed the trueth of Christes body after the adunation therof to the Diuinitie (as the papistes do indeed, though not in words, by their vbiquitie & trā
                     substātiatiō) & saith, thei cannot be partakers rightly of ye sacramēt of his body & bloud, which do not acknowlege yt he had a very body & bloud. Therfore it is intollerable impudencie in M. Hes. to note a place for M. Iewel, whē he

him selfe after, confesseth, that he spake not of the trueth of his body in the sacrament. And whereas he saith, the mouth receiueth that which is by faith beleeued, it helpeth him nothing, for he meaneth nothing else, but that those men cannot receiue with their mouth the sacrament of his flesh and bloud, which deny him to haue true flesh & bloud, for the sacrament is a seale and confirmation of faith. Nowe how far Leo was from transubstantiation or vbiquitie, we haue shewed before in the 11. Chapter of this booke, where his saying may be read.
                  The testimonie of Euthymius is cyted In 6. Ioan. Nisi comederitis. Except ye eate the flesh of the sonne of man, and drink his bloud you shall haue no life in you. They thought this impossible, but he shewed that it was altogether possible, and not that only, but also necessarie, which also he did vnto Nicodemus. He addeth also of his bloud signifying the cup, which as is saide already, he would giue to his disciples in the last supper. Here Euthymius a late writer, and out of the compasse of the challenge, vnderstandeth this text of the sacrament, yet speaketh hee nothing of the carnall manner of eating. As for the other place he braggeth of in Matth. 26. which he cyteth in the 58. Chapter of this booke, how little it maketh for him, I wish the reader before he go any further, to turne to the Chapter and consider.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The sixteenth Chapter endeth the exposition of this text in hand by the Ephesine Counsell.
                  The woordes of the Epistle of the Ephesine Counsell vnto Nestorius,
                        Fulke.
                      be these: Necessario & hoc &c. This also we do adde necessarily, for shewing foorth the death of the onely begotten sonne of God after the flesh, that is, of Iesus Christe, and confessing together his resurrection and ascention into heauen, we celebrate it in our Churches, the vnbloudie seruice of his sacrifice, so also doe we come to the mysticall blessings, and are sanctified, being made partakers of the holy body and precious bloud of Christ, the redeemer of vs all: Not taking it as common flesh, (which God forbid) nor at the flesh of a sanctified man, and ioyned to the word, according to

the vnitie of dignitie, or as possessing a diuine habitation, but truely quickening and made proper vnto the word it selfe. For he being naturally life as God, bicause he was vnited to his owne flesh, professed the sonne to haue power to giue life. And therefore although he say vnto vs: Except ye eate the flesh of the sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, you shall haue no life in you, yet we ought not to esteeme it as of a man, that is, one of vs. For howe can the flesh of a man after his owne nature, be a quickening flesh? But as verily made his owne flesh, which for vs was both made and called the sonne of man. The Fathers of this Counsell do not (as M. Heskins saith) expound this text of the sacrament, or declare what they receiue in the sacrament, but rather shew what they iudged of that flesh, whereof they receiued the sacrament, namely, that it was not the flesh of a pure man as Nestorius affirmed, but the flesh of the son of God, & therfore had power to giue life being eatē by faith, either in the participation of the sacrament or without it. And whereas he noteth a plaine place for M. Iewel, when they say, They were made partakers of the body and bloud of Christ, there is no more plainenesse then M. Iewell will confesse. But where he addeth, Receiuing it, not as cōmon flesh, but as the flesh truely giuing life: he corrupteth the sense of the Counsel, referring that to the receiuing of the sacrament, which they vnderstand of their iudgement of the flesh, whereof they receiued the sacrament. Finally, where he would helpe the matter with the opinion of Cyril, of our corporall coniunction with Christ, howe little it auayleth we shewed before in aunswere to yt place Cap. 14. But least he shuld lacke sufficient proofe of this matter, he confirmeth his exposition by the erronious practise of the Church of Aphrica, from Saint Cyprians time vnto Saint Augustines time at the least, which imagined such a necessitie of tha
                        •
                      sacrament by this place: Except ye eate &c, that they ministred the Communion to infants, he might haue added that some did minister it to dead folkes. But this absurditie, which followeth of the exposition, will rather driue al wisemen from that exposition, then moue them to receiue it. And although the Bohemians vsed this text, to proue

the communion in both kindes, yet doth it not followe, that it is properly to be expounded of the sacrament.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The seuenteenth Chapter expoundeth the next following by S. Augustine and Cyrill.
                  The text he will expound, is: He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my bloud,
                        Fulk.
                      hath life in him. That this text is not to be expounded of the sacrament, it is manifest by this reason, that many doe eate the sacrament that haue not life in them: as Augustine whom he alledgeth most plainly affirmeth. But let vs see his profes for his exposition. First Augustine. Tr. 26. in Ioā. Hanc non habet &c. He hath not this life that eateth not this bread, nor drinketh this bloud. For without is men may haue temporall life, but eternall they can not. He therefore which eateth not his flesh, nor drinketh his bloud, hath no life in him, and he that eateth his flesh and drinketh his bloud, hath life eternall. He hath answered to both, in that he saith, life euerlasting. It is not so in this meate which we take to sustaine the life of this body. For he that shall not take it, shall not liue. Nor yet he that shall take it shall liue. For it may be, that by age or sicknesse, or any other cause, many which haue taken it may dye: but in this meat and drinke, that is, the body and bloud of our Lord, it is not so. For both he that taketh it not hath not life, & he that taketh it hath life, and that eternall. Although there be not one word spoken here of the sacrament, and M. Heskins him selfe alledgeth the words following, in which he confesseth that Augustine expoundeth this meate and drinke of the societie of Christ and his members, which is his Church: yet either so blinde or obstinate he is, that with vaine gloses he will go about to drawe Augustine to his side. First (he saith) though this meate signifie the mysticall body of Christe, yet it signifieth not that alone, but his naturall body in the sacrament, whereof he hath neuer a worde in this treatise of S. Augustine: secondly, Augustine did not go about to instruct the people what they should receiue, but how wel they shuld receiue it. Which is vtterly false, for hee doth both, and there is no better way to instruct

men howe well they should receiue the sacrament, then to teach them to consider what they do receiue. And therfore the conclusion of this treatise, which he cyteth, is altogether against him. Hoc ergo totum &c. Let all this therfore auayle to this end most welbeloued, that we ea
                           •
                        e not the flesh and bloud of Christ onely in a sacrament, which many euill men doe, but that we eate and drinke euen to the participation of the spirit, that we may remaine in the body of our Lorde as his m
                           •
                        mbers, that we may be quickened by his spirite, and not be offended, although many do nowe with vs eate and drinke the sacraments temporally, which in the end shal haue eternal torments. O
                        •
                     t of these wordes M. Hes doth gather, that Augustine doth acknowledge both spiritual and corporal receiuing: by like, bicause he saith that many euil men do eat and drinke the body & bloud of Christ in a sacrament, but what he meaneth is plain by his owne words in the same treatise. 
                        Hoc est ergo manducare illam escam & illum bibere potum, in Christo manere, & illum manentem in se habere. Ac per hoc qui non manet in Christo, & in quo non manet Christus, procul dubio nec māducat spiritualiter carnem eiu
                              •
                           , nec bibit eius sanguinem, licèt carnaliter & visibiliter premat dentibus saecramentum corporis & sanguinis Christi: sed magis tantae rei sacramentum ad iudicium sibi manducat & bibit. This it is therefore to eate that meate, and to drinke that drinke, to abide in Christ, & to haue him abiding in him. And by this he that abideth not in Christe, and in whome Christ abideth not, out of dout neither eateth spiritually his flesh, nor drinketh his bloud, although carnally and visibly, hee presse with his teeth the sacrament of the body and bloud of Christ: but rather eateth and drinketh to his owne damnation the sacrament of so excellent a thing. And that the wicked receiue not Christ at all, neither spiritually nor corporally, he writeth in the 59. Tr. in Ioan. Illi manducabant panem Dominum, ille panem Domini contra dominum, illi vitam, ille poenam.
                      They (meaning the Apostles) did eat the bread which was our Lorde, but he (meaning Iudas) did eat the Lords bread against the Lord, they did eate life, hee did eat punishment. Here he denyeth that Iudas did eat Christe, who did only eat the bread which

Christ gaue him, and not that bread which was Christe as the rest did. But nowe let vs see howe Cyrillus doth expound this text of the sacrament In 15. Ioan. Mariet enim &c. Both the natures abide inuiolated, and of them both Christ
                           •
                         is one, but vnspeakably, and beyonde that mans mynde can vnderstand. The woorde conioyned to the manhoode hath so reduced it wholy into him selfe, that it is able to giue life to thinges lacking life. So hath it expelled destruction from the nature of man, and death, which by sinne was very strong, it hath destroyed. Wherefore he that eateth the flesh of Christ, hath euerlasting life. For this flesh hath the word of God, which is naturally life. Therefore he saith, and I will raise him againe in the last day. He said I, that is, my body that shall be eaten, shall raise him again. For he is none other then his flesh. I say not that, bicause he is none other by nature, but bicause after his incarnation he suffereth not him selfe to be diuided into two sonnes: I therefore (saith he) which am made man, by my flesh in the last day, will raise them vp, which do eat it.
                  
                  But yet an other place of Cyrill In 6. Ioan. Cap. 14 Oportet &c. Truely it must needes so haue bene, that not only the soule by the holy Ghost should ascend into blessed life, but also that this rude and earthly body by a like natured taste, touching, and meate, should be brought to immortalitie. In neither of both these sentences is one worde of the sacrament, and therefor
                        •
                      they fauour M. Hesk. exposition as much, as nothing at al.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The eighteenth Chapter beginneth the exposition of the next text in the sixt Chapter of S. Iohn by Origen and S. Ambrose.
                  The text is: My flesh is verily meat, and my bloud is verily drinke.
                        Fulke.
                      And here hee maketh a fond and childish discourse of the difference of verus cibus, true meate, and verè cibus, meate in deede, or verily meate. Which distinction is confounded by Origen, one of his pretended expositors, in the very text by him alledged, and in many other places of his workes, where he speaketh of this text. But to the exposition before he commeth to Origen, hee toucheth a place of Chrysostome, That reipsa conuertimur in

                        
                           •
                        arnem Christi in very deede we are turned into the flesh of Christ. Which wordes, if they be not vnderstoode of a spirituall conuersion (good Lord) what a monstrous transubstantion shall we haue of our flesh into the flesh of Christ? But Papistes had rather mingle heauen and earth together, then they will depart from their prodigious absurdities. But to Origen in Num. Hom. 7. Lex Dei, &c. The lawe of God is not nowe knowen in figures and images, as before: but euen in plaine trueth, and such things as were before set forth in a dark speache, are nowe fulfilled in plaine maner & trueth. Of which things, these that followe are some,
                  
                     Antea in aenigmate fuit baptismus, in nube, & in mari: nunc autem in specie regeneratio est in aqua & Spiritu sancto. Tunc in aenigmate erat Manna cibus: nunc autem in specie caro verbi Dei & verus cibus, sicut ipse dicit: Caro mea verè est cibus & sanguis meus verè est potur. Before Baptisme was in a darke manner in the clowde and in the s
                           ••
                        : but nowe regeneration is in plaine manner in water and the holie Ghost. Then Manna was the meate in a darke manner: But nowe the fleshe of the worde of God is the true meate in a plaine maner, as he him selfe sayth: my fleshe is meat in deede, and my bloud is drinke in deede. In these wordes Origen teacheth that the sacramentes of the Gospell are cleare and plaine, whereas in the lawe they were obscure and darke. Neither doth he denye that the Gospell hath figures, but affirmeth it hath none other figures, but such as serue to open and set forth the mysteries more plainly, whereas the ceremonies of the olde lawe did rather hide and couer them. And if it be true (as M. Heskins sayeth) that the Gospell hath no figures, I woulde knowe, what be all the ceremonies of the Popish Church, figures of the Gospell? or false inuentions of men? But if wee will beleeue him, our onely spirituall receiuing is impugned by Origen In what wordes good sir? he answereth: The fleshe of the sonne of God is eaten in verie plaine manner. And may not this be spiritually, as well as regeneration is spiritually wrought in baptisme, and yet in the same playne manner, that this eating is spoken of? But let vs heare what Orig
                           •
                        n him

selfe will say in the same booke, Hom. 16. Bibere autem dicimur sanguinem Christi non solùm sacramentorum ritu, sed cum sermones eius recipimu
                              •
                           , in quibus vita consistit sicut & ipse dicit &c. We are sayde to drinke the bloud of Christe, not onely in the ceremonie of the sacramentes, but also when wee receiue his sayings in which life consisteth, as he him selfe saith: In these wordes hee teacheth such a drinking in the sacramentes, as in beleeuing his woorde, and therefore it must needes bee spirituall and not carnall. And as the cloud and Sea was baptisme, so was Manna the body of Christe, by Origens owne wordes, and therefore the proclamer sayde truely, that wee receiue Christe none otherwise in the sacrament, then the Iewes did in Manna concerning the substaunce of the spirituall meat. And Maister Heskins saith falsely, That we excell the Iewes for our incorporation in Christ, and therefore receiue him corporally, as though the Iewes also were not incorporated into Christe, and were not liuely members of his body in as great excellencie as we, yea, and with a prerogatiue of the first begotten, and of the naturall oliue wherein wee are inferiour.
                  The place of Ambrose hee cyteth Lib. 9. cap. 1. De sacramentis. Sicus verus est Deifilius Dominus noster Iesus Christus, &c. As our Lorde Iesus Christe is the true sonne of God, not as men by grace, but as a sonne of the substance of his father: euen so it is true flesh, which we receiue (as he him selfe saith) and very drinke. This is noted for an other plaine place for the proclamer, as though the proclamer did not graunt that we receiue the true flesh and bloud of Christe in the sacrament, but spiritually and by faith, not carnally nor transubstantiated. But Ambrose is the best expounder of him selfe, who in the 6. booke and Chap. 1. 
                        De sacramentis, hath these wordes, Ne igitur plures hoc dicerent, veluti quidam esset horror cruoris, sed maneret gratia redemptionis, ideo in similitudinem quidem accipis sacramentum, sed verae naturae gratiam virtutémque consequeris. Therefore least more should say this, as though there were a certaine horrour of bloud, but that the grace of redemption might remaine, therefore

thou receiuest the sacrament truely for a similitude, but thou obtainest the grace and vertue of his true nature. By which Ambrose expresseth the whole substaunce of the sacrament, that it is a similitude of the body and bloud of Christe, but not a similitude onely, but such a one, as by which we receiue the grace and power of that true nature which is resembled by it. This place would satisfie a sober minde, but a froward heart will admit no wisedome.
               
               
                  The nineteenth Chapter proceedeth vpon the same text by Eusebius Emiss. and S. Augustine.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Eusebius is cyted out of Hom. 5. pasch.
                     
                        Fulk.
                      
                     Quia corpus assumptum &c. Bicause hee would take his assumpted body from our eyes, and bring it into heauen, it was necessarie that in the day of his supper, he should consecra
                           ••
                         vnto vs a sacrament of his body and bloud, that it might be celebrated continually by a mysterie, which was offered for our price, that bicause the daily and vnwearied redemption did runne for the health of all men, the oblation of the redemption might be perpetuall, and that eternall sacrifice should liue in memorie, and that true, onely, and perfect sacrifice, should be present in grace, to be esteemed by faith, not by shewe, neither to be iudged by outward sight, but by inward affection. Wherevpon the heauenly authoritie confirmeth, that my flesh is meate in deede, and my bloud is drinke in deede. This sentence being directly against him as euery man that readeth it, may easily perceiue, he is neither ashamed to alledge it, hauing nothing to gather out of it for his purpose, nor yet (yt is worse) most breastly to corrupt it by false translation and wrong distinction or pointing, committing that childish sophisticatiō which is called ab accentu. For where the Latine is, Et perennis victima illa viueret in memoria, & semper pręsens esset in gratia vera, vnica, & perfecta hostia, fide aestimanda non specie &c. hee hath dismembred it by this translation: And that perpetuall sacrifice should liue in memorie, and alway be present in grace. A TRVE ONE ONLY AND PERFECT SACRIFICE, to be esteemed by faith, and not by outward forme, &c. And al bicause he would not acknowledge

ye presence of Christ yt onely true sacrifice by grace, which is absent in the bodie, as the purpose of Eusebius is to shewe. And therfore those words that follow are to be vnderstoode by them that goe before. Let all doubtfulnesse of infidelitie therefore departe, seeing hee that is the Authour of the gift, is also witnesse of the trueth. For the inuisible priest with his worde by secrete power conuerteth the visible creatures into the substance of his bodie and bloud. The former sentence sufficiently declareth, that he speaketh of a spiritual and not a carnall conuersion, because his body which is absent from vs, and carried into heauen, is present with vs by grace and not otherwise.
                  Saint Augustine is cyted Tr. 26. in Ioan Cum enim cibo & potu, &c. For as much as men by meate and drinke, do this desire▪ that they should neither hunger nor thirst: nothing perfourmeth this truely, but this meate and drinke, which maketh them of whom it is receiued immortall, and inco
                           ••
                        uptible, that is the fellowship of the Saints where peace shalbe & full and perfect vnitie. For therefore truely (as the men of God haue vnderstoode it before vs,) our Lord Iesus Christ commended his bodie and bloud in those thinges, which of many are brought to one certein thing. For the one is made into one of many graynes & so consisteth: the other cōmeth into one of many grapes. Because this sentence is clean contrarie to ye carnal presence, & transubstantiation, you must cal to remēbrance, the glose of a certeine blind Authour, that there be three things in ye sacrament to be considered. The first the sacrament only, which is a signe of an holy thing, and yt is the forme of bread. The second the thing signified, & conteined, that is ye very bodie of Christ. The third is signified but not conteined, that is the mysticall bodie of Christ. But this balde distinction, is so farre of Augustines minde, that he cleane ouerthroweth two partes of it. First the carnall presence of Christes bodie conteined, & when he affirmeth that this meate maketh them of whome it is receiued, immortall and incorruptible, whiche are onely them that receiue it by faith, for if it were conteined, wicked men should also receiue it: but they receiue it not, therefore it is not conteined. Secondly, he ouerthroweth

transubstantiation, when he saith that Christe commended his bodie in such thinges, as are made one of many, as one bread of many graines, and one wine of many grapes. For the fourme, by which Heskins meaneth the accidents of bread, is made neither of graynes nor of grapes. Therfore the fourme of Bread is none of those things in which Christ commended his body and bloud.
                  But when nothing is in Augustine, then the collections of Prosper must helpe on this manner. Hoc est quod dicimus, &c. This it is which we say, which by al meanes we labour to approue, that the sacrifice of the Church, is made by two meanes, and consisteth of two thinges: the visible kinde of the elementes, and the inuisible fleshe and bloud of our Lorde Iesus Christe, both of the sacrament, and of the thing of the sacrament, that is the bodie of Christ: as the person of Christ consisteth of God & man seeing Christ himselfe is very God▪ and verie man. Because euerie thing conteineth in it the nature and trueth of those thinges of which it is made: but the sacrifice of the Church is made of two, the sacrament, and the thing of the sacrament, that is, the bodie of Christ, therefore there is the sacrament, and the thing of the sacrament. This last sentence M. Hesk. hath not translated. But he noteth three things in these words affirmed which ye sacramentaries denie: that is, that the Church hath a sacrifice, that therein is a sacrament, which is the fourmes of bread and wine, and that there is present the very body and bloud of Christ, which he calleth the thing of the sacrament. Concerning the tearme of sacrifice, it is a stale quarrell, whereby he meaneth the sacrifice of thankes giuing, or the Eucharistie. For the formes of bread & wine, that is (as Maister Heskins meaneth) the accidentes, it is false, he hath nothing tending to that end, he saith, Specie elementorum, that is the kinde of elementes, which is the substance, and not the accidentes of bread and wine. And for the presence, heare his owne wordes in the same booke.
                  
                     Escam vitae accepit & poculum vitę bibit, qui in Christo manet, & Cuius Christus habitator est. 
                     
                        Nam qui discordat a Chricto, nec panem cius manducat, nec sanguinem bibit, etiamsi tanto rei

sacramentum ad iudicium suę praesumptionis quotidie indifferenter accipiat. He hath receiued the meat of life, and drunke the cuppe of life, which abideth in Christ, & in whom Christ dwelleth. But he that disagreeth from Christ, neither eateth his bread nor drinketh his bloud, although he receiue euerie day indifferently the sacrament of so great a thing, vnto the condemnation of his presumption.
                  
                  This place is plaine against the corporall eating of Christe and M. Heskins wise distinction, seeing the wicked by the iudgement of Prosper out of Augustine, eate onely the sacrament that is bread and wine, and not the bodie & bloud of Christ, which is not eaten but by faith.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The twentieth Chapter proceedeth vpon the same text by Saint Hilarie, and Euthymius.
                  Hilarius is cited Lib. 8. de Trinitat. Que scripta sunt, &c. Let vs reade those thinges that be written,
                     
                        Fulke.
                      
                     and let vs vnderstande those things that we shall read, & then shal we performe the dutie of perfect faith. Such thinges as we learne of the naturall trueth of Christ in vs, except we learne of him, we learne foolishly and vngodly. For he him selfe saith: my flesh is meat in deed, & my bloud is drinke in deede. He that eateth my fleshe and drinketh my bloud abideth in me and I in him. There is no place left to doubt of the trueth of his flesh and bloud. For now by the profession of our Lord himselfe it is verily fleshe and verily bloud. And this beeing taken and dronken, bring this to passe, that Christ is in vs, and we in Christ. Out of these wordes he noteth three thinges. The first, that the text is spoken of the sacrament conteyning the bodie and bloud of Christe, of the veritie whereof there should be no doubt: The second is the corporall receiuing of Christ in the sacrament: The third is, that thereby Christ is in vs and we in him. To the first note, this text is none otherwise spoken of the sacramēt, as we haue often shewed, then as the sacrament is a seale of this eating and drinking of Christes fleshe and bloud which is also without the sacrament. And that we should not doubt of the trueth of his fleshe and bloud, it is true, we confesse he hath true flesh & true bloud, & with the same doeth feede

vs, but that this flesh and bloud is conteined in the sacrament, Hillarie saith not, but Heskins. Neither doeth he speake of any corporall receiuing of Christe in the sacrament, which is the second note, but seeing he dwelleth in all them that receiue him (which is the thirde note) there is no place for the corporal receiuing, which the Papists confesse to be common to the wicked, in whome Christ dwelleth not, nor they in him.
                  But to proue the corporall receiuing, he hath another place out of the same booke. Si enim verè, &c. For if the WORDE was verily made flesh, and we doe truely eate the worde made flesh in the Lordes meate, how is he not to be thought to abide naturally in vs, which being borne a man hath taken vpon him the nature of our flesh now inseparable, & hath admixed the nature of his flesh, vnto the nature of eternitie, vnder the sacrament of his fleshe to be communicated vnto vs. This with him is a plaine place, and much adoe he maketh about this worde, naturally, by which he meaneth nothing else but truly, for otherwise M. Heskins (if he be in his right wittes) wil confesse, that the abiding of Christe in vs, is not naturall nor after a naturall manner, but spirituall, and after a Diuine manner. And although he spake plain ynough of the participation of his flesh vnder a sacramēt, yet more euidently in the same booke in these wordes. 
                        Si verè igitur carnem corporis nostri Christus assumpsit, & verè homo ille, qui ex Maria natus fuit, Christus est, nos
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            verè sub mysterio carnem corporis sui sumimus, & per hoc vnum erimus, quia Pater in eo est, & ille in nobis, quomodo voluntatis vnitas asseritur, cum naturalis per sacramentum proprietas perfectae sacramentum sit vnitatis.
                     
                  
                  
                     If therefore Christe did verily take vpon him the flesh of our bodie, & that man, which was borne of Marie, was verily Christ, and we doe verily receiue the fleshe of his body vnder a mysterie, and thereby shall be one, because the Father is in him and he in vs, howe is the vnitie of will affirmed, when the naturall propertie by a sacrament is a sacrament of perfect vnitie. Here he saith we do verily eate the flesh of his bodie: but if you aske how? He aunswereth vnder a mysterie, as before he said vnder a sacrament.
                     
Therfore to take that absolutely (as M. Heskins doth) which of him is spoken but after a certeine manner as vnder a sacrament, or a mysterie, is a grosse abusing both of the authour and of the readers.
                  Euthymius is cited In Ioan. Caro mea, &c. My fleshe is meate in deede. It is true meate: or moste conuenient meate, as which nourisheth the soule, which is the moste proper part of man. And likewise of the bloud: or else he saide this, confirming, that he spake not obscurely or parabolically.
                  
                  I maruel what Maister Heskins gayneth by this place. Forsooth yt this is no figuratiue speech, but a plain speech, signifying none otherwise then the wordes sound. Well, yet we must not cast away that which Euthymius saide in ye beginning of the sentence, that it is a meate to nourish the soule, and not for the bodie to receiue, neither receiued, but where it nourisheth the soule. And that ouerthroweth the corporall manner of eating.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The one and twentieth Chapter continueth the same exposition by Chrysostome and Lyra.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     Chrysostome is cited Hom. 46. in Ioan. The same wordes almoste that were before ascribed to Euthymius, who borrowed them of Chrysostome. Quid autem, &c. But what meaneth this saying: my fleshe is meate in deede, and my bloud is drinke in deede? Either that he is the true meate, whiche saueth the soule: or that he might confirme them in that he said before, least they should thinke he spake darkely in parables. If this be spoken of the fleshe of Christe in the sacrament, then none receiue the flesh of Christ in the sacrament, but they whose soules are saued, but many receiue the sacrament, whose soules are not saued, therefore this is not spoken of the fleshe of Christ in the sacrament. Ye, but are ye aduised yt this is a plaine place for M, Iewel, that these words: My fleshe is meate in deede, and my bloud is drinke in is no figuratiue speeche? Let it be as plaine as you will, it must be meate in deede, and drinke in deede to feede our soules, and that must needes be spiritually, for our soules cannot eate carnally. As for Lyra a late Popishe

writer, I haue often protested, that I will not stay vpon his authoritie, let him be on M. Heskins side.
               
               
                  The two and twentieth Chapter continueth the exposition of the same text by S. Cyrill, and Dionyse.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  S. Cyrill is alledged Lib. 4. Cap. 16. in Ioan. Vmbram & figuram nosti, &c.
                     
                        Fulk.
                      
                     Knowest thou the shadowe and the figure? Learne the very truth of the thing. For my flesh (saith he,) is meate indeed and my bloud is drinke in deede. Againe he maketh a distinction betweene the mystical benediction and manna, the streames of water out of the rocke, and the communication of the holie cuppe, that they should not more esteeme the miracle of manna, but rather receiue him which is the giuer of the heauenly bread, and of eternall life. For the nourishment of Manna brought not eternall life, but a short remedie of hunger. Therefore it was not the true meate. But the holie bodie of Christ is a meate nourishing vnto immortalitie & eternall life. Also that water out of the rocke easied bodily thirst for a short time, neither brought it any thing beside. Therfore it was not that true drinke: but the bloud of Christ, by which death is vtterly ouerthrowen and destroyed, is the true drinke. For it is not the bloud of a man simply, but of him, which being ioyned vnto a natural life, is become life. Because M. Heskins cannot tell what to gather out of this place for his purpose, he taketh vp yesterdayes colde ashes, of the authorities cited before, by light of them to wrest this place to his purpose, but all remaineth still darke and dyme for his intent. Of the excellencie of the fleshe and bloud of Christe aboue Manna & the water as they were corporal foode, there is neither doubt nor question, nor yet that the same is eaten in the sacrament of the faithfull, but whether it be eaten corporally or spiritually is all the question. And Dionyse the Charterhouse Monke, whome he matcheth vndiscretely with Cyrill, denieth also that the body of Christ is receiued corporally in the sacrament. Verè est cibus animae non corporis, quia non visibiliter nec corporaliter sumitur, quamuis verum corpus sumatur. It is meate in deede, but of the soule not of the bodie, because it is not receiued visibly nor corporally although the very body be receiued. So that the Papistes them selues

do not al agree of the maner of receiuing. In this Chapter beside these two expositors are also cited Augustine & Chrysostome. Augustine in Saint Prosper, to auouch the phrase of formes of bread and wine. Caro eius est quam forma panis opertam in sacramento accipimus: & sanguis eius est, quem sub vini specie & sapore potamus. It is his flesh, which we receiue in the sacrament couered with the fourme of bread, and it is his bloud, which we drinke vnder the kinde and taste of wine. Beside that this collection of Prosper is not to be found in any of Augustines owne workes, I denie the names of Forma and Species to be taken for accidentes in that sense the Papistes doe: but for a figure or signification, as by the wordes immediately following it is most manifest, which M. Heskins hath moste lewdly suppressed: 
                        Caro videlicèt carnis: & sanguis sacramentum est sanguinis: carne & sanguine, vtro
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            inuisibili, spirituali, intelligibili, signatur spirituale Domini nostri Iesu Christi corpus palpabile, plenum gratia omnium virtutū & diuina Maiestate. That is, the flesh is a sacrament of ye flesh, and the bloud is a sacrament of the bloud, by both of them beeing inuisible, spirituall, intelligible, is signified the spirituall bodie of our Lord Iesus Christe which is palpable, ful of the grace of all vertues, and diuine Maiestie. In these wordes, he calleth the elementes of bread & wine, flesh and bloud, which are sacramentes of his true glorious & palpable bodie which is in heauen: as it is yet more plaine by that whiche followeth: 
                        Sicut ergo coelestis panis, qui caro Christi est, suo modo vocatur corpus Christi, cum reuera sit sacramentum corporis Christi, illius videlicet quod visibile, quod palpabile, quod mortale in cruce positum est, vocatur
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ipsa immolatio carnis, quae sacerdotis manibus sit, Christi passiō, mors, crucifixio, non rei veritate sed significāte mysterio: sic sacramentum fidei, quod baptismus intelligitur, fides est. As yt heauēly bread which is the flesh of Christ, after a certeine manner, is called the body of Christ, when in very deede it is ye sacrament of the bodie of Christ, which beeing visible, which beeing palpable, which beeing mortall, was put on the crosse, & the very offring of his flesh, which is done by the hands of the priest, is called the passion, death, and crucifying of

Christ, not in trueth of the thing, but in a signifying mysterie: so ye sacrament of faith, which is vnderstood to be baptisme, is faith. In these words he affirmeth, the elements to be the bodie & bloud of Christ, as the action of the Priest is his passion, death, & crucifying: & as baptisme is faith, not in trueth of the thing, but in a signifying mysterie. Chrysostome is alledged to proue yt the whole bodie of Christe is in the sacrament. Hom. 24. in 10. ad Cor. 1. Et quando, &c. And when thou seest that thing set foorth, say with thy selfe, for this bodie, I am no more earth and ashes, this bodie being crucified and beaten, was not ouercome by death. This same bodie being bloudied and wounded with a speare, hath sent foorth founteines of bloude and water wholesome to all the world. Here is much a doe, the same bodie is in the sacrament which was crucified. Wee knowe Christ hath no more bodies but euen that one, that was crucifyed, & the same is eaten in the sacrament as in a mysterie, significatiuely, as the same Chrysostome in the same place doth testifie. Quid enim appello inquit communicationem? 
                     
                        id ipsium corpus sumus. Quid significat panis? Corpus Christi. Quid autem fiunt qui accipiunt corpus Christi? non multa, sed vnum corpus. For what do I call it (saith he) a participation? We are the verie same bodie. What doth the bread signifie? the bodie of Christ. What are they made that receiue the bodie of Christ? not many bodies but one bodie. Lo here the breade signifyeth the bodie of Christe, which was crucified. And the faithfull that receiue it, are made the same bodie of Christ that was crucified, but all this in a mysterie, not carnally or corporally. What reader of Cambridge he girdeth at, that alledged obiectiōs of Duns against the carnall presence, I knowe not. Duns might frame or reherse more arguments against it, then with al his subtilties he could aunswere: but my thinke M. Hesk. should not enuie this practise, when he himselfe hath neuer an argument nor authoritie almost out of the doctors, but such as he hath of other mens gathering, and not of his own reading, as his manifold mistakins do declare, beside wilfull corruptions and falsifications.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The three and twentieth Chapter endeth the exposition of this text by Theophylact & Beda.
                  Of these two being both of the lower house, the testimonie of Theophylactus maketh nothing for him,
                        Fulke.
                      the saying of Beda maketh much against him. Concerning Theophylact, let them that list read his sentence, for I compt it superfluous to rehearse their testimony, whose authoritie in this matter I will not stand to. But because the opinion of carnall presence was not receiued in this church of England in the age of Beda, nor long after, I thinke it not amisse, to consider his authoritie. He writeth therefore in Ioan. Dixerat superiùs &c. He had sayde before: he that eateth my fleshe & drinketh my bloud, hath life eternall. And that he might shewe howe great a difference is betweene corporall meate, and the spirituall mysterie of his bodie & bloud, he added: my fleshe is meate in deede, & my bloud is drink in deede. Here Beda calleth the sacrament a spiritual mysterie of the bodie and bloud of Christ, which although it be playne against the carnall presence, yet M. Heskins would cloke it with a fonde definition of a mysterie, to be that, (I wot not what,) which conteyneth couertly a thing not to be perceiued by sences or common knowledge, and so the sacrament is a mysterie, conteyning the verie bodie of Christ. Besides that, he remembreth not that Beda calleth it not onely a mysterie, but a spirituall mysterie, I would wit of him, what it is that Beda calleth a spirituall mysterie? if he say ye sacrament, I would further knowe, what he calleth the sacrament? he will aunswere, the formes of breade & wine, for so they determine forsooth. Well, then Christ would not shewe the difference of the spirituall foode of his flesh & bloud which is the thing conteined, but of the accidents of bread and wine, from the corporall foode. O foolishe conclusion of Beda! or rather, O false definition & counterfet exposition of Hesk! For Beda sheweth the excellencie of the spirituall mysterie of Christes bodie and

bloud, which is our spirituall foode, aboue the corporall foode, and neuer dreamed of M. Heskins mysterie.
               
               
                  The foure and twentieth Chapter beginneth the ex-position of the next text in the sixt of S. Iohn by S. Hillarie & S. Augustine.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The text is:
                        Fulke.
                      
                     He that eateth my fleshe and drinketh my bloud abydeth in mee, and I in him. For vnderstanding of this text, he premiseth a destinction of two manners of abyding in Christ, that is spiritually and naturally: spiritually, by right faith and sincere charitie, as S. Cyrill doth teache, and naturally by receiuing of Christes fleshe, as S. Hillarie teacheth. This distinction not being made by any doctour, but deuised vpon occasion of termes vsed by the doctours, to ouerthrowe the meaning of the doctours, he pleaseth him verie much therein. I haue shewed before, that Hillarie by the worde naturally, meaneth truelye, that as Christ is truely ioyned vnto vs by taking on him our fleshe, and we are truely ioyned to him, by eating & drinking his flesh, vnder a sacrament, and vnder a mysterie, (for both these termes of restreint he hath, to shewe the manner of our eating to be sacramentall and mysticall, not as M. Heskins would, carnall and naturall) so Christ is truely one with God, not in vnitie of will only, but in vnitie of Godhead, in substance of diuinitie, in essence of eternitie. But let vs heare his owne wordes. lib. 8. de Trinit. Quod autem in eo, &c. But that we be in him, by the sacrament or mysterie of his fleshe and bloud, which is communicated vnto vs, he testifieth him selfe saying: And this world doth not nowe see mee, but you shall see mee for I liue, and ye also shall liue, because I am in my father, and you in mee, and I in you, &c. But that this vnitie in vs is naturall, he hath witnessed saying: He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my bloud, abideth in mee, & I in him. For there shall no man be in him, but in whome he shalbe, hauing onely his assumpted flesh in him, who hath taken his. By this place out of which he would buyld his destinction of naturall and spirituall abyding, the same is manifestly ouerthrowne. For the drift of that

distinction (as he confesseth) is to shewe, that Christe may abyde naturally, where he doth not abyde spiritually, as in the wicked. But the place of Hillarie is plain, that where this naturall vnitie is, Christe abydeth eternally: therefore this naturall vnitie, is not in the wicked. Thus, while Maister Heskins harpeth greedily vppon the terme naturally, for the naturall presence of Christes bodie, he looseth his distinction, and with all his naturall presence also. For if his bodie be not naturally receiued of the wicked, it is not naturally present in the sacrament, as all Papistes do confesse. And further, that this natural vnitie, is after a spirituall manner, it appeareth by the last wordes of the sentence. That he in whome Christ dwelleth, hath onely the assumpted flesh of Christ in him. But this must needes be after a spirituall manner, as the holie and innocent fleshe of Christe is made oures, therefore this naturall vnitie he speaketh of, is not in that sense naturall, that Maister Heskins immagineth, but after a diuine and vnspeakable manner. For otherwise, Godly men haue fleshe of their owne, yea, and sinfull fleshe, which is not of the singular substance of the fleshe of Christe, though it be of the nature and kinde thereof, but corrupted with sinne, as his neuer was. Thus the shewe that Maister Heskins would make, by snatching at one worde misunderstoode, by a little diligence vsed in discussing the sentence, is turned altogether against him, both in shewe and purpose of the author. The other place he citeth, though he citeth it truncately, contrarie to his promise in his preface, I will cite it whole, as I did before in the 20. Chap. of this book. If the worde in deede be made flesh, and we do verily eat the word made fleshe, in the Lordes meate, howe is he not to be esteemed, to dwell naturally in vs, which being borne a man, hath taken vppon him the nature of our fleshe nowe inseparable, and hath ioyned the nature of his fleshe vnto the nature of aeternitie vnder a sacrament of his fleshe to be communicated to vs. For so wee are all one, because the father is in Christ, and Christ is in vs. Therefore, whosoeuer shall denye the father to be naturally in

Christ, let him first denye, that either he is naturally in Christe, or Christ is in him. For the father being in Christ, and Christ in vs, do make vs to be one in them. Therefore if Christ did verily take vppon him the fleshe of our bodie, and that man which was borne of Marie is verely Christe, and we do verily receiue the fleshe of Christe vnder a mysterie, and by this, shalbe one, because the father is in him and he in vs, how is the vnitie of will affirmed, when the naturall propertie by a sacrament, is the sacrament of perfect vnitie. In these wordes the fleshe of Christe is communicated vnto vs, but vnder a sacrament, wee eate the fleshe of his bodie, but vnder a mysterie: the naturall propertie by a sacrament, is a sacrament of perfecte vnitie.
                  And besides all this, marke, that this naturall vnitie is such, as thereby we are vnited to the father, and being vnited to the father by Christ, it must needes followe, that we are made partakers of eternitie, which no wicked men are, therefore wicked men receiue not Christ naturally nor spiritually, and so the distinction remaineth without a difference. But nowe we come to S. Augustine, of whome he borroweth the other parte of his distinction, Tract. 26. in Ioan. Deni
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         iam. Nowe at the last he expoundeth, how that may be done, which he speaketh, and what it is to eate his bodie and drinke his bloud. He that eateth my fleshe and drinketh my bloude, abydeth in mee & I in him. This it is therefore to eat that meate, and to drinke that bloude, to abide in Christ, and to haue him abyding in him. And by this, hee that abideth not in Christ, and in whome Christe abydeth not, out of all doubt, neither eateth his fleshe spiritually, nor drinketh his his bloude, although carnally, and visibly he presse with his teeth sacrament of the bodie and bloud of Christe. But rather hee eateth and drinketh the sacrament of so great a thing to his condemnation, because he being vncleane, presumed to come to the sacraments of Christe, which no man receiueth worthily, but hee which is cleane of whome it is sayed: blessed are the cleane of hart, for they shall see God.
                  
                  S. Augustine in these words maketh a distinctiō of eating the sacrament of the bodie & bloud of Christ, & of

eating the bodie and bloud of Christ: and not onely of eating spiritually & eating carnally, shewing that spiritually the fleshe of Christ is eaten, carnally the sacrament, which were vaine, if bothe were one. And ye whole discourse of that treatise is against that carnall eating of the bodie and bloud of Christ, which M. Heskins himselfe confesseth to be vnprofitable, yea, damnable without the spirituall eating, whereas the spirituall eating, vndoubtedly causeth eternall life. But better to vphold this distinction of Christes naturall & spirituall abyding, he citeth a testimonie out of the 11. Sermon de verbis Dom. in Euangelio vnder the name of Augustine, which whether it be rightly intituled to him, I will not contende.
                  The wordes are these: Illud etiam, &c. This also that he sayeth: He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my bloud, abydeth in mee & I in him, how shall we vnderstand? Can wee take them here also, of whome the Apostle sayth, that they eate and drinke their owne damnation, when they eat that fleshe and drinke that bloude? Did Iudas also, the seller and vngodly betrayer of his maister, although he did eat and drinke that first sacrament of his flesh and his bloud made with his own hands, with the rest of the disciples, as Luke the Euangelist declareth more plainly, did he abyde in Christ, or Christ in him? Finally, many which either with fained heart do eat that fleshe and drinke that bloud, or when they haue eaten and dronken they become Apostataes, do they abyde in Christ or Christ in them? But truely there is a certeine manner of eating that fleshe and drinking that bloude, after which manner he that shall eate and drinke, abydeth in Christ, & Christ in him. We must receiue this authoritie, so that it may stande with all the rest of the vndoubted workes of Augustine, we must be as bold to distinguish the words, fleshe and bloud, as M. Heskins is the spirituall and naturall eating. By flesh and bloud aequiuocally, he vnderstandeth the sacrament of the flesh and bloud of Christe, as where he sayeth, that Iudas did eate the sacrament of his flesh and bloud, he doth him selfe declare. And then he distinguisheth of the manner of eating, for the sacrament,

(as Augustine sayth) is eaten of both wicked and godly, but the matter of the sacrament, is not eaten but to eternall life. And that Iudas did not eate the breade that was the Lorde, as we alledged before, and Prosper in his collections out of Augustine plainly defineth: He that disagreeth from Christe, neither eateth his breade, not drinketh his bloud, although he dayly receiue the sacrament of so excellent a matter vnto condemnation of his presumption. Wherefore, although we shoulde receiue this authoritie, yet it proueth not, that wicked men receiue the fleshe of Christ, but onely the sacrament thereof, which is in some manner of speaking called the fleshe of Christ, as Augustine euery where affirmeth. Finally, what a blasphemous absurditie is it, to say, that Christ dwelleth naturally in wicked men, in whome he is not spiritually, and that his flesh is there, where his quickening spirite doth not worke?
               
               
                  The fiue & twentieth Chapter, proceadeth in the exposition of the same, by Chrysostome & S. Gregorie.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Chrysostome is cited Hom. 45. in Ioan. Qui manducat,
                     
                        Fulke.
                      
                     &c. He that eateth my fleshe & drinketh my bloud, dwelleth in mee & I in him, which he sayeth, that he may shewe him selfe to be ioyned vnto him (M Heskins translateth, mingled) with him, And what this mingling is, he willeth vs to remember, what this author sayeth in the same Homilye: that wee should not onely by loue, but in verie deede be turned into his fleshe, it is brought to passe by that meate which he hath giuen vnto vs. I will aske no better interpretation, for this must either be a spirituall and vnspeakeable manner of conuersion, or else it would be a monsterous and blasphemous transmutation of our flesh into the flesh of Christ, as I haue diuerse times before noted of this place. But what sayeth S. Gregorie? in Iob. Cap. 6. Natus Dominus, &c. Our Lorde being borne is layd in the manger, that it might be signified, that the holie beaster, which long vnder the lawe were founde fasting, should be filled with the haye of his incarnation.

Being borne, he filled the manger, who gaue him selfe to be meate to mennes mindes, saying: he that eateth my fleshe, and drinketh my bloud, abydeth in me and I in him. What winneth M. Heskins by this place? it is the meate of the soule, therefore it must be spiritually receiued. Or if hee will not haue it onely spiritually receiued, wherefore serueth the text alledged, which he affirmeth to be verified onely in them that receiue spiritually? But we must heare further out of Gregorie in Hom. Pasc. Quid nam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , &c. For what the bloud of the lambe is, you haue not nowe learned by hearing, but by drinking, which it put vpon bothe the postes, when it is not dronke onely with the mouth of the bodie, but also with the mouth of the heart. What newes haue we here? forsooth, Christes bloud dronke with mouth of bodie, and mouth of heart. I heare him say the bloud of the Pascall lambe, which he sayth, doth figure the sacrament, is so dronke, but not the naturall bloud of Christ. Why then marke what he sayeth soone after: Qui sic, &c. Hee that so taketh the bloud of his redeemer, that he will not yet followe his passion, he hath put the bloud on the one post. In this allegorie, if he call the sacrament of Christes bloude, the redeemers bloud, as he calleth it, the bloud of the lambe, what great marueile is it, or what great matter is it? the whole speache being figuratiue, both allegoricall, and metonymicall.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The sixe and twentieth Chapter, continueth this exposition by Saint Cyrill and Lyra.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     Cyrill is cited in Ioan. Cap. 15. Qui manducat, &c. Hee that eateth my fleshe and drinketh my bloud, abydeth in mee & I in him. Whereuppon it is to be considered, that not by disposition onely, which is vnderstoode by charitie, Christ is in vs, but also by a naturall participation. For, as if a man do so mingle waxe that is melted with fire, vnto other waxe likewise melted, that one thing seeme to be made of them both: so by the communication of the bodie and bloud of Christe, he is in vs, and wee in him. For this corruptible nature of our bodye coulde not otherwise bee

brought to incorruptiblenesse and life, except the bodie of naturall life were ioyned to it.
                  
                  By these wordes Cyrill teacheth, that wee are ioyned to the naturall fleshe of Christe, so that by participation thereof, wee are made one with him: but wicked men are not made one with Christe, nor partakers of incorruptiblenesse, therefore wicked men are not ioyned to Christe by that naturall participation he speaketh of, and consequently, Christe is not corporally receiued of them, nor of any other. Yet Maister Heskins noteth, as his manner is, a plaine place for Maister Iewell, when he saith, we do partake the naturall flesh & bloud of Christe. Which wee alwayes confesse, but wee partake it spiritually, by faith: and haue eternall life thereby: therefore wicked men partake it not, which want both the meane and the effect. Thus Cyrill beeing aunswered, wee force not vpon Lyra. As for that which followeth in the Chapter, to shewe that by participation of Christes fleshe, wee are not deliuered from temporall death, but from eternall destruction, being no matter of question, I passe ouer as needelesse.
               
               
                  The seuen and twentieth Chapter, abydeth in the same exposition by Theophylact and Ruperius Tuicen.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Although there is no greate matter in the speache of the two Burgesses, to helpe maister Heskins purpose,
                        Fulk.
                      yet because they are too young to beare witnesse in this cause, I will not trouble my selfe, nor my reader, either to rehearse them, or to make aunswere to them.
               
               
                  The eyght and twentieth Chapter, endeth the exposition of this text by Haimo & Euthymius.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  As for fryer Haimo, I leaue him to M. Hesk. although in the words cited by him,
                        Fulk.
                      he sayeth nothing greatly to his intent. But for as much as Euthymius Zigabonus▪ doeth often borrowe his expositions of the old doctours,

though he him selfe be not so auncient a writer, I will rehearse his testimonie in Math. 26. Si de vno, &c. If all we that are faithfull do partake of one bodie and bloud, wee are all one, by the participation of these mysteries, and we are all in Christ, and Christ is in vs all. He sayth, he that eateth my fleshe & drinketh my bloude, dwelleth in mee and I in him. For the WORDE by assumption was vnited to flesh, and againe, the flesh is vnited to vs by participation. Here M. Heskins noteth a plaine proofe of the presence, against the proclaimer. How so? the naturall fleshe was vnited to the sonne of God, and the sonne is vnited to vs by participation. What else? but this participation is by faith, and causeth vs to bee one with Christe, and Christe in vs all, and is not in the wicked, which thing Maister Heskins with a dry foote passeth ouer, as also in translation, he omitteth the word fideles, all wee that are faithfull, because he woulde haue the ignorant to thinke that the vnfaithfull do partake the same flesh, as truely as the faithfull.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The nine and twentieth Chapter, expoundeth the next texte that followeth in the sixt of Saint Iohn, by Saint Augustine, and S. Cyrill.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     The text is this: As the liuing father sent mee, and I liue for the father, and he that eateth mee, shall liue also for mee, or by the meanes of mee: In exposition of this text, he will onely declare by Saint Augustine: Howe Christ liueth by the father: which because it is no matter of controuersie betwixt vs, I do altogether omitt, & come to Cyrillus, whose wordes concerning an
                        •
                      thing our question are these, for the rest, as impertinent, I passe ouer. Quemaedmodum ego factus, &c. As I am made man by the will of my father, and liue by the father: because I haue naturally flowed out of that life which is so of nature, & perfectly do keepe the nature of my father, so that I also am naturally life: euen so he that eateth my fleshe, shall liue for mee, being wholly reformed vnto mee which am life, and am able to giue life. And he sayeth, that he him selfe is eaten, when his fleshe is

                        
                           •
                        aten. Because the worde was made fleshe, not by confusion of natures, but by the unspeakable manner of vnion. Here Maister Heskins noteth, that Christe is eaten when his fleshe is eaten, as a man doth see when his eye, or rather his soule by the eye doth see, &c. For the godhead is not eaten, therefore it cannot be spiritually eaten, but verily. Still he maketh spirite and trueth contrarie, as though what soeuer were done spiritually, were not done verily. But he remembreth not that Cyrill sayeth, that he which eateth this fleshe, is wholy refourmed or fashioned anewe into Christe. Whereby hee doth not onely exclude wicked men, but also teache a spirituall eating, as the reformation is spirituall. And as the worde was made fleshe by an vnspeakable vnion, so wee by eating that fleshe, are ioyned to him, by an vnspeakable vnion.
                  Finally, where Maister Heskins sayeth, that Christs fleshe cannot be verily eaten but in the sacrament, he excludeth all them from the benefites of his fleshe, which are not partakers of the sacrament, and so condemneth all children not come to yeares of discretion. O cruell transsubstantiation.
               
               
                  The Thirtieth Chapter beginneth the exposition of the nexte text by Saint Ambrose and Chrysostome.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The text is:
                        Fulke.
                      
                     This is that breade that came downe from heauen, not as your fathers did eate Manna in the wildernesse, and are dead. He that eateth this bread shal liue for euer. Saint Ambrose is alledged, lib. 8. de initiandi, but I thinke he should saye Capit
                              •
                           
                         8. de mysterijs initiandis: Reuera mirabile, &c.
                      
                     Truely, it was maruellous, that God did rayne Manna to the fathers, and that they were fedd with dayly foode from heauen. Wherefore it is sayde, man did eate the breade of Angels. But yet they that did eate that breade in the wildernesse are dead. But this breade which thou receiuest, this breade of life, which came downe from heauen, giueth the substance of eternall life. And whosoeuer shall eat this breade,

shall not dye for euer. And it is the body of Christ. M. Heskins noteth, that he calleth it the body of Christ, as though any man doubted thereof: But the same Ambrose reacheth, that it must bee spiritually receiued, in the same booke, Chap. 9. In illo sacramento Christus est, quia corpus est Christi, non ergo corporalis esca, sed spiritualis est. In that sacrament Christ is, bicause it is the body of Christe, therefore it is not corporall but spirituall meate. If it be spirituall meate, it must be spiritually receiued and not corporally, as it is no corporall meate.
                  Now followeth a long sentence of Chrysostome, Hom. 46. in Ioan. which Maister Heskins him selfe confesseth to make no great mention of the sacrament, yet bycause he saith it followeth vpon his iudgement of the sacrament, I will set it downe to be considered. He saith therefore, he that eateth my flesh shall not perish in death, he shall not be damned. But he doth not speake of the common resurrection (for all shal ri
                           •
                        e again) but of that cleere and glorious which deserueth reward. Your fathers haue eaten Manna in the wildernesse, and be deade. He that eateth this bread, shall liue for euer. He doeth oft repeate the same, that it might be imprinted in the mindes of the hearers. This was the last doctrine, that he might confirme the faith of the resurrection and euerlasting life: wherefore after the promise of eternall life, he setteth foorth the resurrection, after he hath shewed that shall be. And howe is that knowne? By the scriptures, vnto which he doth alwayes send them to be instructed by them. When he saith, it giueth life to the world, he prouoketh them to emulation, that if they be moued with the benefite of other men, they will not be excluded them selues. And he doth often make mention of Manna, & comparing the difference, allureth them to the faith: For if it were possible that they liued fourtie yeares without haruest & corne, and other things necessarie to their liuing, much more nowe when they are come to greater things. For if in those figures they did gather without labour the things set foorth nowe truely, much more where is no death, and the fruition of true life. And euery where he maketh mention of life. For we are drawne with the desire there of, and nothing is more pleasant then not to dye. For in the olde Testament long life and many dayes were promised, but

nowe not simply length of life, but life without end is promised. Herevpon hee noteth, that we are come to greater things in the sacrament, then the Iewes did in Manna. I graunt the faithfull come to greater thinges then the vnbeleeuing Iewes, of whome and to whome our sauiour Christ speaketh. Otherwise they that were faithfull, did eate the same spirituall meate in Manna that we doe in the Sacrament. 1. Cor. 10. But if the reall presence be not in the sacrament (saith Maister Heskins) Manna is greater then a bare peece of breade. This comparison is topsituruie. Chrysostome compareth bare Manna, which the wicked receiued, with the body of Christ, which the godly take: Maister Heskins compareth Manna to bare breade.
               
               
                  The one and thirtieth Chapter proceedeth in the exposition of the same text by S. Hierome and S. Cyrill.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Hierome is cyted, Ad Hedibiam quęst. 2. Si ergo panis, &c.
                     
                        Fulk.
                      
                     Then if the bread, which came downe from heauen, is the body of our Lorde, and the wine, which he gaue to his disciples, be his bloud of the newe Testament, which was shed for many in remission of sinnes, let vs cast away Iewish fables, and let vs ascend with our Lorde into the great parler, paued and made cleane, and let vs take of him aboue, the cuppe of the newe Testament, and there holding the Passeouer with him, let vs be made dronke by him with the wine of sobrietie: for the kingdome of GOD is not meate and drinke, but righteousnesse and ioye and peace in the holy Ghoste. Neither did Moses giue vs the true bread, but our Lord Iesus, hee being the guest, and the feast, hee him selfe eating, and which is euen. 
                     (S. Hierome proceedeth with yt which M. Hes. omitteth.) His bloud we drinke, and without him we can not drinke it, and daily in his sacrifices we tread out new redd wine of ye fruit of the true vine, and of the vine of Sorech, which is interpreted chosen: and of these wee drinke the wine new in the kingdome of his father, not in the oldenesse of the letter, but in the newenesse of the spirit. By these words, & more that foloweth, it is most euident, that

Hieronyme speaketh of spirituall eating by faith: as also by that he saith, we ascend with Christ into the parler, by which he meaneth heauen, and there aboue, we receiue the cup of the newe Testament. Maister Heskins noteth that the bread which descended from heauen is the body of our Lorde. But he must beware he say not, that the naturall body of Christ descended out of heauen. Againe, he forgetteth not to repeat that that bread is the body of Christe: but he will not see in Hieromes wordes, that Christ gaue wine to his disciples. Cyrillus is cyted thus, Non enim prudenter, &c. Those things which suffice for a short time, shal not wisely be called by that name: neither was that bread good, which the Elders of the Iewes did eate and are dead. For if it had bene from heauen, and of God, it had deliuered the partakers of it from death. Contrariwise, that body of Christe is bread from heauen, bicause it giueth the eaters of it eternall life. Cyrill saith, the body of Christe is the bread that came downe from heauen, and which giueth eternall life being eaten, euen in the sacrament, all this we confesse alwayes. But as the body of Christe did not naturally descend from heauen, which he receiued here on earth, no more speaketh he of a carnall presence, or corporall manner of eating, but yet of his very flesh and bloud, eaten spiritually by faith.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The two and thirtieth Chapter endeth the exposition of this text by S. Augustine and Theophylact.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     Saint Augustine is cyted, Tract. 26. i
                           •
                         Ioan. Hic est panis &c. This is the bread which came downe from heauen, that by eating thereof, we might liue, bicause we can not haue eternall life of our selues. Not (saith he) as your Fathers did eate Manna, and are deade. He that eateth this bread▪ shall liue for euer. Therefore that they are dead, he would haue it so to be vnderstoode, that they should not liue for euer. For truely they also die temporally that ea
                           •
                         Christ, but they liue eternally, bicause Christ is eternall life. Maister Heskins wondereth what gloses the aduersaries inuent vpon this saying, but I maruell what hee can

picke out of it for his purpose, except it bee this, that who so euer eate Christ, shall liue for euer, but that I am sure, hee will none of. The saying of Theophylact, (but that I stand not on his authoritie being a late writer) seemeth to be directly against him. For hee saith, that The Lorde by his flesh which he tooke of the Virgine Marie, shall preserue our spirituall nature. Which as it is very true,
                        Ioan. 6. so must it needes inforce a spirituall receiuing. For our spirituall nature can not receiue carnally or corporally: but onely spiritually. And yet the wise man noteth in his margent, a plaine place for the proclamer, which is plaine against his owne purpose.
               
               
                  The three and thirtieth Chapter proceedeth to the next text in the sixt of S. Iohn.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The text is, that when our Sauiour had taught this doctrine in the synagogue in Capernaum,
                        Fulk.
                      diuers of his disciples were offended, and saide: This is an hard saying: who can abide it? Hee aunswereth out of Saint Augustine In Psal. 98. They were hard, and not the saying. The like out of Theophylact. In Ioan. 6. Who beeing carnall, can eate spirituall meate, and the bread which came downe from heauen, and the flesh which is eaten? &c.
                  
                  
                     For bicause they had flesh, they thought he would compell them to be deuourers of flesh and bloud. But bicause we vnderstand him spiritually, we neither are deuourers of flesh, but rather we are sanctified by such a meate. This place for any thing that I can see therein, is directly against the carnall eating of the Papistes, sauing that Theophylact lyuing in a corrupt time, writeth in other places suspiciously, of the carnall presence and transubstantiation. Nowe where Maister Heskins chargeth vs, to be Caparnaites, whome he calleth Sacramentaries, and derideth our carnall vnderstanding, bycause wee can not conceiue howe Christes very body should bee in the sacrament, except it should occupie a place and bee felt with our senses, let the world iudge whether our vnderstanding or theirs

bee more spirituall or else more grosse, and like the Capernaites.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The foure and thirtieth Chapter beginneth the exposition of this text: Si videritis, &c. by Saint Augustine and Saint Cyrill.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     The text is this: What if you see the sonne of man ascend where he was before? Ere he enter into his exposition, hee moueth this doubt: howe Christe doth say: the sonne of man shall ascend where he was before, seeing concerning his humanitie hee was neuer in heauen, before he spake these wordes? For answere, he bringeth a long sentence of Saint Augustine, which containeth this in effect, that Christ concerning his humanitie, would ascend thither where he was before concerning his diuinitie. For by reason of the vnion of two natures in one person of Christe, that is often spoken of the whole person, which is proper either to the diuine nature onely, or to the humane nature onely.
                  For exposition hee cyteth Augustine, Tr. 27. in Ioan. Quid est hoc? Hinc soluit &c. What is this? by this he resolueth them, whome he knewe, by this he hath opened whereby they were offended, by this plainely, if they would vnderstand. For they thought that he would giue foorth his body: but he saide, that he would ascend into heauen whole. When you shall see the sonne of man ascending where he was before, certainly euen then at least you shall see, that he giueth not foorth his body after that manner, that you thinke: certainly euen then at least you shall vnderstand, that his grace is not consumed with bytinges. Although this place is so directly against him, that nothing can bee more plaine: yet hee is not ashamed to cyte it for his purpose. Affirming, that Augustine by these wordes, denyeth not the giuing of Christes bodye, but the manner of the giuing of his bodye. This wee confesse, but what manner of giuing doth hee denye? Maister Heskins saith: onely the giuing of it by lumpes and peeces, as the Capernaites did imagine. But that is false, for

he denieth, not onely the giuing of Christes bodie by lumpes, but also al corporall and carnall manner of giuing thereof, as both these wordes aboue cited, and the whole discourse of that treatise doth shew most euidently. First he saith, that Christ by telling them of his ascention, doth clearely resolue them, and open plainely where at they were offended: Which is very true. For when they should see that he carried his naturall bodie, whole into heauen, they might well perceiue, that he would not giue that bodie to be eaten after a corporall manner, either in peeces, & much lesse in the whole. For ye giuing thereof in whole, is much more monstruous, then the giuing therof in peeces. And if there remained a corporall receipt of his whole bodie, notwithstanding his absenting thereof from the earth, the doubt by his ascention is nothing at all resolued, but by an hundreth times more increased. Againe where he saith after his ascention: Then you shall see, that he giueth not his bodie after the manner that you thinke, then you shal vnderstand that his grace is not consumed with bitings. By these wordes, he doeth plainely determine, of the manner of giuing, that the Iewes thought, which was corporall, whether it were in whole or in peeces, and after what manner Christes bodie is giuen, namely by grace. But Maister Heskins citeth another place out of Augustine In Psalm. 98. to proue, that he denieth the giuing of his bodie by lumpes or peeces. But the place is altogether against him, if he had alledged the whole, and not cut it off in the waste. Tunc autem, &c. Then when our Lorde setting foorth this had spoken of his flesh, and had saide, except a man eate my flesh, he shall not haue in him life euerlasting. Some of the seuentie were offended and saide: This is an harde saying, who can vnderstand it? And they departed from him and walked no more with him. It seemed a harde thing to them which he saide: Except a man eate my flesh he shall not haue eternall life. They tooke it foolishly, they thought of it carnally, and they thought that our LORDE would cut certeine peeces of his bodie and giue them, and they saide: this is an harde saying. Here stayeth Maister Heskins: but it followeth in Augustine.
                  
                     
                     
                        Ille a
                              •
                           tem instruxit eos, &c. But he instructed them, and saith vnto them: it is the spirite that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing. The wordes which I haue spoken to you are spirite and life. Vnderstand you spiritually that which I haue spoken. You shal not eate this bodie which you see, & drinke that bloud which they shal shed, which shall crucifie me. I haue commended vnto you a certeine sacrament or mysterie, which beeing vnderstoode spiritually shall giue you life. Although it be needefull that it be celebrated visibly, yet it must be vnderstoode inuisibly. In these wordes Augustine denieth, not onely the giuing of his bodie in peeces, but all maner of corporall eating of his naturall and visible bodie, and aduoucheth onely a spirituall vnderstanding of this text, that we haue beene so long in expounding. But M. Heskins willeth vs not to triumph before the victorie, for Augustine In sermo. ad Neophy. hath a plaine place for M. Iewel. Hoc accipite in pane, &c. Take ye this in the bread, that did hang on the crosse: Take ye this in the challice, that was shed out of the side of Christ. He shall haue death not life, that thinketh Christe a lyar. If M. Heskins had expressed in what booke or 
                        •
                     ome, I should haue sought for this sermon Ad Norphil. he might haue spared me a great deale of labour which I haue lost in searching for it and yet cannot finde it. There are many homilies and sermons of Augustine Ad Neophyl: and yet in none of them can I reade that whiche he aduouched out of him. It seemeth therefore that this place is taken out of some later writer yt without iudgement ascribeth it to Augustine, which is not to be found in his workes: And yet the saying is not such but yt it may haue a reasonable interpretatiō, for ye bread (after a certein maner as Augustine speaketh) is yt which did hang on the crosse, & the wine is yt which was shed out of his side, yt is sacramētally, but not naturally or after a bodily maner. S. Cyril followeth ca. 22. sup. 6. Ioan. Ex imperitia multi, &c. Many that folowed Christ for lack of knowledge, not vnderstanding his wordes, were troubled. For when they had hearde, Verily, verily I say vnto you, Except you shall eate the fleshe of the sonne of man

and drinke his bloud you shall haue no life in you: they thought they had bene called by Christ to the cruell manners of wilde beastes, and prouoked that they would eate the rawe flesh of a man, and drinke bloud, which are euen horrible to be heard: for they had not yet knowen the fourme, and most goodly dispensation of this mysterie. This also (moreouer) they did thinke: howe shall the flesh of this man giue vs eternall life? Or how can he bring vs to immortalitie? Which things when he vnderstod to whose eyes all things are bare and open: he driueth them to the faith by an other maruelous thing: Without cause (saith he) O syre are ye troubled for my words. And if you will not beleeue that life is giuen by my bodie vnto you, what will you do, when you see me flie vp into heauen? I doe not onely say that I will ascend, least you should aske againe how that should be, but you shall see it with your eyes so to be done. Therfore what will you say when you see this? Shall not this be a great argument of your madnesse? For if you thinke that my fleshe can not bring life vnto you, how shall it ascend into heauen like a birde? How shall it flye into the ayre? For this is a like impossible to mankinde. And if my fleshe beside nature shall ascende into heauen, what letteth but it may likewise beside nature giue life? Cyrill noteth (as M. Heskins saith) two vaine thoughtes of the Capernaites, one of eating raw the flesh of Christ, the other how yt flesh shuld giue life, the latter he answereth at large, the other breefely, they vnderstoode not the fourme and dispensation of the mysterie, by which he meaneth the spirituall & mysticall maner of receiuing his bodie, cleane contrarie to their grosse imagination, for otherwise the ascention of Christe would not answere that doubt, but increase it. Maister Heskins citeth another text, to shewe the power of Christes fleshe, whiche is needelesse, for it is confessed of vs to be such, as he himselfe hath declared it to be. Non verbo soliù, &c.
                     
                        In Ioan. 14. 
                     He did not onely with his worde raise dead men, but also with his touching, to shewe that his bodie also doth giue life. If then with his onely touching, corrupted thinges are made sound: how shall we not liue, which doe both tast and eate that fleshe? it will without all doubt refourme againe to immortalitie the partakers thereof. Neither doe thou inquire after the Iewish manner, how? But remember that although water by

nature be colde, ye
                           •
                         by comming of fire to it, forgetting her coldene
                           •
                        , it boyleth with heate. Here M. Heskins will not allowe vs our glosse, that Cyril speaketh of the spirituall receiuing of Christes flesh, because he teacheth more then once, that we are ioyned to Christ not onely spiritually, but also after the flesh, and that by eating the same flesh: as though we could not truely be partakers of the fleshe of Christe▪ by a spirituall receiuing of him, not onely in the sacracrament, but also by faith, without the sacrament. And Cyril saith, we doe both taste and eate his flesh, whiche of necessitie imployeth a spirituall manner of receiuing, for other tast we haue not of Christes flesh, but spirituall and by faith. In the ende of the Chapter to deliuer himselfe & his fellowes from the grosse errour of the Capernaites, he scoffeth finely at our spirituall sifting of the sacrament so fine, that we leaue nothing but the bare bran of the signifying signe in our owne hand, whiche is the grosse bread we feede on. If we taught a bare signe or bare bread in the sacrament, there were some place for Maister Heskins ieaste. But when we teache that presence and receiuing, which Maister Heskins so often confesseth to be onely profitable, and which we finde in the scriptures and auncient doctors, we haue the sacrament so perfectly boulted and fined to our hand, that we acknowledge no branne or drosse at al to be in the bread, neither yet any dregges at all in the cuppe, whatsoeuer there is in the Popish challice, which the priest hath sucked and licked so drie, that there is not one droppe of the bloud of Christe in it, to quench the thirst of the poore people.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The fi
                        •
                     e and thirtieth Chapter proceedeth, in the exposition of the same text, and endeth it by Euthymius, and Petrus Cluniacensis.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     Euthymius is cited In 6. Ioan. following the exposition of Cyrillus, as he doth often of the olde Greeke writers. Si ergo videritis, &c. If therfore ye shal see, the sonne of man ascending where he was before, what will you say? He speaketh of the assumption of him selfe into heauen, ascending according to his

humanitie, where he was before, according to his Diuinitie. For he that can make this fleshe heauenly, can also make it meate of men. Maister Heskins inferreth vpon this saying, that the argument of the ascention vsed by Christ, is vaine to proue the spirituall eating, but good to proue the reall eating of his fleshe. Note here first, that he counteth the argument of his ascention expounded and vsed by Augustine in the Chapter next before, to be vaine. Secondly although Cyrillus vseth the argument of Christes ascention, to prooue that Christes flesh being eaten, may as well giue life, as it could ascend into heauen, doth it therefore proue a reall, corporal, or carnal presence, & eating of Christes bodie, which is taken away by his ascention? But he saith, The flesh of Christ was spiritually the meate of the holie fathers in the olde lawe, therefore that needed not to be proued possible, which was knowen so long before. A wise reason, as though Christ had to doe with faithfull Iewes, and not with Infidels, that neither knew nor beleeued, any such matter: or, if hee had spoken to the Patriarches them selues, as though they had knowne and vnderstoode the mysteries of Christ so distinctly and plainly, that Christes instruction had bene needelesse to them. But Maister Heskins in all his arguments and expositions almost, setteth downe that, as certeine and granted, which is the whole matter in controuersie. His meate is flesh in deede, his flesh is not eaten spiritually, &c. He must haue an easie aduersarie, or else he shall gaine litle by such petition of principles. The saying of Petrus of Clunie, though he be but a late writer, conteineth more against him, then for him, for he denieth the mangling of Christs flesh after the Capernaites imaginations, and teacheth, that it is Diuided without paine, parted without diminution, and eaten without consumption, because it is the spirite that quickeneth, and because his fleshe beeing so receiued and vnderstoode, giueth eternall life. What can we here vnderstand but a spirituall receiuing?
               
               
                  The sixe and thirtieth Chapter createth of the next text by Augustine, & Chrysostome.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Fulke.
                     This text is this: it is the spirite that quickeneth, the fleshe profiteth nothing. This text is made so familiar (he saith) that boyes and girles can blatter it against Christes presence in the sacrament, as though they denied the vertue of his fleshe, that denie your carnal presence in the sacrament. But we must heare Saint Augustine. Tract. 27. In Ioan. Quid est quod adi
                           •
                        ngit, &c. What is that he ioyneth? It is the spirite that quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing? Let vs say vnto him for he suffreth vs not gainsaying but desirous to know) O Lord good Maister, how doeth not the flesh profite any thing, when then hast said: except a man eate my flesh, & drink my bloud, he shal not haue life in him? Doth not life profite any thing? And wherfore are we that that we are, but that we may haue eternal life, which thou doest promise by thy flesh? What then is it: it profiteth not any thing? The flesh profiteth nothing, but as they vnderstoode it. For they vnderstoode fleshe so, as it is rent in peeces in a dead bodie, or solde in the shambles, not as it is quickened by the spirit: It is therfore so saide: the flesh profiteth nothing, as it is saide: knowledge puffeth vp a man. Shall we nowe then hate knowledge? God forbid. And what it is then? Knowledge p
                           •
                        ffeth vp? beeing alone without charitie. Therefore he added: But charitie doth edifie. Therefore adde charitie to knowledge, and knowledge shalbe profitable, not by it selfe but by charitie So now likewise the fleshe profiteth nothing, that is the fleshe alone. But let the spirite come to the flesh, as charitie commeth to knowledge, and it profiteth verie much. For if the flesh had profi
                           •
                        ed nothing: the worde should not haue beene made flesh that it might dwell in vs. If Christ haue profited vs much by his flesh, how doeth the flesh profite nothing at all? But the spirite by the flesh hath done some thing for our health. The fleshe was that vessel, marke what it had in it, not what it was. The Apostles were sent, did their flesh profite nothing? If the flesh of the Apostles profited vs not, could our Lordes flesh not profite vs? For how came the sound of the word vnto vs but by the voyce of the flesh? From whence the stile? From whence the writing? All these workes be of the flesh, but the spirite mouing it as his instrument. Therefore it is the spirite which quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing. As they vnderstoode flesh, so do I not giue my flesh to be eaten. Maister Heskins doth glorie that he bringeth not this sentence

truncately as the heretiques do, but wholy, that the reader should not be defrauded of S. Augustines right meaning, vpō this scripture. And here again he repeateth his rotten distinction, that Christ giueth not his flesh by lumpes & peeces, yet giueth it corporally, & that S. Augustine meaneth none otherwise. But as long a sentence as he rehearsed, he hath omitted the very interpretation of his text in hand. Which Augustine maketh in these wordes: Quid est spiritus & vita? Spiritualiter intelligenda sunt. What is spirite and life spiritually to be vnderstanded: neither is there one worde in all that treatise for the corporall presence, or receiuing. And yet we cōfesse that Christ truly giueth vs his fleshe, & we are truely fed therewith, but not after a corporall maner, but after a spiritual & vnspeakable maner. Chrysostome is cited hom. 46. In Ioan. Quid igitur? caro, &c. What then? Doth the fleshe profite nothing? He speaketh not of the very flesh, God forbid, but of them that carnally take those things that are spoken. And what is it to vnderstand carnally? Simply as the thinges are spoken, and not to thinke any other thing of them. For th
                           •
                        se thinges that are seene, are not so to be iudged, but all mysteries are to be considered with inwarde eyes, that is spiritually. He that eateth not my flesh, and drinketh not my bloud, hath no life in him selfe. How doeth the fleshe profite nothing without the which no man can liue? See that this particle (The flesh profiteth not any thing) is not spoken of the fleshe it selfe, but of the carnall hearing. M. Hesk. saith that Chrysostome needeth no expositor, to open his exposition. And I am of yt same iudgment. For he is so plaine against al grosse and carnal imagination, about these mysteries, that nothing can be plainer. He saith to vnderstand these thinges in ye sixt of Iohn simply, as they are spoken, is to vnderstād them carnally, which ought not to be, for all mysteries must be vnderstood spiritually, the receiuing of Christ in the sacrament is a mysterie, therfore it must be vnderstāded spiritually.
               
               
                  The seuen and thirtieth Chapter proceedeth vpon the same text, by Theophylact, & S. Bernarde.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Theophylacte following Chrysostome,
                        Fulke.
                      as he doth very much, whē he is not carried from him by the corruption

of his time, saith That the wordes of Christ must be vnderstood
                           •
                         spiritually: Whervpon M. Hesk. maketh an obiection, how those words may be vnderstood spiritually, & yet ye carnal presence & receiuing retained? He answereth, yt the Papists also confesse, the words of Christ must be vnderstode spiritually, and first alledgeth Theophylacte, to proue that he allowed the carnal presence, which though they do not vndoutedly proue it, yet considering ye time in which he liued, it may be granted that he did allow it. What then? Marie spiritual vnderstāding letteth not ye carnal presence. But I haue shewed before yt while Theophylact wold followe Chrysost. & yet mainteine the errour of his time, no maruel though he were contrarie to himself. But spiritual vnderstanding by M. Hesk. definition, is to vnderstand, yt these thinges are not done by any naturall meane, but by the spirit of God, namely transubstantiation & such like. But Chrysostom as we sawe in the Chapter before, determined otherwise of spirituall vnderstanding of this scripture, namely, that the sayings must not be taken simply as they are spokē, but as mysteries be considered wt ye inward eyes. But M. Heskins hath a plaine place for the proclaymer out of S. Aug. serm. Ad Infant: Quod videtis in altari panis est, &c. That which you see on the altar is bread and the cuppe, which also your eyes do shew you. But that faith requireth to be instructed: the bread is the bodie, the cup is the bloud. In the mind of some man such a thought may arise, Our Lorde Iesus Christ we know whence he receiued flesh, namely of the virgin Marie, he was nourished, grewe vp, was buried, rose again, & ascended into heauen, thither he lifted vp his bodie, from whence he shall come to iudge both the quick & the dead. There he is now siting at the right hand of the father, how is therfore bread his bodies? or that which is in the cuppe how is it his bloud? Brethren, therefore those things are called sacraments, because one thing is seene in them, another thing is vnderstanded. That which is seene, hath a corporall forme, that which is vnderstoode hath a spirituall fruite. What plainnes is in this place, except it be against transubstantiation, and the reall presence, let the readers iudge. And withal I must admonish them, that M. Hesk. citeth it farre otherwise then

it is in Augustine, beside yt he leaueth out that which followeth, & maketh all the matter as plain as a pack staffe, which are these words: Corpus ergo Christi, &c. 
                     Therfore if yu wilt vnderstand the body of Christ, heare the Apostle saying to the faithful: you are the bodie of Christ & his mē
                        bers. If you therefore be the bodie of Christ & his members, your mysterie is set on ye table, you receiue ye Lords mysterie, you answer Amen to yt which you are, & in answering you consent. Thou hearest therefore the body of Christ, & thou answerest Amen. Be thou a mēber of the bodie of Christ, that thy Amen may be true. Why then in bread? Let vs here bring nothing of our owne. Let vs also heare the Apostle. Therfore when he spake of this sacrament he saith: One bread, we being many are one bodie. Vnderstand this and reioyce. By these wordes it is moste manifest that Augustine excludeth the carnall presence, affirming the elementes to be the bodie and bloude of Christ, euen as we are the bodie and members of Christ, and that is spiritually & mystically: & as we are ye bread, namely by significatiō, & not by transubstantiation. The testimonies of Algerus and Bernard I leaue to M. Hesk. for that they are without the compasse of the challenge.
               
               
                  The eight and thirtieth Chapter endeth the exposition of this text by Euthymius and Lyra.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Euthymius is cited In 6. Ioan. in these words: Spiritus est qui viuificat, &c. It is the spirite that quickeneth.
                     
                        Fulk.
                      
                     Now he calleth the spirit, the spiritual vnderstanding of those things which are said: likewise the flesh, to vnderstand them fleshly. For the speech is not now of his flesh which quickeneth. Therefore he saith: to vnderstand these thinges spiritually, giueth that life, which I spake of before: but to vnderstand them carnally it profiteth nothing. Maister Hesk. wold fain make Euthymius to speak for him, if he could tell how to wring him in, but it wil not be. Spiritual vnderstanding is, as Chrysost. before in the 36. Chap. hath declared, & not as M. Heskins would racke it, to make it stand with his grosse and carnal vnderstanding. From the iudgement of Lyra as no compotent Iudge, I appeale, although in this place he speake nothing for M. Heskins,

but rather against him, for he agreeth with the rest that the wordes must be spiritually vnderstanded.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The nine and thirtieth Chapter beginneth the exposition of the next text by S. Augustine and Cyrill.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     The text is this: the wordes that I speake vnto you are spirite and life, of which Augustine writeth thus: Tra. 27. In Ioan. Quid est, &c. What is it, they are spirite and life? They are spiritually to be vnderstoode. Hast thou vnderstoode them spiritually? they are spirite and life. Hast thou vnderstoode them carnally? Euen so also they are spirite and life, but not to thee. M. Heskins hauing once made a blind determination of spirituall vnderstanding, taketh spirituall vnderstanding wheresoeuer he findeth it for carnal vnderstanding, & carnall vnderstanding for spirituall vnderstanding, without all ryme or reason.
                        Hom. 46. in Ioan.
                      
                     But still Chrysostome lyeth in his way: to vnderstand carnally, is to vnderstand things simply as they are spoken, for all mysteries must be vnderstood with inward eyes, that is, spiritually. When the inward eyes see the bread they passe ouer the creatures, neither do they thinke of that bread, which is baked of the baker, but of him, which called himselfe the bread of eternal life. Cyril is cited Cap. 24. In 6. Ioan. Verba quae, &c. The wordes which I haue spoken to you are spirit and life. He sheweth that his whole bodie is full of quickening vertue of the spirite. For here he called his very fleshe, spirite, not because it lost the nature of flesh, & is changed into the spirite: but because beeing perfectly ioyned with it, it hath receiued the whole power to quicken. Neither let any man think, this to be spoken vndecently, for he that is surely ioyned to the Lorde, is one spirite with him. How then shal not his flesh be called one with him? It is after this manner therefore which is saide: you thinke I said this earthly and mortall bodie of his owne nature to be quickening or giuing life, but I spake of the spirit & life. For the nature of the flesh of it self cānot quicken, but the power of the spirite hath made the fleshe quickening. Therefore the words, which I haue spokē, that is those things which I spoke vnto you are spirite and life, by which my fleshe also liueth and is quickening. Cyrill hauing his minde still bent against the

Nestorians, earnestly auoucheth ye trueth of Christes flesh vnited to his Diuinitie, but for M. Hesk. purpose he saith nothing at all, I meane for the carnal maner of receiuing Christes fleshe in the sacrament. The name of Capernaites M. Hesk. so much misliketh, that he would turne it ouer to vs, if he could inuent any balde reason to proue it agreeing to our doctrine. The sacramentaries he saith are carnal and grosse, because they say that Papistes receiue nothing but bare flesh, and not the flesh of Christe, which is vnited to the Deitie, and giueth life. But indeed the Papistes say as much, when they say that the flesh of Christ is receiued, where it giueth no life. As for those whome he calleth sacramentaries they wil not graunt, yt the Papistes (although they prate so grossely of flesh & bloud,) yet receiue any thing, but a wafer cake, & a draught of wine.
               
               
                  The fortieth Chapter endeth the exposition of this text, and so of the processe of the sixt of S. Iohn by Euthymius, and Lyra.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Euthymius to end this long and tedious processe,
                        Fukle.
                      is cited, as before In. 6. Ioan. Verba quae, &c. The wordes which I speake vnto you are spirite and life, they are spirituall and quickening. For we must not looke vpon them simply, that is vnderstand them carnally. But imagine a certeine other thing, and to beholde them with inward eyes as mysteries, for this is spiritually to vnderstand. Euthymius affirmeth the same, that Chrysostome doeth Hom. 46. In Ioan. and almoste in the same wordes, neither can M. Hesk. drawe any thing out of thē to serue his humor, but that the sacramentes are mysteries, and therefore some other thing must be present, then is seene with the outward eye: which is true, so it be such a thing as may be seene onely with the eyes of the mind, of which the authour speaketh. But the bodie of Christ, as Aug. saith, euen immortall and glorified, is stil visible. Ep. 85. Consentio. To wrangle about ye sentence of Lyra it were losse of time, who although he wil haue a real presence, yet he wil haue The flesh of Christ to be eaten in the sacrament after a spirituall maner, because the spirite by the power of God vnited to the flesh is refreshed. Wherevpon M. Hesk. reiecting

the true spirituall manner of eating Christes fleshe in ye sacrament by faith, as hereticall, which he hath so often before allowed, as onely profitable: setteth vp three other spirituall manners of Christes presence in the sacrament for three causes. First, because it is wrought by the spirite of God. Secondly, because, although it be verily present, it is not knowen by corporall sence, but by spirituall knowledge of faith. Thirdly, because our spirite by the power of God, is vnited to the fleshe: of these deuises he maketh Lyra the author, and he may bee well ynough. For such blinde teachers, while they wrangled about words, they became altogether vaine in their imaginations, and lost the true sence and meaning, both of the worde of God, and of the sacraments. The rayling stuffe wherewith he concludeth this Chapter, and this worthie expositiō continued in 36. Chapters, I passe ouer as vnworthie of any answere.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The one and fortieth Chapter beginneth, the exposition of these wordes of Christ: this is my bodie, after the minde of the aduersaries.
                  The first part of this Chapter conteyneth a fonde and lewde comparison of the doctrine of the Sacramentaries,
                        Fulke.
                      with the temptation of the diuell, vsed to our firste parents▪ which, because it sheweth nothing but M. Hesk. witt and stomake, I omitt. It hath more colour of reason that he bringeth in afterward: namely that there are two things, which ought to moue men to resist the temtation of the sacramentaries: their contrarietie to the worde of God, and their contrarietie among them selues. Their contrarietie to the worde of God, he sayeth to bee, where Christ sayde: This is my bodie, Sathan sayth, it is not his bodie. In verie deede, if after Christe hath sayde, the bread and wine are his bodie & bloude, any man shuld rise vp & saye, they are not his bodie & bloud at al, we might well iudge yt he spake by the spirite of Sathan: as when Christe sayeth, drinke ye all of this, & the Pope sayth to the people, there shall none of you all drink of

this, we may easely acknowlege the spirit of Antichrist. But we (whome he calleth sacramentaries) doe with all reuerence & humilitie confesse, that the bread & the wine ministred according to Christes institution, are the body & bloud of Christ, in such sence, as he saide they were. And we say with S. Augustine: 
                        Per similitudinem Christus multa est quae per proprietatem non est. Per similitudinem & petrae est Christus, & ostium est Christus, & lapis angularis est Christus, &c. By similitude, Christ is manie things, which he is not by propertie. By similitude the rocke is Christ, ye dore is Christ, the corner stone is Christ, &c. Wherfore, we affirme nothing contrarie to the words of Christ, but altogether agreeable to his meaning. For contrarietie of Sacramentaries among them selues, he citeth a saying of Luther written in his frowardnesse, that there shoulde be eyght seuerall disagreeing spirites among the Sacramentaries, from which, if you take away Carolostadius, Swenkfeldius, Campanus, and the eight without name, which is belike H. N. opinion, that euery man may think of it what he list, whose opinions the godly, whome hee calleth sacramentaries, did euer more detest as wicked & vngodly: there remaineth ye interpretation of Zwinglius, of the wordes of Christ, This signifieth my bodie: & of Oecolampadius, This is a token of my bod
                        •
                     e: & two other, Receiue the benefits of my passion: and Take this as a monument, or remembrance of my bodie crucified for you, which differ in forme of wordes, and are all one in deede and meaning. So is the iudgement of Melancthon: this is the participation of my bodie: And of Caluine, yet not as Heskins like a lewde lyer slaundereth him, to say, This is the verie substance of my bodie, but it is not my bodily substance, but agreeing in effect with all the rest, that the verie bodie of Christ is receiued, but not after a carnall or bodily manner, but after a spirituall & vnspeakable manner. As for the fiue sectes numbred among the Lutherans, which dissent from vs in this point, we make none accompt of them.
                  Thus, where M. Hesk hath gathered, as he reckoneth,

sixteene seueral sectes, foure of them being condemned of vs for hereticall, with the authors of them, fiue agreeing with the papistes in the carnall presence, and Luthers owne secte, if he dissent from them, as Heskins maketh him to doe, the sixt, tenne are of vs generally refused. The other sixe, that remaine in Maister Heskins number, are falsely forged to disagree, when they holde all one thing in effect, although they expresse the same thing in diuerse formes of wordes, as it is not possible for diuerse interpreters, though they agree in sense and interpretation, to iump all in one forme of words, for then all commentaries should be one. But as God giueth his giftes diuersely, some expound the scriptures briefely, some more at large, some more plainly, some more obscurely: so all these, and fiue hundred more, (God be thanked) learned men either in writing, or in preaching, haue shewed the vnderstanding of Christes wordes, hardly fiue of them agreeing in all termes and phrases, yet all moste sweetely consenting in one sense, and meaning, which consent and agreement is more notable, when it is vttered in so many diuerse formes of wordes. And yet, to take away all cauels and flaunders, all the churches for the moste parte in Fraunce, Scotland, Sauoy, Heluetia, Germanie, Hungarie, Piemont, Polonia, &c. beside the persecuted Churches of Italians, Spanyards, and others, haue subscribed to one forme of confession, concerning not onely the sacrament, but all other principall poyntes of religion, which wee do likewise receiue in this Church of England. And if disagreing of men among themselues, were a matter of such importance, it were no harde thing, to shewe the battels of the schoole doctours among the Papists, not onely about other matters, but euen about the manner of the presence of Christes bodie in the sacrament, & transsubstantiation. If you say, all these, whome you reiecte, as the Lutherans in this poynt, the Swinkefeldians, Anabaptistes, Libertines, Henrinicolaites, and such other, do all disagree with you, from the Catholike church of

Rome, therefore you are all together naught. By this reason, all Christianitie might bee condemned of the Iewes and Gentiles, because so many sectes and heresies as be vnder the name of Christianitie, together with the true Church of Christe, be all against Iudaisme & Gentilisme. But agreeing or disagreeing of men among themselues, is a weake argument, to proue or disproue any thing, onely agreeing with the trueth, is a sure reason to allowe, and disagreeing from the trueth, is a certeine argument to refuse, either men, or matter propounded by them.
               
               
                  The two and fourtieth Chapter, beginneth the exposition of the wordes of Christe, after the Catholike manner, with certein proues of the same.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  First,
                        Fulk.
                      he setteth downe the sayings of the three Euangelistes, Mathew, Marke, and Luke, and of the Apostle Paule, in which they describe the institution of the sacrament: of which he sayeth, not one maketh any mention of tropes, figures, or significations, wherein hee vseth a shamelesse kinde of Sophistrie: for although they name no tropes, or figures, or signification, yet by the Papistes owne confession, Saint Luke, & S. Paule, vse manifest tropes, figures, and significations, namely, where they say: This cupp is the newe testament in my bloud. First, it is a trope or figure, to saye, the cupp, for that which is conteined in the cup, vnlesse they will say, that the cupp, of what metall or matter so euer it was, was likewise transubstantiated into the bloud of Christe.
                  Likewise, where he sayeth: this cuppe is the newe testament or couenant, he must either acknowledge a signification, this cuppe signifieth the newe testament, or else he must make the newe testament to be nothing else but a cuppe.
                  Finally, where he sayeth, this cuppe is the newe testament in my bloud, except hee acknowledge a trope or figure, he will vtterly denye that, which is in the cup, to be the bloud of Christe.
                  
                     And out of all controuersie, this manner of speache vsed by Saint Luke and Saint Paule, is a manifest interpretation of the wordes vsed by S. Mathewe, and Saint Marke, this is my bloud, which are all one in sence and meaning, and teache vs howe the wordes spoken of the breade are to be interpreted, this is my bodie, this is the newe testament in my bloude, which is as much to saye, this is a seale, and confirmation of the newe couenaunt, (which is remission of sinnes) purchased by the breaking of my bodie, and the shedding of my bloud for you. This breade and this cuppe receiued of you, shall assure you, that you are truely incorporated into my bodie, & so made partakers of eternall life. This interpretation hath in it nothing farre fetched, or strange, from ye words of Christ, & ye vsuall maner of speaking in the scripture.
                  But nowe M. Heskins will proue, that the wordes of Christ are to be vnderstanded without trope or figure, by the slaunders of the Infidels, which defamed ye Christians in the primitiue Church, for eating the fleshe of men and of children, as appeareth in Euseb. lib. 5 Cap. 2. & 3. in the storie of Blandina and Attalus martyrs: when they did eate the flesh of Christ. But none of them, neither in Eusebius, nor yet Iustine, Origen, Tertullian, or any other that haue written Apollogies, defended the Christians, by the commaundement of Christ, to eat his bodie, but vtterly denyed and derided the slaunder, that they were sayde, to eat the fleshe of men or children, as they did other slaunders, which had no ground nor similitude of trueth, as that they worshipped an Asses head, yt they companyed together in the dark like brute beastes, and such like: whereas, if they had eaten the naturall fleshe of Christ, as the Papists teache, they woulde neither haue simply denyed ye eating of a mans flesh, nor yet haue spared to shewe, how it was eaten vnder the formes of bread & wine, to auoide all crueltie and lothsomnes. As for the legend of S. Andrewes passion, which M. Heskins sayeth was written per Presbyteros & diaconos Achaie, is of as good credit, as ye booke of Beuis of Hampton,

ye like I say of ye fable of Amphilochius a newe found olde writer: concerning the Iewe, that sawe a childe diuided when the sacrament was broken. The Legend and festiuall haue many such miracles. But why did he not see a man diuided, seeing Christe is not nowe a childe, but a man? Belike the authours of those miracles thought, that if they feigned him to be a little child like Tom Thumb, their miracles should be more credited, that such a one should be conteined in their cake, rather then a tall man of perfect stature. O impudent asses! But it proueth wel the reall presence (saith M. Hes.) that Auerrois a Philosopher saith: I haue walked ouer the world, I haue found diuers sectes, and yet haue I found none so foolish a sect. is is the sect of the Christians. For they deuour with their teeth their God whome they worship. Hereof it is easie to perceiue (saith he) that ye fame was, that they did receiue and eate Christ, whom they honoured. But herein M. Hes. bewrayeth either his falshood, or his ignoraunce. For hee speaketh as though Auerrois were an ancient Philosopher, that liued in the dayes of the primitiue Church, whereas he was a Spanish Mahometist, or rather Athist, not past three or foure hundreth yeres ago, when Poperie was in ye greatest pride, and Idolatrie couered the face of the earth. His saying therfore proueth nothing, but how great an offēce ye popish Idolatrie did giue to ye Heathen, Turkes, and Iewes. And whereas Iustinus in his Apollogie to the Emperour, declareth whatsoeuer was done in the assemblies of the Christians, he well dischargeth them of all slaunders that were raised against them, but defendeth not the corporall eating of mans flesh by the commaundement of Christ, although he confesse that they receiued that breade not as common bread, nor as common drinke: but as their flesh and bloud was nourirished by that foode, so they were persuaded that it was the flesh and bloud of Iesus Christ for the spiritual foode of their soules.
                  As for the curse that Rupertus threatneth to them that adde vnto the word of God▪ pertaineth not to them yt giue the true sense of the word of God, whether it be in more

wordes or fewer. And whereas Rupertus saith these words of Christ, I am a vine, and this is my body, be no like speaches: I confesse, they are not in euery respect, bicause in the one he did institute a sacramēt, in the other he taught as by a similitude, the true end, vse, and signification of the sacrament. Yet are they not altogether vnlike, bicause they are both figuratiue, and so iudged and compared together by the auncient Fathers. But Rupertus will proue by two reasons, that the latter is no figure. First, bicause in the former, there is a continuation of the Allegorie, which proueth it to be a figure, in the other there is none such. This is a fond reason, for both we haue shewed a continuation of the trope, where he saide, this cup is the newe Testament, and although there were none, yet that can not exclude a figure, no more then when baptisme is called regeneration, when the lamb is called the Passeouer, which be sacramentall speaches and such like, where no continuation of the figure followeth. The other reason of Rupertus, M. Heskins diuideth into two parts. The first is, to note the enunciation of both scriptures, for he doth not take a braunch of a vine, and say, I am this vine, or this vine is my body, but he saith of the bread, this is my body. A strong reason: he saith (as signanter) by a certaine demonstration of substaunce, and speaking of the same sacrament, That rocke was Christe, and in the time when it was a sacrament, it was and might be truely said, pointing to the rocke, this is Christ, and to the water issuing out of it, this is the bloud of Christ, and so no doubt, Christ spake by his spiri
                        •
                     e in the consciences of the faithfull. The second part of Rupertus reason is, that ye wordes which followe, which is giuen for you, &c. can not be applied to the figure, therefore the sense of that place is proper, and not figuratiue. But contrariwise, these wordes can not be applied to the sacrament, therefore the speach is not proper but figuratiue, and shewe howe the breade and the cup are the body and bloud of Christe, namely, as his body is broken and his bloud shed for vs, for the vertue of the sacrament standeth in his passion, by which his

body and bloud offered in sacrifice for our sinnes, are made a spirituall foode of our soules. The conference that Rupertus maketh betweene the words of Christ, and the wordes of the serpent, I passe ouer, as containing no argument in them for the proofe of M. Heskins bill, but onely shewing the corrupt iudgement of the authour, whose reasons I am content to weigh, but I esteeme not his authoritie, as being a late prop of the Popish church.
               
               
                  The three and fortieth Chapter beginneth to proue the vnderstanding of Christes foresaid wordes not to be figuratiue, by the authoritie of the Fathers. And first by Alexander and Iustinus.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Iustine is alledged in this second Apologie in a corrupt Latine translation,
                        Fulk.
                      which he maketh worsse by falsifying the same in his English translation. The place hath bene already considered in the first booke Chap. 27. according to the originall Greeke copie. I will nowe rehearse the same after his Latine translation, and afterward shewe M. Heskins falsification. Cum autem &c. When he that is ouerseer hath giuen thankes, and all the people haue assented, they which are called Deacons with vs, do distribute to euery one that is present, that they may take part in the breade in which thankes is giuen, and of the wine and water, and carie it to those which are not present. And this foode which is called thankes giuing: Of which it is not lawfull for any other to take part, but he that beleeueth those things to be true which are taught by vs, and which is washed in the lauer vnto remission of sinnes and regeneration, and so liueth as Christ hath taught. Neither do we take these thinges as common bread and a common cup: but euen as by the word of God Iesus Christ our sauiour being incarnate, had both flesh and bloud: so we are taught that the foode through the prayer of his word being consecrated by thankesgiuing, of which our flesh & bloud by transmutation are nourished, is the flesh & bloud of Iesus Christ, which was incarnate. For the Apostles in their cōmentaries, which are called Gospels, haue taught that he did so cōmaund them, That when he had taken bread & giuen thanks, he said, Do this in remembrance of me, this is my body. And likewise when he had taken the cup and giuen thankes that he said: This is my bloud, and gaue first to them alone. M. Heskins hath falsified this author

in his translation. First, where he turneth is qui pręest, the prieste, as though there were Masse priestes in that time. Secondly, quae docentur a nobis, that be taught of vs, as though none should receiue the sacrament, but they which beleue the real presence, which he surmiseth to be taught to thē. But more notably, where he translateth these wordes: Sie verbi sui oratione, consecratum gratiarum actione alimentum, ex quo caro nostra, & sanguis per transmutationem aluntur, ipsius incarnati Iesu Christi & carnem & sanguinem esse educti sumus. Into this English, with foysting in a parenthesis, and chaunging his letter. EVEN SO WE BE TAVGHT THAT THE FOODE (wherewith our flesh and bloud be nourished by alteration) WHEN IT IS CONSECRATED BY THE PRAYER OF HIS WORD, TO BE THE FLESH AND BLOVD OF THE SAME IESVS INCARNATED. In this beastly racking & peruerting, he hath left out thank
                           •
                        giuing, not knowing wher to place it. The cause of this falsification is, for that he can not abide, that the food after it is consecrated, shuld nourish our bodies, which Iustinꝰ doth most expresly affirme. But before I proceede to his collections, I will gather my selfe out of this place, that which the Papistes wil not wel like of, and yet although they would burst for anger, thei can not auoyde, but that they be necessarie collections. First, that there was no priuate Masse in his dayes, for all that were present did communicate. Secondly, that the people, as well as the ministers, receiued in both kindes. Thirdly, that the things wherof they were partakers, were bread, wine, and water, which after they were consecrated, were the nourishment of their bodies. Now let vs heare M. Hes. collection for the reall presence. First he saith not, these things were signes, figures, tokens: therefore they were none. A tried argument of the authoritie, of a man negatiuely. Secondly he saith, they were taught that by consecration, they were made by ye power of Gods worde, the flesh and bloud of Christ that was incarnated. We beleue the same likewise. Thirdly M. Hes saith, the real presence was as certaine to the primitiue Church, as the incarnation.

So saith not Iustinus, neither that the sacrament was the same substance of naturall flesh and bloud of Iesus that was incarnat by that diuine & wonderful means, by which he was incarnate, and this do we most constantly beleeue. And therefore here is no plaine place for the proclamer to proue the reall presence, whereof Iustine speaketh none otherwise, then the proclamer did speak, & beleeue while he liued.
                  But M. Heskins, although there was neuer seene a more impudent falsifier of the Doctours sayings and meanings, and euen in this place as I haue plainely discouered, most lewdly corrupted the authours wordes by false translation: yet he shameth not to slaunder holy and learned Cranmer of the same crime. But what should an harlot do? but after she hath plaied the strumpet, call euery honest woman shee meeteth whore first? Cranmer (saith he) reporteth, as though Iustine should say, the sacrament is but called the body of Christe. This is first an intollerable lye. For Cranmer saith, it is called the body of Christ, he saith not it is but called so, that is only called so. Secondly Cranmer saide out of Iustinus, that these creatures after they be consecrated do nourish the bodies, and are chaunged into them. And therein he saith most truely, and as the wordes of Iustine are, and as the Latine translation is, and Maister Heskins most falsely hath corrupted them, as I shewed before. Of which falsification being guiltie in his owne conscience, he fleeth from his former Latine translation which is true in this point, to the translation of Petrus Nannius a Papist, which yet helpeth him not, but by false pointing and displacing of the wordes, Ita quoque per preces verbi illius, cibum ex quo caro nostra & sanguis per immutationem aluntur cum benedictus fuerit, Iesu ipsius incarnati, carnem & sanguinem didicimus esse. But the Greeke Article is so placed, as it can abide no such patcherie: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  
                     Euen so we are taught that that foode after thankes are

giuen for it by prayer of his word, of which our flesh and bloud by permutation are nourished, is the flesh and bloud of that Iesus which was incarnated. So are the very wordes of Iustine.
                  
                  But to helpe out the matter, Ambrose is alledged. Lib. 4. de sacra. Cap. 5. Before it be consecrated it is bread, but when the wordes of Christ are come to it, it is the body of Christ. But the same Ambrose in the same booke and Chapter, saith of the sacrament in the prayer of the Church: 
                        Fac nobis, inquit, hanc oblationem ascriptam, rationabilem, acceptabilē: quod est figura corporis & sanguinis Domini nostri Iesu Christi. Make vnto vs (saith the priest) this oblation ascribed, reasonable, acceptable: which is the figure of the body and bloud of our Lord Iesus Christ. By these wordes it is manifest, how Ambrose and the Church in his time, tooke the breade to be the body of Christ. The like may be said of Augustine, whose wordes M. Heskins cyteth, De verbis Domini, ser. 8. Before the wordes of Christ that which is offered is called breade, when the words of Christ are spoken now it is not called breade, but is called his body. Who seeth not yt these words are vttered by comparison, it is not caled bread, but his body, that is, it is rather called his body then bread, as S. Paule saith, Christe sent me not to baptise, but to preach, that is, rather to preach then to baptise?
                  But nowe commeth in the authoritie of Alexander somtime Byshop of Rome, to which I will not vouchsafe to make any answere, bicause it is a meere forgerie and counterfet Epistle, as all ye pack of these decretall Epistles are, yt are feined in the name of those auncient holy Martyrs, sometimes Bishops of the citie of Rome, by some lewde Losel, that could not write true Latine, as is easie to see of all men that will take paines to read such beastly baggage. I will giue you a taste of this counterfet Alexander, speaking of holy water: If the ashes being sprinkled with the bloud of a heifer did sanctifie the people, much more shall water sprinkled with salt, and hallowed with godly prayers. See howe the brutish blasphemous Asse, transferreth the argument of the Apostle, Heb. 9. from the precious bloud

of Christ to his beggerly holy water. I wil therfore leaue M. Heskins rooting with his groyne in this draffe sacke, and passe to the next Chapter.
               
               
                  The foure and fortieth Chapter by occasion of the wordes of Alexander, treateth of the adoration and honouring of Christes body in the sacrament.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  It is a worshipfull Alexander, that gaue you the occasion of this discourse by his wordes. But let the occasion goe, we will looke to the matter. First he rehearseth halfe a side of M. Iewels wordes against the adoration of the sacrament, out of which he gathereth two arguments, the one thus: Christ neuer gaue cōmandement to worship the sacrament: ergo, it is not to be done. This argument he answereth is negatiue, and therfore concludeth nothing. But vnder correction of his great Logike, when God chargeth vs to do that onely, which he commaundeth, an argument of negatiues of Gods commaundement concludeth al things to be vnlawfull, which God hath not commaunded. Hee bringeth examples of many that worshipped Christe, yet had they no commaundement of him so to doe. A great number worshipped him not as God, but as the Prophete of God, for which they had commandement in the lawe, and they that worshipped him as God most especially. But M. Heskins will make the like argument, Christ gaue the sacrament of his body to the Apostles onely, and gaue no commaundement that all people should receiue it indifferently, wherefore it ought not to be done. Reuerend M. Doctour, I denye your antecedent, for ye can not proue, that he gaue it only to his Apostles, nor that he gaue no commaundement, for he gaue an expresse commaundement to continue ye same ceremonie vntil his comming againe, as S. Paule doth testifie. Therefore your argument is as like, as an apple is like an oyster. But to passe ouer the rest of his babbling against the proclamers learning, too well knowne, to bee defaced by such an obscure Doctours censure: I come to his second argument. S. Paule that tooke the sacrament at

Christes hand, and as he had taken it, deliuered it to the Corinthians, neuer willed adoration or godly honour to be giuen to it. This argument he will not vouchsafe to aunswere, as concluding nothing, but he denyeth the antecedent, saying, It is false, that S. Paul deliuered no more to the Corinthians then Christ did. First he will make Paule a lyar, when he saide, that which I receiued I deliuered, &c. But howe will he proue that he deliuered more then Christ did? If you can spare laughter in reading, I could not in writing. Forsooth S. Paule deliuered to the Corinthians, that the vnwoorthie receiuer shall be guiltie of the body and bloud of Christ, whereas Christ when he instituted the sacrament gaue no such lawe. O noble Diuine! as though that if Christ at his supper had vsed no longer discourse of this sacrament, then those fewe words, which the Euangelistes doe rehearse, as a summe thereof, yet it was not necessarily to be gathered, that the vnworthie receiuer contemning the body & bloud of Christ, which is offered to him, is guiltie of haynous iniurie against the same, and therefore it is necessarie that euery one that receiueth it, should examine him selfe that hee receiue it worthily. Whether Christ receiued Iudas or no, which is not agreed vpon: but if he did, knowing him by his diuine knowledge to be a reprobate, though not yet discouered to the knowledge of man, hee gaue vs none example to receiue notorious wicked persons, whome wee as men knowe to be vnwoorthie without repentance.
                  But to make the matter out of doubt, Saint Paul, though not by the terme of adoration, yet willed honour to be giuen to the sacrament. When he saith, let a man examine him selfe, and so let him eate of this bread, and drinke of this cup. For a man cannot examine him self without great honor giuē vnto the sacrament. And for more manifest proofe, Saint Paule referreth the honour or dishonour that is done by woorthie or vnwoorthie receiuing, not to the grace of GOD, or merite of Christes passion, but to the sacrament. Who so eateth this breade, and drinketh this cuppe of the Lorde vnworthily, shall be guiltie of the bodie and bloud of Christ. Nay rather, hee referreth the honour or contempt of the sacrament to the body and bloud of Christe, whose sacrament

this is, as the wordes are plaine. But who would thinke that Maister Heskins would play the foole so egregiously, to abuse his reader with ambiguities and aequiuocations? as though there were no difference betweene adoration and honouring, that is, giuing of due reuerence vnto the sacraments, and worshipping them as Gods. But S. Augustine (I trowe) helpeth him, Ep. 118. ad Ian. Placuit &c. It hath pleased the holy Ghost, that in honour of so great a sacrament, the body of Christ should enter into the mouth of a Christian man before other meates. I holde him as blinde as a beetle, that seeth not honour in this place to signifie reuerence, which is giuen to holy things, and not adoration, which pertayneth onely to GOD. His last reason to proue, that Saint Paul taught the adoration of the sacrament, is that, which is the whole controuersie, that Saint Paule taught the carnall presence, but that remaineth to bee proued afterward.
               
               
                  The fiue and fortieth Chapter proueth by the same Doctours, that the proclamer nameth, that the sacrament is to be honoured.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  This is a meere mockerie, the Bishop speaketh against adoration of the sacrament as God, M. Heskins proueth,
                        Fulke.
                      that it is to bee honoured, that is to say, reuerenced as a holy ceremonie. And none otherwise then the sacrament of baptisme, as wee shall see by his proofes. First, Chrysostom being one that is named by the Bishop, maketh so cleere mention thereof, as M. Heskins thinkes, the reader will maruell, hee was not ashamed to name him. And what saith he? De sacerdotio lib. 6. thus he writeth: Quum autem ille &c. But when he (meaning the Prieste) hath called vpon the holy Ghost, and hath finished that sacrifice, most full of horrour and reuerence, when the common Lord of all men is daily handled in his handes: I aske of thee in what order shall wee place him? Howe great integritie shall we require of him? How great religion? For, consider what handes those ought to be, which doe minister, what manner of tong, that speaketh those words. Finally, then what soule, that soule ought not to be purer and holier, which hath receiued that so great and so worthie a spirit? At that time euē the Angels do set by the Priest, and all the order of heauenly powers

lifteth vp cryes, and the place neere to the altar in honour of him which is offered, is full of the companies of Angels. Which thing a man may fully beleeue, euen for the greate sacrifice which is there finished. And I truly did heare a certain man reporting, that a certaine wonderfull olde man, and one to whome many mysteries of reuelations are opened by God, did tell him, that God did once vouchsafe to shewe him such a vision, and that for that time he sawe as farre as the sight of man could beare, soudenly a multitude of Angels clothed in shining garments compassing the altar, finally so bowing the heade, as if a man should see the souldiers stand when the king is present, which thing I do easily beleeue. In these words Chrysostom doth hyperbolically amplifie the excellencie of the Ministers office, vnto which no man is sufficient. But notwithstanding, he rehearseth a vision by hearesay, of angels reuerencing the presence of God, to aduance the dignitie of the ministerie, yet speaketh he not one worde, that the sacrament is to be worshipped & adored as God. And therefore M. Heskins maketh a poore consequence, the ministration of ye sacrament is honourable: ergo, much more a man ought to honour the sacrament. The ministration of baptisme is honourable, doth it therefore followe, that the water of baptisme is to be worshipped as God? An other testimonie he cyteth out of Chrysostomes Liturgie, which he calleth his Masse, which though it be out of doubt none of Chrysostomes penning, yet maketh it nothing for the adoration of the sacrament: Thou that fittest aboue with the father, and art here present with vs inuisibly, vouchsafe to giue vnto vs thy vndefiled body, and thy precious bloud, and by vs to al the people. Then the Priest adoreth, and the Deacon in the place where he is, thrice sayth secretly. God be mercifull to me a sinner. And all the people likewise with godlinesse and reuerence do adore. It is said here they doe adore, but not the sacrament, but God. For here haue passed no words of the consecration as yet by the Papistes owne rule, therefore this adoration can not be referred to the sacrament. And yet M. Heskins is so blockish to gather, that he fitteth in heauen, and yet is here present, as though he were present in body before they had prayed that he would giue them

his body, &c. But yet an other place of Chrysostome, Hom. 24. in 1. Cor. 10. Christus suam, &c Christe hath giuen v
                           •
                         his flesh, that we might be filled therewith, whereby he hath allured vs very much into his loue. Let vs therefore with feruencie and most vehement loue come vnto him, that wee suffer not a more greeuous punishment. For the greater benefite we take, so much more shall wee bee punished, when wee shall appeare vnwoorthie of it. This body did the wisemen reuerence in the manger, and being both vngodly men and barbarous, after they had ended a long iourney with much feare and trembling did worship it. Let vs therfore that are citizens of heauen folow those strangers. For they when they did see only that manger and cottage, and none of those things which thou nowe beholdest, came with great reuerence and horrour. But thou seest it not in the manger but in the altar, not a woman which holdeth it in her armes, but the Priest present, and the spirite so aboundantly powred vpon the sacrifice that is set foorth. Neither doest thou see a simple body, as they did, but thou doest acknowledge his power, and all the administration. And thou art not ignorant of any of the thinges that by him were made, and t
                           •
                        ou art diligently instructed in all thinges. Let vs be stirred vp, and tremble, and declare more godlinesse then those barbarous men
                     ▪ Note here▪ reuerence and trembling, but no worshipping of the sacrament, no, not although he saith the wise men did worship his body in the manger, yet dare hee not conclude, that wee ought to adore it in the sacrament. Wherefore it is intollerable, that M. Heskins gathereth that in the first place, he declareth that it is to be honoured, in the second, he declareth the practise of him selfe, his ministers, and all the people in worshipping it, & in the last yt he prouoketh al men to honor it in the altar by the example of the wise men. For none of these three can be concluded out of ye same places. Next foloweth Ambrose, De spiritu sanct. lib. 3. cap. 12. Per scabellum terra &c. By the footstoole the earth is vnderstood, and by the earth the flesh of Christ, which as this day also we do adore in the mysteries which the Apostles, as we haue saide before, did adore in our Lorde Iesus: For Christ is not diuided, but one. By adoring, he meaneth the reuerent vse of the mysteries, and not worshipping ye
                     
sacraments as though Christ were present in them, as he is in heauen, for that he acknowledgeth not, but only a sacramentall presence, as hath beene shewed often already, & more shalbe, as occasion serueth. And he saith we worship or reuerence the flesh of Christe in the mysteries, he saith not we worship the mysteries as the flesh of Christ. Finally we worship Christ in the sacramentes as we do in the word, and yet we imagine no carnal presence in either of them. Yea, we honor him, his ministers, both ciuil Magistrates, and Ecclesiasticall teachers, & yet we haue none of thē as transubstantiated into Christ. The last is S. Augustine In Psal. 98. Adore ye the footestole of his feete, for it is holie. But see brethrē what he biddeth vs to adore. In another place the scripture saith: Heauen is my seate, & earth is the footestoole of my feete. Then he commandeth vs to adore the earth, because he said in an other place, that it is the footestoole of God. And how shall we adore the earth? when the scripture saith plainely, thou shalt adore the Lord thy God, and here he saith, adore his footestoole. And expoūding to me what is his footstoole, he saith: the earth is my footstoole, I am made doutful, I am afraide to adore the earth, least he condemne me, which hath made heauen and earth. Againe, I am afraid not to adore the footstoole of my Lord, because the Psalme saith to me, Adore ye his footstoole. Thus wauering vp and down I turne me vnto CHRISTE, because I seeke him here, and I finde howe without impietie the earth may bee adored, without impietie his footestoole may be adored. For he hath taken on him earth of the earth, because flesh is of the earth, & of the flesh of Marie be tooke flesh. And because he walked here in that flesh, and gaue that flesh to be eaten of vs to saluation: And no man eateth that flesh except, he do first adore it, it is found out how such a footestoole of the Lord may be adored, and we should not onely not offend in adoring, but offend in not adoring. The Papists make no small accompt of this place, and yet there is no place in al S. Augustines workes, yt maketh more against them then this, if it be wel marked with that whiche followeth. For first he saith not that the sacrament must be, or may be worshipped as God, but that the flesh of Christ may be worshipped as the earth, which is Gods footstool,

whereunto Diuine honour is not to be giuen, but reuerence as to an holie thing, & no man eateth his flesh, but he that before hath worshipped it, not as really present in the sacrament, but he that hath reuerently acknowledged his incarnation, passion, and giuing of his flesh to be holsome vnto vs. But to put al out of doubt, he so maketh the sacrament Gods footestoole, that he doeth expressely denie speaking in the person of Christ, yt his bodie which was seene and crucified should be eaten, but a sacrament which being spiritually vnderstood, should quicken them or giue them life. The place hath beene already once or twise set downe. Non hoc corpus quod videtis mandicaturi estis, &c. You shall not eate this bodie which you see, &c. The corporall presence therefore being flatly taken away by S. Augustine in that place, it is easie to see what kinde of worship is left to the sacrament.
                  But he is cited againe Lib. Confess 9. Cap. 13. speaking of his mother. Illa imminente, &c She when the day of her departure was at hand, tooke no care to haue her bodie sumptuously buri
                        
                           •
                        d, or to be spiced with sweete spices, neither did she couet a chosen monument, or cared for her fathers sepulchre. She did not giue vs in charge any of these thinges, but onely she desired that remembrance shold be made of her at thine altar, which she without any dayes intermission had serued, from whom she knew that holie sacrifice to be dispensed, by which the hand writing that was against vs, was put out, by which triumph was obteined against the enimie. Maister Heskins would learne of the proclaymer what seruice she did, was it not the seruice of Christ her Lord God? Yes, and why did she it at the altar, and not in heauen? Haue you heard of such a blind question? While she liued on earth, although she worshipped him that is in heauen, yet she serued him in the place appointed for publike prayer and administration of the sacramentes, and she serued him with prayer and thankesgiuing, not with knocking and kneeling to the sacrament, which is the thing he would haue if he could tell howe to bring it about: as for the carnall presence it was spoken off euen in the place next before cited out of the 48. Psalme.
                  
                     After this he saith, the same that the Christians did honour Ceres and Bacchus, proueth their adoration of the sacrament. A substantiall proofe I promise you. It may argue they had some vse of bread & wine in their religion, but no adoration of it. For the Heathē men did not take bread and wine to be Ceres and Bacchus, but Ceres and Bacchus to be the Gods of bread and wine. S. Augustine is cited Contra Faust. Lib. 2 Cap. 13. Quomodo &c. How then doest thou compare our bread and cuppe, and sayest that errour which is farre differing from the trueth to be like religions beeing more madde then some which for the bread and the cuppe thinke vs to honour Ceres and Bacchus? The Heathen did offer bread and wine to Ceres and Bacchus, so they imagined yt the Christians did, not that they honored bread and wine, as Maister Heskins dreameth. The like is to be saide of the other place. Si
                           •
                        ut a Cerere, &c. As we are farre from Ceres and Bacchus the Gods of the Pagans, although we imbrace after our manner the sacrament of the bread and the cuppe, which you haue so praysed as you would be equall with vs: so our fathers were farre from the chaynes of Saturne, although for the time of the prophesie they haue obserued the vacation of the Sabbaoth. Because there is nothing in this place for the purpose, M. Heskins after his accustomed manner, hath falsified the worde by wrong translation, to deceiue the vnlearned. For he hath translated, Quamuis amplectamur sacramentum, although we honor the sacrament. Yet again S. Augustine is cited In Psal. 48. Edent pauperes, &c. The poore shall eate and be satisfied. What eate they? That which the faithful know. How shall they be satisfied? In following the passions of their Lord, and not without cause taking their price. What do the riche? They also do ease: but how do they eate? All the riche of the earth haue eaten and worshipped. He saith not, they haue eaten and are satisfied: but they haue eaten and worshipped. They do in deede adore God, but they will not shewe brotherly humanitie, they eate and adore, these eate and are satisfied, yet all do eate. Augustine saith expresly the rich adore God, but of adoring the sacrament he speaketh neuer a worde. Last of all he citeth him Ep. 120. ad Honoratum. Neque enim frustra ita distincti sunt, &c. Neither are they without purpose so

distincted, that before it was said of the poore: The poore shall eate and be satisfied: And here all the riche of the earth haue eaten and haue worshipped. For they also are brought to the table of Christ, and receiue of his bodie and his bloud, but they doe adore onely, they are not also satisfied, because they doe not followe. For eating the poore men, they disdaine to be poore because Christ suffered for vs leauing v
                           •
                         an example, that we should followe his steppes. This place being the same in effect, that the next before, hath neuer a worde of adoring the sacrament, but that Maister Heskins in his drowsie head dreameth, that where mention is made of eating and worshipping, it must needes followe that those thinges are worshipped which are eaten. And thus you see how pithily he hath proued the adoration of the sacrament, out of those Authours, whome the proclaymer named, as making no mention thereof.
               
               
                  The sixe and fortieth Chapter proueth by other Doctors that the sacrament is to be adored.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  First he taketh this principle,
                        Fulke.
                      that if Christe verie God and man, be there, he is to be honored: but that is the matter in question, although it doeth not followe, if he were there, that the sacramēt is to be worshipped. The doue was an vndoubted sacrament of the presence of the holie Ghost, so was the fiery tongs, yet none of them worshipped. For God wil not be worshipped in outward shapes, as he hath often testified in the lawe, otherwise then he hath appointed, therefore would he not appeare in any visible fourme vnto the people, least they should be deceiued to worship God therein. But to his Doctours. The first is Erasmus who pleaseth him wel, in affirming that he would still worship Christe in the Eucharistie. Then he presseth his principle of the reall presence, and that he will proue by Algerus, that was more then 400. yeres before him, & then by Paschasius that was more then 200. yeres before Algerus, and last of all by Leo that was more then 400. yeares before Paschasius. As for Algerus and Paschasius as being farre without the compasse of the challenge

I wil passe ouer and come to Leo: sauing that I wil note, that though Paschasius alledgeth Hilarie, Ambrose, Augustine, Cyrill, and the counsell of Ephesus, he doeth but wrest their sayings, as the Papists do now to vphold ye errour yt was not so olde in his time. The wordes of Leo are Ep 22. ad Constant. Separentur & huiusmodi, &c. Let such men be separated from the holy member of the bodie of Christ, neither let the Catholique libertie suffer the yoke of the vnfaithfull to be laide vpon it. For they are to be accounted without the house of Gods grace, and without the sacrament of mans health, which denying the nature of our flesh in Christ, doe both speake against the Gospell, and striue against the Symbole. Neither doe they perceiue through their blindenesse, that they are brought into such a steepe place, that they stand neither in the truth of the Lords passion, nor of his resurrection for both is made voide in our sauiour, if flesh of our kinde be not beleeued to be in him. In what darkenesse of ignorance, in what sluggishnes of sloth haue they 
                           〈◊〉
                         hitherto, that they would neither learne by hearing, nor acknowledge by reading that, which in the Church of God, in the mouth of all men, is so agreeably spoken? That not as much as of the tongues of infantes, the veritie of the bodie and bloud of Christ is vnspoken of among the sacraments of the common faith: for in that mystical distribution of that spirituall foode, this thing is giuen foorth, this thing is receiued, that receiuing the vertue of that heauenly meate, we may goe into his fleshe, which was made our fleshe.
                  
                  First M. Heskins as his fashion is, to make the matter more cleare on his side, falsely translateth, Hoc impertitur, hoc sumitur, this bodie is giuen forth, this bodie is receiued. Where as Hoc is either taken absolutely for this thing, or else at the least, must haue relation to Sacramentum, which is the next substantiue of the neuter gender in any reasonable construction.
                  Secondly, it is manifest that Leo speaking against the heretiques Eutyche
                        •
                      and Dioscorus, setteth forth the truth of Christs bodie & bloud, as one of the common knowen sacraments or mysteries of Christian faith: & saith neuer a word of his carnall presence in the mysterie of his supper, but contrariwise teacheth that it is a mystical distributiō,

a spiritual food, an heauēly meat, which words import not a carnal maner, but a spiritual maner of presēce & eating. Thus real presence (as he termeth it) being not yet proued, ye adoration cannot follow, as he pretendeth.
               
               
                  The seuen and fortieth Chapter proceedeth in the proofe of the adoration of the Sacrament by doctors.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The first doctor named,
                        Fulk.
                      is Dionysius Areopagita disciple of S. Paule (as he sayeth) Eccles. Hierarch. 3. parte. Cap. 3. who maketh this prayer to the sacrament: O verie godly & holie mysterie, opening fauourably the couerings of signifying signes, wherewith thou art couered, shine openly and apertly vnto vs, & fill our spiritual eyes with the singuler & open brightnesse of thy light. That this Dionyse, although of some antiquitie, yet is not that Dionyse, that was conuerted by S. Paule, nor any that liued 600. yeres after, at the least, it is plaine by this reason; that neither Eusebius, nor Hieronyme, nor Gennadius, which wrote the Catologs of all ecclesiasticall writers, that were before them, or were famous in the church in their time, nor yet any other writer within the compasse of 600. yeres after Christe, maketh any mention of any such Dionyse, to be a writer of those bookes, which are saide to be written by him. Now touching his supposed prayer, it is but an exclamatiō rethoricall, named apostrophe, not vnto the bread & wine, but to him, that in that mysterie is represented, which is Christ, that he would vouchsafe to open him self, & shine in the hearts of the faithfull, as the outward signes are seene wt the outwarde eyes. And that he allowed no transubstantiation, it is manifest by that he saith in the same place, that the Bishop doth after consecration, cut in peeces the vndiuided bread, & speaking of ye sacrament, doth often affirme, that by those symboles or signes, wee are changed into God & Christ, meaning, we are renewed by his spirite, but neuer affirmeth, the bread & wine to bee turned into the bodie & bloud of Christ. Howbeit, what I iudge of his authorite & antiquitie, I haue declared before. The next is Gregorie Nazianzen in Epitaph. Gorgoniae sororis. Quid igitur, &c. What then did the soule both

great & worthie of greatest things, and what remedie had shee against her infirmitie? For nowe the secreat is disclosed, when shee had dispaired of all other, shee flyeth to the Phisition of all men, and taking the solitarinesse of the night, when the disease had giuen her a little respite, shee fell downe with faith, before the altare, and with a lowde voice and all her might, shee called vppon him which is worshipped at is, and vnto him shee rehearsed all the myracles that he had done of olde time. M. Heskins immagineth, that it was such an altare as they haue in the popish Churches, which is vntrue, for it was a table, & men stoode round about it, as is to be proued by many testimonies of antiquitie. Secondly, he immagineth, that ye sacrament was hanged ouer the altare to be worshipped, as it is among them, but that is vtterly false: for it was receiued at such time as it was consecrated, except some remanents that were kept to be eaten. Therfore, though shee made her prayer at the altare, shee made no prayer to any thing vppon the altare, but to God, whome shee did worship and reuerence, and whose mysteries shee vsed to receiue at the same altare. Therefore M. Heskins falsifieth Gregories words, which are these: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. but thus they are turned by him into latine, ante altare cum fide procubuit, & illum quem super altare venerabatur &c. Shee prostrated her selfe with faith before the altar, and called vpon him whome shee worshipped vpon the altare. But Gregorie sayeth: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in it, or at it, meaning the altare where shee prayed. And to put all out of doubt, yt shee worshipped not the sacrament vppon the altare, it followeth afterwarde? 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . And if her hand had layde vp any where, any parte of the figures of the precious bodie, or of the bloud, that shee mingled with teares, O marueilous thing! and immediatly departed feeling health. By these wordes it appeareth, that shee brought this remanent of the sacrament with her, which Gregorie calleth 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the signes or tokens, or figures

of the bodie and bloud of Christ, and not the verie naturall bodie of Christe: and those shee worshipped not, but wett them with teares, whether superstitiously let the Papistes iudge, for they them selues will allowe no such fashions, nor yet reseruation for such purposes, but as for adoration of the sacrament, which is the matter intended, here is none spoken of in this place. After this, he toucheth the facte of Satyrus the brother of S. Ambrose, which is aunswered before, lib. 1. Cap. 24. whose hope was in God, and not in the sacrament. Although Satyrus as a young nouice, not throughly instructed in Christian religion, cannot simply be defended, though he may be excused, howsoeuer by his brother Ambrose he is highly commended. Then followed Eusebius Emisser
                           •
                        us Hom. Pascal. Because he woulde take away his assumpted bodie from our eyes, and carrie it into heauen, it was needefull that this day he should consecrate vnto vs the sacrament of his bodie and bloud: vs coleretur iugiter per mysterium quod semel offerebatur in precium: that it might be continually worshipped or exercised by a mysterie: (for colere signifieth both) whiche was once offered for our price.
                  
                  M. Heskins gathereth hereof, that the same bodie, should be honoured by mysterie, whose visible presence not his bodie, was taken away from the earth. But Eusebius sayeth, not onely that he would take his bodie from our sight, but also place it in heauen, and in steede therof, he leaueth the sacrament of his bodie and bloude, which no man doubteth, but it ought to be honoured, as so high a mysterie deserueth, but not as God or Christe. The other saying of Eusebius, which hee addeth, doeth shewe, howe it is to be honoured: When thou commest to the reuerende altare to be satisfied with heauenly meates, beholde with faith the holy bodie and bloud of thy God, honour it, wonder at is, touch it with thy minde, take it with the hande of thy heart, and cheefely, receiue it with the inwarde draught. What can be layed more plainely for the spirituall receiuing, and the like reuerence to be giuen to so holie a sacrament? But because M. Heskins thinketh this saying to make more

against him, then for him, therefore he sayeth, to auoyde cauilling, Eusebius proceedeth sone after in these words: Sicut autem, &c. As any man comming to the faith of Christe, before the wordes of baptisme, is yet in the bands of the olde deis, but when the words are spoken, is foorthwith deliuered from all dreg
                           •
                         of sinne: So when the creatures are set vppon the holie altares to be blessed with heauenly words, before they be consecrated by inuocation of the most highest name, there is the substance of bread & wine, but after the wordes of Christ, the bodie & bloud of Christ. This is a plaine place for M. Iuell, what else? But if it be rightly vnderstood, it is a plaine place against M. Hesk. for he sheweth the change or transubstantiation that is in the Lordes supper, to be the same, that it is in baptisme, which is spirituall, and not carnall, and so doth verie fitly compare them together, or else his similitude were to no purpose, if it were not to shewe by that which is don in baptisme, what is likewise done in the other sacrament.
                  M. Heskins still blattereth of a bare figure, which is of vs always denyed. Consequently he citeth Bernarde, whose authoritie I leaue vnto him, being a burgesse of ye lower house, in which he hath many voices, as he hath neuer a one in ye vpper house, though he wrest their speaches most iniuriously. To confirme some phrase of Bernard, he rehearseth certein phrases of the old writers like to them in words, but not in sense, which haue bene aunswered alreadie, as Hierom. ad Hed. qu. 2. Our Lord Iesus is the feaster, & the feast: he that eateth and which is eaten. Ambrose in praepara. ad miss. which is none of his, but falsly intituled to him: Thou art the Priest and the sacrifice, wonderfully and vnspeakably appointed. And Augustine in Psal. 33. He was borne in his owne hands. But he leaueth out a worde, which expoundeth both Augustine, and all the rest that speake so: quodam modo, after a certeine manner Christ was borne in his owne hands, is the feast & that which is eaten, & the sacrifice. I say quodam modo, therefore not simpliciter. Last of all, he wil ioyne issue, to subscribe on this point, that the proclaimer can bring but one auncient doctor, that saith

the sacrament is not to be adored. To whome I answer, that forasmuch as in the primitiue church, the opinion of transubstantiation was not knowen, there neuer grew any question of the adoration of the sacrament, as yt Papistes nowe do vse it and commaund it.
               
               
                  The eyght and fortieth Chapter, confuteth the rest of the proclaymers wordes before rehearsed, against the honouring of Christ in the sacrament.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The words which he taketh vpon him to confute,
                        Fulk.
                      are these: It is a newe deuise to worship the sacrament. About three hundreth yere past, Pope Honorius commaunded it to be lifted vp, and the people reuerently to bowe vnto it. How doth he confute these words? First, he saith it is no newe deuise, but ye contrarie, that is, the denying of the adoration, is not past fourtie yeres old, and yet he confesseth before, that some infected with the heresie of Berengarius & Wickliffe, might whisper it in corners, yet Berengarius and Wickliffe preached openly, & be
                        •
                     ore them Bertrame wrote a booke to Charles the great, wherein he confuteth the reall presence, which began in that time to be receiued of some, as it seemeth, & vpward euen to Christ, al the auncient fathers are against that carnall presence, & consequently against adoration. But to proceede: Admitting that Honorius was the first yt commaunded it to be worshipped, which was 300 yeres agoe, yet is he elder then Oecolampadius & not defamed of heresie as Oecolampadius was: yes M. Hesk he is defamed of more then heresie, and proued to bee an antichrist. As for the continuance of 300. yeres in an errour can make no prescription against ye trueth. But he saith, it is a fond argument of the proclaimer: Because Honorius commaunded the adoration of the sacrament, therefore it was neuer in vse before. But if it were generally beleeued & vsed in all ages before, as M Hesk. would beare vs in hande, what neede had Pope Honorius to commaund it? He saith: in like manner the fleshly sort of them dispute to mainteine their shamelesse abode with their women it is a newe deuise that priests should not marrie, inuented by Vrban and Gregorie.
                  
                  
                     Whether M. Heskins were marryed, or else had a shamelesse abode with a woman, I leaue to be tryed by God & the countrie, in the countie of Cambridge. But to the purpose, I haue not heard any affirme, these late Popes to be the first forbidders of marriage, and therefore it is to no purpose, that he citeth Syluester before them, and Calixtus before him, and the counterfet Canons of the Apostles before them all. And yet by the prohibition of the latest Popes, it is certeine, that Priestes were married vntill their time. And for as much, as the scripture alloweth their marriage, and condemneth the forbidders thereof, and the eldest fathers in the primi
                        •
                     iue church confesse no lesse, it is not to bee regarded, although a whole hundreth Popes in a rowe, did euery one forbid it. The like example he bringeth of fasting in Lent, decreede in the eight Toletane counsell, neere 700. yeres after Christe, but yet affirmed of Hierome, to be a tradition of the Apostles (For so they vsed to father such ceremonies and vsages, as they knewe not the beginning of them, vpon tradition of the Apostles) neuerthelesse, he cannot shewe any Pope, or any councell before Honorius, that did commaund adoration of the sacrament, wherefore the wordes are vnconfuted vntill the contrarie can be shewed.
                  After this, the Proclaimer, (sayth he) falleth to mocking the Scholasticall doctours, as S. Thomas, Duns, Durand, Holcos and such like to make it seeme a dangerous thing to honour the sacrament, for that the people cannot discerne the accidents from the bodie of Christ, and so may committ idolatrie in honouring the outwarde formes, in steede of Christ, or if the priest do 
                           •
                        mitt consecration. This M. Heskins calleth a mocking, but he is not able to auoide it in good earnest. He calleth it a phantasie, like to that which ioyned with auarice, pulled downe all the Abbeys in England. The like phantasie, he sayth, might moue vs, not to honour Christ in heauen, and much more the Apostles that honoured Christ in the flesh, percase not sufficiently discerning the humanitie from the Deitie, and so likewise others that

worshipped Christ & yet doe, euen some of the proclaymers schollers, vnderstand not these quiddities. Shal they therefore fly the honor of Christ in heauen? A wise comparison, betweene Christe both God and man, who no doubt is to be worshipped both as God & as the mediator of God & man, and the accidents of breade & wine, or bread and wine, when they are not consecrated. Christ in the flesh is to be worshipped, because he was incarnate and ioyned to the humanitie in a personall vnion, but he is not to be worshipped in bread & wine, or in ye accidents of bread & wine, because he is neither impanated, nor inuinated, nor inaccidentated, that is, not ioyned to any of them in a personall vnion. To these doubtes that are moued by his owne schoolemen, what if the Priest do not consecrate? what if he speake not the wordes of consecration? what if he had none intention to consecrate? in all which cases, the schoolemen define, that the people committ idolatrie if they worship their hoste. First hee sayeth: he goeth about to shake the foundation of this sacrament, as Brentius doth of baptisme. Concerning Brentius, although it were easie to defende his assertion euen by the schoolemen, yet because it is no matter of our controuersie, I will briefely passe it ouer. Brentius helde that Christ hath not bound vs to baptise in certein forme of wordes to be pronounced by the minister, so the meaning be obserued, that he baptise into the name of the Father, & of the Sonne, & of the holie ghost. Herevpon, charitable M. Heskins rayleth on him, that he impugneth the forme of baptisme, and reiecteth ye wordes of baptisme, which is vtterly false: and then he reasoneth, that if the wordes of baptisme may be without daunger omitted, why may not the words of consecratiō likewise? as though Brentius sayeth, they might be omitted, where he speaketh of altering the forme of wordes, when the same sense remaineth. Next to this he farceth in another slaunder of vs, that we agree not in the number of the sacraments, some admitting three, some two, some foure, and some neuer a one. The world knoweth what we holde

herein. After this, he sheweth out of Basil & Damascen ye necessitie of the forme of baptisme, which wee confesse, & Brentius him self doth not denye. At length he defineth contrarie to ye scholemen, yt if consecration be omitted, ye danger is to the priest, & not to ye people that worship an idol. Finally, he wil moue the like doubt of our ministration, what if the minister of ye communion, doe neither speake ye words of consecration, nor haue intent to minister, what do the people receiue? I aunswer, wt his intentiō wee haue nothing to doe, but for asmuch as nothing is whispered, or mumbled in our Communion, but so vttered, yt all men may heare and vnderstand, if any thing be omitted that is necessarie to the consecration of ye sacrament, if ye people communicate with him, they are in as great fault as he. As for Richerus, whome he calleth a Caluenist, yt forbiddeth to pray to Christ, and reiecteth ye wordes of consecration, if any such be, let him aunswere for him self, we haue nothing to do with him. Although we acknowledge not any mumbling of wordes, but the whole action according to Christes institution, to be the forme of consecration of the sacrament.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The nine and fortieth Chapter, proceedeth in the vnderstanding of Christes wordes, by Irenaeus & Tertullian.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     Irenęus is cited, lib. 4. Cap. 32. Sed & discipulus, &c. But also giuing counsell to his disciples, to offer to God the first fruites of his owne creatures, not as to one that hath neede, but that they also should neither be vnfrutefull nor vnthankefull: he tooke that bread which is of the creature, & gaue thankes saying: this is my bodie, & likewise he confessed the cupp, which is of the creature that is among vs, to be his bloud & taught the newe oblation of the newe testament, which the church receiuing of the Apostles in all the worlde, offereth to God. 
                     Here M. Hesk. choppeth off ye taile, for it followeth: Euen to him which giueth foode vnto vs, the first fruites of his giftes: which words do both open the purpose of Irenaeus, & shewe that the oblation was of bread & wine, & not the naturall bodie of Christ, as M. Hesk. gathereth, together with the reall presence. But for clearer proofe, he addeth another testimonie out of Irenęus,

which he quoteth lib. 5. but it is lib. 4. ca. 34 which it seemeth he redd not him selfe in the author, both because he knewe not where it was writen, & also because he omitteth some wordes in it. Quomodo autem constabit eis, &c. he leaueth out autem & eis: but thus the wordes are in English. But how shall it be knowen vnto them, that that bread, in which thankes are giuen, is the bodie of their Lorde and the cupp of his bloud, if they say not that he him selfe is the sonne of the maker of the worlde? &c. And how againe do they say, that the fleshe commeth to corruption, & receiueth not the life which is nourished of the bodie & bloud of our Lord? Out of these places he noteth, that ye sacrament is the bodie and bloud of Christ, & that our flesh is nourished by the same bodie & bloud. This we confesse, so he meane spiritually, but yt he will not haue. And therfore, to drawe the places to his carnall presence, & nourishing, he sayth that Irenaeus hereby impugned two heresies: One, that Christ was not the sonne of God that made the world, but a man liuing in Iewrie, which dissolued the law & the Prophets, & all the works of God that made the world: The other, that the soule only should be saued & not the bodie. And therefore to confute the former, he maketh an argument of the real presence, How could a bare naturall man compasse, that his bodie should so be, if he were not the sonne of God that made the world? &c. This proceedeth of grosse ignorance, or rather of intollerable mallice, to deceiue the ignorant. For the heresie against which he writeth, was not yt Christ was a bare man, & not the sonne of God, but yt he was the sonne of another God, then he yt made ye world, for they made two gods, one ye maker of ye world, which they sayd was God of ye old testament, & another ye father of Christ, which they said, was God of the newe testament. Now Irenaeus proueth by institution of ye sacrament, in the creatures of bread & wine, yt Christ is the sonne of God yt created ye world, & of none other God, to which purpose he sayth in the 57. Chapter of that fourth booke: 
                        Quomodo autem iustè Dominus si alterius patris existens, huius conditionis quae est secundiòm nos accipiens panem fuum corpus confisebatur, & temperamentum calicis sui

sanguinem confirmanit? How did our Lorde iustly, if being sonne of another father, taking bread which is of this creation that we are▪ confesse it to be his bodie, and the temperament of the cuppe he confirmed to be his bloud? Thus you see neither in the one place, nor in the other, he reasoneth of the diuine power of Christe, to make a reall presence, or transubstantiation, but of the inconuenience that Christ shoulde ordeine his sacrament in the creatures of another God. The seconde heresie he impugneth in deede, by the receipt of the bodie and bloude of Christe in the sacrament, by which our fleshe is nourished vnto immortalitie, which nourishing, M. Heskins in no wise will haue to be vnderstoode spiritually, but corporally, and sayeth, it doth inuincibly proue the reall presence. I will not rippe vp what absurdities do followe, if wee say, that Christes fleshe doth nourish our flesh corporally, or after a carnall manner, as of the concoction and digestion thereof, to be turned into our nature, where he sayed before, that our flesh is turned into his fleshe: but I will proue out of Irenaeus, that he meant nourishing spiritually and not corporally. For lib. 5. he hath these wordes.
                  
                     
                        Quando ergo & mixtus calix, & factus panis, percipit verbum Dei, fit eucharistia sanguinis & corporis Christi, ex quibus augetur & consistit carnis nostrae substantia: quomodo carnem negant capacem esse donationis Dei qui est vita aeterna, quae sanguine & corpore Christi, nutritur & membrum eius est.
                     
                  
                  
                     When therefore the cuppe that is mixed, and the bread that is made, receiueth the worde of God, it is made the Eucharistie of the bloud & bodie of Christe, of which the substance of our fleshe is increased and consisteth: howe do they denye, that the flesh is capable of the gift of God, which is eternall life, which is nourished with the bodie and bloud of Christ, and is a member of him.
                  
                  Here you see plainly, that our fleshe is so nourished of the bodie and bloud of Christ, that it is increased of the same, and so consisteth of them, that wee are his members, but our bodies are not increased, &c. but spiritually:

therefore they are not nourished but spiritually, & after an heauenly manner.
                  But moste plainly, for impugning of both the heresies aforesaide, and other heresies more of transubstantiation and the carnall presence, and the sacrifice propitiatorie of the masse, he writeth, lib. 4. Cap. 34. 
                        Nostra autem consonans est sententia Eucharistiae, & Eucharistia rursus confirmat sententiam nostram. Offerimus enim ei quę sunt eius, congruenter communicationem & vnitatem praedicantes carnis & spiritus. Quemadmodum enim qui est a terra panis, percipiens vocationem Dei, iam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia ex duabus rebus constans, terrena & caelesti: sic & corpora nostra percipientia Euchaeristiam, iam non sunt corruptibilia, spem resurrectionis habentia. Offerimus autem ei non quasi indigenti, sed gratias agentes donationi eius, & sanctificantes creaturam. But our sentence is agreeable to the Eucharistie or sacrament of thankesgiuing, and the Eucharistie againe doth confirme our sentence. For wee offer vnto him those things that be his owne, agreeably setting foorth the communication and vnitie of the fleshe and the spirite. For as the breade which is of the earth receiuing the calling of God, is not nowe common bread, but the Eucharistie consisting of two things, an earthly thing & an heauenly thing: euen so our bodies also receiuing the Eucharistie, are not nowe corruptible, hauing hope of resurrection. And wee offer to him, not as to one hauing neede, but giuing thankes for his gifte and sanctifying the creature.
                  
                  By this place is transubstantiation ouerthrowen, where" he sayth, the sacrament consisteth of two things, an earthly and an heauenly, the carnall presence, when hee defineth it to be a heauenly thing, that is a diuine and spiritual communication of the bodie and bloud of Christ, the propitiatorie sacrifice, when he sayeth, that the creatures of breade and wine were offered for a thankes giuing, &c. That Melancton defending the popish presence abused the authoritie of Irenaeus against Oecolampadius, it ought to be no preiudice to vs, especially

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
seeing as M. Heskins before confessed, that Melancthon him selfe forsooke that opinion in the end.
                  Now come we to Tertullian, whose testimonie, though it bee flatly against him, yet hee hath laboured if it were possible, by wrestling and wrangling, to make it serue his turne, or a least to auoyde it, that it should not hurt his cause, Lib. 4. contra Marcionem. Professus itaque, &c. When therefore he had professed that with desire he desired to eate the Passeouer, as his owne (for it was vnmeete that God shuld desire any thing pertayning to an other) the breade that was taken and distributed to his disciples, he made it his body, saying. This is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body. But it had bene no figure except his body had bene of trueth. 
                     Here M. Heskins cutteth off: but it followeth in Tertullian, Caeterum &c. For a vaine thing which is a fantasie could receiue no figure. Or if therefore he feigned the bread to be his body, bicause he lacked the trueth of a body, then ought hee to haue giuen the breade for vs. It would haue made for Marcions vanitie, that the breade should haue bene crucified. The alteration, falsification, and truncation of Tertullians wordes, which Maister Heskins vseth, was noted in the first booke partly, and it wearieth me to note these faultes so often as he committeth them. But here he turneth these wordes: Figura autem non fuisset nisi veritatis esset corpus. But it had not bene a figure except it were a body of trueth. As though the breade were both a figure and a body of trueth, which cleane peruerteth the sense of Tertullian, and is contrarie to his purpose, as you may see by that which followeth. For Marcion agreed with Valentinus, against whome Irenęus writte, that Christ was not the GOD of the olde Testament, and moreouer affirmed, that Christe had not a true body, but a fantasticall body. Against both these hereticall opinions, hee reasoneth in this sentence. First he saith, Christe desired to eat the Passeouer, therefore it was of his owne institution, for it was vnmeete that God should desire any thing of an other Gods institution. And that Christe had a true bodye, hee proueth by the institution of the sacrament,

which was a figure of his body, for a fantasticall body, or a vaine thing, can haue no figure, for a figure hath a necessarie relation to a thing of trueth, whereof it is a figure, the sacrament is a figure of Christes body, therefore Christe hath a true body.
                  That this is the true meaning of Tertullian, it appeareth plainely by the wordes before alledged, and by these that followe, and by the whole discourse of his worke, Lib. 5. hee saith. 
                        Proinde panis & calicis sacramento iam in Euangelio probauimus corporis & sanguinis Dominici veritatem aduersus phantasma Marcionis. Therefore by the sacrament of the breade and the cuppe, nowe in the Gospell we haue proued, the trueth of the body and bloud of our Lorde, against the fantasie of Marcion. But M. Hes. interpretation of Tertullians meaning, is not onely false, but also ridiculous. He saith, that Tertullian to proue that Christ had a true body, bringeth in the institution of the sacrament, saying, that Christ made the breade his true body, therefore hee had a true body, as though Marcion, whiche woulde not beleeue that Christe had a true body when he liued on the earth, would acknowledge that Christe had a true body in the sacrament. But Marcion acknowledged the sacrament to be a figure of Christes body, and therevpon Tertullian inferreth that hee had a true body, whereof the sacrament was a figure.
                  But nowe it is a sport to see howe M. Heskins taketh vpon him To open Tertullian, and to deliuer him from the sacramentaries. His saying hath two partes, the one that Christe made the breade his body, the other that he saith: This is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body. Nowe hee will require of ye aduersarie, whether of these two parts he will receiue? and he is certaine they wil not receiue ye former part, bicause Zuinglius, Oecolāpadius, & Bullinger, with the rest, denieth the bread to be the naturall body of Christ. But he is fouly beguiled, for al these & we with thē will neither receiue the first part by it selfe, nor the latter part by it selfe, but both parts together, as they are vttered by Tertullian, that Christ so made the bread his body, yt
                     
hee made it a figure of his body. That is to say, that hee made it a sure & vndoubted pledge of his body. And we agree with Cyprian De cae
                           •
                        . Deu
                           •
                        . that The bread which our Lord gaue to his disciples to be eaten, being not cha
                           •
                        nged in shape, but in nature, by the almightie power of the word was made flesh: and with S. Ambrose. li. 4. de sacr. cae. 4. That this bread before the wordes of the sacrament is bread, but when the consecration commeth to it, of bread it is made the flesh of Christ. Places often answered before by interpretation of the same Authours. And we do so vnderstand Tertullian, as he is not contrarie to him selfe, nor to any Catholique writer of his time in this matter, which is Maister Heskins rule to vnderstand a Catholique Authour, And we so vnderstand the sacrament to bee a figure, as it is not a bare figure. But nowe, bicause Maister Heskins must needes acknowledge the sacrament to be a figure, he maketh two kindes of figures. A figure of a thing absent, and a figure of a thing present. Bicause there is no doubt of the former, I will touch onely the latter. An example of a figure of a thing present, he maketh in these wordes: As the spouse beholding her very husband, and seeth the scarres and tokens of wounds that he suffered for her defence and safegard, and of his children and hers: is brought in remembrance of his louing kindnesse, and of the dangers sustained for her sake. In which case although the substance of the man be present, yet to his wife he is a figure and token of remembraunce of him selfe absent, in condition of a man nowe in fight & dangered with sore and deepe woundes. For nowe he is no such man, but whole & sound, & a perfect man. Haue you not heard a wise similitude thinke you? Is the substance of the man present, a figure of his actiōs & passions absent? or rather the scarres present, a token of his wounds suffered, and actes passed? If hee be so grosse, that he cannot distinguish betweene substance and accidents, and the properties and effectes of them both, yet very children can plainely see, that the substance of the man occasioneth no such remē
                     brance as he speaketh of, but the scarres of the woundes: neither do they bring the substance of the man in remē
                     brance, but the actions and passions of the man. And therfore

this is too blockish an example, that a figure may be of a thing present in substance. But Augustine Lib. sentent. Prosperi. doth helpe this matter as he weeneth: Caro carnis, &c. The flesh is a sacrament of the flesh, and the bloud is a sacrament of the bloud. By both which being inuisible, spirituall, and intelligible, is signified the visible and palpable body of our Lord Iesus Christ, full of the grace of all vertues, and diuine Maiestie. M. Hes. noteth, that the inuisible body of Christ in the sacrament, is a figure of the same visible. Very good. But let me goe with him. Although S. Augustine or Prosper speake not of an inui
                        •
                     ible body. But he saith directly, that the flesh and the bloud in the sacrament, are both spirituall and intelligible flesh and bloud, which is as much as I aske. Then the spirituall flesh of Christe which is in the sacrament, doth signifie yt visible and palpable body of Christ, then the which nothing can be said more plainly against the corporall presence, nor for ye spiritual presence. But he obiecteth further, yt the scriptures also vse such speaches, saying, that Christe was made in the likenesse of a man. Ph. 2. When he was a man in deede, and so Tertullian might well cal it a figure, although it be the body it self. As though S. Paule in that place speaketh of the substance of his humanitie, & not rather of the base shewe and condition that he tooke vpon him in his humanitie, whereas he might haue behaued him self as God, being both God and man. Yet Augustine hath two places, by conference whereof this thing shall appeare; that the sacrament is both a figure and the very thing it selfe. The first place is in Psal. 3. speaking of Iudas the traytour, which place M. Heskins read not in Augustine, but in some other mans collections, for both he cyteth it truncately, & also addeth wordes both in the Latine and the English, which are not in Augustine, although he do not alter the sense. But Augustines wordes in deede are these. Et in historia &c. 
                     And in the historie of the newe Testament, the patience of our Lord was so great and woonderfull, that he suffered him so long as though he had bene good: 
                     Whereas he was not ignorant of his thoughtes, when he had him present at the feast, in

which he commended and deliuered to his disciples, the figure of his body and his blo
                           •
                        d. The other place is cyted Ep. 162. Our Lorde him selfe doth suffer Iudas, a diuill, a theefe, and his seller. He letteth him take among his innocēt disciples, that which the faithful know, our price. But when Augustine him selfe saith, ye sacraments beare the name of those thinges whereof they are sacraments, it is no maruell, if the sacrament of the body and bloud of Christ, be called our price, whereof it is a figure or sacrament, especially seeing Augustine flatly denyeth, that Iudas did receiue the bread which was the Lorde, but only the Lords bread. This conference therefore maketh against him, not for him: As for Theophylactes authoritie, which he calleth a plaine place for the proclamer, wee refuse, although it is not so plaine as he pretendeth, for we also affirme, that the sacrament is not a bare figuration of the flesh of Christ, but his flesh in deede, spiritually receiued. Finally, Tertullians place De resur. Car. is nothing at all for him. Ca
                           •
                        o corpore &c. The flesh eateth the body and bloud of Christ, that the soule may be fed with God. For by the body and bloud of Christe, he meaneth the sacrament of them, which is called by the name of that is figured or signified by it. As for the last shift, that No Catholique Doctour saith, that the sacrament is only a figure, is too childish for a Doctour to vse; for in these words of Tertullian: Corpus meum, id est▪ figura corporis met, my body, that is to say, a figure of my body, there needeth not to be added the exclusiue onely, for the latter part is a description of the former, which must containe all that is in the thing described, or else it is nothing worth: as for example. If I say M. Heskins is a man, that is to say a soule, it were fond and ridiculous, but when I say he is a man, that is to say, a reasonable 
                        •
                     ight, I neede not say he is onely so, for I haue said before as much as he is, and so hath Tertullian: Meaning that the sacrament is a figure, but not a common or bare figure, but a diuine and mysticall token, not only to signifie, but also to assure vs, of the spirituall feeding of vs with the body and bloud of Christ.
               
               
                  
                  The fiftieth Chapter abideth in the exposition of the same wordes by S. Cyprian and Athanasius.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  First he alledgeth Cyprian de cęna Domini in these words,
                        Fulk.
                      
                     Significata olim a tempore Melchisedech, &c. For vnderstāding of which place, seeing he referreth his reader to the first booke and 29. Chapter, where he handleth it more at large, thither also will I referre him for answer, where the place is at large rehearsed and discussed. But out of the same sermon of S. Cyprian, he hath a plaine place for M. Iewel: Which is this: Non
                           •
                         est 
                           •
                        uius sacramenti doctrina, &c? The doctrine of this sacrament is newe, and the Euangelicall schooles first brought foorth this manner of teaching, and Christ beeing the teacher. This learning was first made knowen to the worlde, that Christian men should drinke bloud, the eating whereof the authoritie of the olde lawe doeth most straitly forbidde. For the lawe forbiddeth the eating of bloud, the Gospell commandeth that it should be dronke. In which commandem
                           ••
                        t
                           •
                         this moste cheefely ought the Christian religion to discerne, that the bloud of beastes differing in all thinges from the bloud of Christe, hath onely the effect of temporall releefe, and the life of them ha
                           •
                        h an end appointed without reuocation. 
                     Hereupon he noteth yt the Christians drinke the bloud of Christ, which I graunt: but spiritually: for so Cyprian expoundeth himselfe in the same sermon: vt sciremus quòd mansio nostra in ips
                              •
                            fit manducatio, & potus quasi quaedam incorporatio. That we should knowe that our eating is our dwelling in him, and ou
                           •
                         drinking it as it were a certeine incorporatio
                           •
                         in him: And againe: Esus igitur carnis huius quaedam auiditas est & quoddem desiderium manendi in eo, &c. Therefore the eating of his flesh is a certeine desire to abide in him, &c. These and such like places doe proue a spirituall eating and drinking of his bloud, and none other.
                  
                  He noteth further, that this is called of Cyprian, a new doctrine, and therefore it can not be the drinking of the figure of the bloud of Christ, for that was olde. I answere briefly, it was so new, as the gospel is the new Testament,

whiche yet was preached to Adam and Eue, but not so clearely and distinctly as since the time of Christ, and so was the eating of the bodie and bloud of Christe, all one with that it is now, differing but in manner of reuelatiō, and not in substance of spirituall foode.
                  Athanasius is alledged as he is cited in Theodoret Dial. 2. in confus. Corpus est, &c. It is therfore a bodie to whom he saith: for them on my right hand. Whereof the diuel was enimie, with the euill powers, and the Iewes and the Greekes. By which bodie, he was in deede and so was called an high priest and Apostle, by that mysteria which he d
                           •
                        liuered to vs saying▪ This is my bodie whiche is broken for you. And the bloud of the new Testament, not of the old, which is shedd for you. The Godhead hath neither bodie nor bloud, but man, which he did take of the virgine Marie. He meaneth nothing lesse, than that ye sacrament was his natural body and bloud, but that he could not haue instituted a mysterie of hi
                        •
                      bodie and bloud, except he had ben a very man, which hath bodie and bloud, for the godhead hath none. And therfore the rule that M. Heskins giueth, that scriptures must be alledged in their literal sense in matters of faith, is to litle purpose, although it may stand well in this place. For the mysterie of his bodie proueth his humanitie, without any allegorie or other figure, as I haue shewed before. Athanasius is likewise alledged in the second Nicen counsell: Serm. de 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Iesu in Berito. 
                     How truly I will not say, but thus he is reported to say of ye bloud of Christ, which was said to be in many places, which he deniet
                           •
                         to haue come frō Christ, but from an image that was crucified Nec esse aliter 
                              〈◊〉
                            a vere Catholicis prae
                           
                              ••
                           r id quod 
                              〈◊〉
                            à nobis, quasi ex carne & sanguine Christi aliq
                              •
                           id pas
                              ••
                            i
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            inu
                              ••
                           iri, nisi 
                              〈◊〉
                           , quod in aera altarit per manus sacerdanu
                              •
                            quoti
                              •
                           ie spiritualiter officitur. Neither is it otherwise to be thought of true Catholiques, then is written of vs, as though any part of the flesh & bloud of Christ may be found in the world, but that which on the altar is euerie day made spiritually by the handes of the priestes. I do not cite this, as the vndoubted authoritie of Athanasius, but thinke rather it was forged in his name, as many

other thinges were in that wicked idolatrous counsel, yet it appeared that the maker of that sermon, & so ye Church in such time as he liued, had not receiued the Popish corporall presence.
                  
               
               
                  The one and fiftieth Chapter sheweth the minde of Iunencus, & Euseb. Emissen, vpon the wordes of Christ.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Iuuencus a Christian Poet is cited Lib. 4. Euang. Histor. Haec vbi dicta dedit palmis sibi frangere panem, &c.
                     
                        Fulke.
                      
                     When he had thus said, he tooke bread in his handes, and when he had giuen thankes he diuided it to his disciples, and taught them that he deliuered vnto them his owne bodie. And after that our Lorde tooke the cuppe filled with wine, he sanctified it with thankesgiuing, and giueth it to them to drinke, and teacheth them that he hath diuided, to them his bloud, and saith this bloud shall remitte the sinnes of the people. Drinke you this my bloud. Because this Poet, doeth but onely rehearse the historie in verse, without any exposition and interpretation, and saith no more then the Euangelistes say: I will not stand vpon him, onely I will note the vanitie of Maister Heskins, which like a young child that findeth miracles in euerie thing he seeth, still noteth a plain place for Maister Iewel, a plaine place for the proclaymer: when either there is in it nothing for his purpose, or as it falleth out oftentimes, much against him.
                  Euseb. Emissen is cited Hom. 5. Pasc. Recedat omne, &c. Let all doubtfulnesse of infidelitie depart. For truely he which is the auctour of the gifte, is also the witnes of the trueth. For the inuisible priest by secrete power doth with his worde conuert the visible creatures into the substance of his bodie & bloud saying thus: This is my bodie. And the sanctification repeated: take and drinke saith he, this is my bloud. This place hath beene often answered, to be ment of a spirituall and not a carnall conuersion, as diuerse other places out of ye same homilie alledged by M. Hesk. himself, doe proue. First it foloweth immediately. Ergo vt, &c. Therfore as at the will of our Lord sodenly commanding, of nothing the height of the heauens, the depths of the waters, the wide places of the earth were in substantiall beeing: euen so by

like power in the spirituall sacramentes, vertue is giuen to the word and effect to the thing. Therefore how great and notable thinges, the power of the Diuine blessing doeth worke, and how 
                           〈◊〉
                         ought not seeme to the too strange and impossible that earthly and mortall thinges are chaunged into the substance of Christ, aske of thy selfe which now art borne againe into Christe. Here saith M. Heskins, he proueth the chaunge possible, I graunt, and with all sheweth what manner a chaunge it is, euen such a one as is in regeneration, namely spirituall. The same is shewed in the other places following. Non dubites quispi
                           ••
                        , &c: Neither let any man dout, that by the wil of the Diuine power, by the presence of his high maiestie, the former creatures may passe into the nature of the Lordes bodie, when he may see man himselfe by the workmanship of the heauenly mercie, made the bodie of Christ. And as any man comming to the faith of Christ, before the wordes of baptisme, is yet in the band of the olde debt, but when they are rehearsed, he is forthwith deliuered from all dregges of sinnes: So when the creatures are set vpon the holie altars to be blessed with heauenly wordes, before they be consecrated by inuocation of the highest name, there is the substance of bread and wine, but after the wordes of Christe, the bodie and bloud of Christ. And what maruell is it, if those things, which he could create with his word, beeing created, he can conuerte by his worde? Yea rather it seemeth to be a lesse miracle, if that which he is knowne to haue made of nothing, he can now when it is made, chaunge into a better thing. Vpon these sayings Maister Heskins vrgeth the chaunge. I acknowledge the chaunge, and vrge the kinde or manner of chaunge to be spirituall, according to the examples of baptisme & regeneration. Vnto these authorities hee annexeth a large discourse of transubstantiation, and citeth for it diuers testimonies olde and newe, what the olde are, we will take paynes to viewe, as for the younger sorte, we will not sticke to leaue vnto him.
                  First Gregorie Nicene is cited, Serm. Catech. de Diuin. Sacram. Sicut antem qui panem videt, quodammodo corpus videt humanum, &c. And as he that seeth bread, after a certeine manner, seeth a mans bodie, because bread beeing in the bodie becommeth

a bodie: so that diuine bodie, receiuing the nourishment of bread, was after a certeine manner the same thing with that meate, (as we haue said) beeing turned into the nature of it. For th
                           •
                        t, which is proper to all flesh, we confesse to haue apperteined to him. For euen that bodie was susteined with bread, but that bodie, because God the WORDE dwelled in it obteined Diuine dignitie. Wherefore we doe nowe also rightly belieue, that the bread sanctified by the worde of God, is chaunged into the bodie of God the WORDE. Maister Heskins after his vsuall manner translateth Quodammodo in a manner, if not falsely, at the least obscurely. But that worde Quodammodo, that is after a certeine manner, looseth all the knotte of this doubt. For euen as the bodie of CHRISTE was bread after a certeine manner, because it was nourished with bread, and bread was after a certeine manner the bodie of Christ: euen so we beleeue, that the sacramentall bread is after a certeine manner chaunged into the bodie of Christ, that it may be the spirituall foode of our soules.
                  Ambrose is cited De his, qui initian. Cap. 9. Where Maister Heskins beheadeth the sentence, for it is thus: 
                        Prior enim 
                              •
                           ux quàm vmbra, veritas quàm figura, corpus authoris quàm manna de coelo. For light is before the shadowe, the trueth before the figure, the bodie of the authour before manna from heauen. Which wordes we may vnderstand, howe he taketh the bodie of Christe, that sayeth it was before manna, namely, for the effecte of his death and sacrifice perfourmed by his bodie. But M. Heskins beginneth at these wordes. Forte dicat, &c. Peraduenture thou mayst say. I see another thing. How doest thou assure me that I take the bodie of Christ? And this remaineth for vs to proue. Howe many examples therefore doe we vse, that we may proue this not to be that which nature hath formed it, but which the blessing hath consecrated, and that there is greater force of blessing, then of nature, for by blessing nature it selfe is chaunged?
                  
                  
                     Moses helde a rodde, hee cast it do
                           •
                        ne, and it was made a serpent. Againe, he tooke the serpent by the tayle, and it re
                        
                           ••
                        rueth into the nature of the rodde. Thou seest therefore by the

prophets grace, the nature of the serpent and of the rodde to 
                           〈◊〉
                         beene twise changed: And after many exāples: Quod si, &c. If then the benediction of man was of so great power, that is chaunged nature, what say we of the very diuine consecration, where the very wordes of our Lorde and Sauiour doe worke. For this sacrament which thou reciuest is made with the worde of Christ. And againe. Thou hast read of all the workes of the worlde, that he saide & they were made, be commanded and they were created. Therefore the worde of Christ which could of nothing make that which was not, can it not change those thinges that are, into that they are not? For it is no lesse thing to giue newe natures to thinges, then to chaunge natures. Hitherto you haue heard Ambrose speaking earnestly for a change of nature, in the sacrament, now heare him expound it in the same place for a spirituall change: 
                        Vera vtique caro Christi quae crucifixa est, quae sepulta est: verè ergo carnis illius sacramentum est. Ipse clamat Dominus Iesus: Hoc est corpus mo
                              •
                           m: ante benedictionem verborum coelestium, ali
                              •
                            species nominatur, post consecrationem, Corpus Christi significatur. Ipse dicit sanguinem suum, ante consecrationem a
                              •
                           ud dicitur, post. consecrationem sanguis nuncupatur. It was the verie fleshe of Christ which was crucified, which was buried: therefore this is truely a sacrament of that flesh, our Lord Iesus crieth out saying, This is my bodie. Before the benediction of the heauenly wordes, it is called another kinde, after the consecration, the bodie of Christ is signified. He himselfe saith, it is his bloud, before consecration it is called another thing, after consecration it is called bloud. And in the same place againe. In illo sacramento Christus est, quia corpus est Christi, non ergo corporalis esca, sed spirituali
                              •
                            est. In that sacrament Christ is, because the bodie of Christe is. Therefore it is not corporall meate but spirituall meate. Wel then, ye bread is chaunged from the nature of cōmon bread, to be a true sacrament of the bodie of Christ, wherby Christ his bodie is signified, and to be spiritual meate, and this is the change and conuersion he speaketh of, and nor the Popish transubstantiatiō. Next is alledged Chrysostome, Hom. 83. in Matth. Non sunt, &c. These are not the works of mans power, he that then in that supper made these things,

he also now worketh, he performeth them. We holde the order of ministers, but it is he which doth sanctifie and change these things. Here is a change or transmutatiō, but no word of ye maner of ye chaunge, therfore it maketh nothing for Popish transubstantiation, and this place hath beene more then once answered before, by Chrysost. authoritie. After him he citeth Cyrillus ad Colosirium in these words. V
                           •
                        uificati
                           ••
                        em, &c. The quickening WORDE of God vniting himselfe to his own flesh made that also quickning. How when the life of God is in vs, the WORD of God being in vs, shall our bodie also be able to giue life? But it is an other thing for vs to haue the sonne of God in vs after the manner of participation: and an other thing, the same to haue beene made flesh, that is, to haue made the bodie which he tooke of the blessed virgin his owne bodie. Therefore it was meete, that he should be after a certeine manner vnited to our bodies, by his holie flesh & precious bloud, which we receiue in the quickening blessing, in bread and wine. For least we should abhorre fleshe and bloud set vpon the holie altars, God condescending to our fragilities, inspireth to the thinges offered, the powre of life, turning them into the trueth of his owne flesh, that the bodie of life may be found in vs all, certeine seede giuing life. Here Maister Heskins in his translation cleane leaueth out Quodammodo, after a certeine manner Christe is vnited to our bodies by the sacrament, and so is this chaunge made after a spirituall manner, for otherwise this place is directly against transubstantiation, where he saith we receiue the flesh and bloud of Christ in bread and wine.
                  Euthymius is the next In Matth 26. Quemadmodum, &c. As he did supernaturally Deifie (as I may so say) his assumpted flesh, so he doeth also vnspeakably chaunge these thinges into his quickening bodie and his precious bloud, and into the grace of them. When he saith the bread and wine are chaunged into the grace of his bodie and bloud, it is easie to vnderstand, that he meaneth a spirituall chaunge, and the last clause is an exposition of the former, they are chaunged, into the bodie and bloud of CHRISTE, that is, into the grace of them.
                  Remugius followeth 1. Cor. Cap. 10. The fleshe whiche the

worde of God the father tooke vpon him in the wombe of the virgin in vnitie of his person, and the breade which is consecrated in the Church, are one bodie of Christe, for as that flesh is the body of Christ: so this bread passeth into the bodie of Christe, neither are they two bodies but one bodie. He meaneth, that the bread is a sacrament of the very and onely true bodie of Christ, otherwise his antiquitie is not so great, to purchase him authoritie, but as a Burgesse of the lower house, what so euer he speake. The rest that remaine although I might well expound their sayings so, as they should not make for Popish transubstantiation, which the Greeke Church did not receiue: yet beeing late writers out of the compasse, as Damascen, Theophylact, Paschasius, I omit them. But of all these doctors, M. Heskins gathereth, that it is a maruelous and wonderfull worke, that is wrought in this chaunge of the sacramentall bread and wine, therefore he would proue it cā not be into a bare token, or figure, but it may well be into a spirituall meate, to feede vs into eternall life, which is a wonderful and great work of God, as likewise that the washing of the bodie in baptisme, should be the washing of the soule from sinne. And therfore be saith very lewdly, yt the institution of sacramental signes, as the Pascall lambe, and such like, is no wonderfull worke of God, and as fondly compareth he the institution of sacramentes with bare signes and tokens of remembrance, as the twelue stones in Iordane, &c. And yet more lewdly, with the superstitious bread vsed to be giuen to the Cathechumeni in Saint Augustines time, that had no institution of God. Finally touching the determination and authoritie of the late Laterane counsell for transubstantiation, as we doe not esteeme it beeing contrarie to the worde of God: so I haue in ye first booke shewed what a grosse errour it committed, in falsification of a text of scripture, out of Saint Iohns Gospell.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The two and fiftieth Chapter openeth the minds of S. Basil, & S. Ambrose vpon the wordes of Christ.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     Basil is cited Quaest. comp. explic. qu. 17
                        •
                     . In aunswere to

this question, with what feate, what faith or assured certeintie, and with what affection the bodie and bloud of of Christ should be receiued? Timorem docet, &c. The Apostle teacheth vs the feare saying: He that eateth and drinketh vnworthily, eateth and drinketh his own damnation, but the credite of our Lords words bringeth in the perfection of certeintie, who said: This is my bodie which is giuen for you, doe this in remembraunce of me. In this aunswere, seeing he bringeth no exposition, but onely citeth the bare wordes of the text, there is nothing that maketh for M. Heskins. He saith the wordes are plaine inough, and neede none other interpretation. It is true, before the worlde was troubled with the heresie of carnall presence, the text seemeth plaine ynough, & these wordes: Do this in remēbrance of me, were thought a sufficient interpretation of those words: This is my bodie: and so doth Basill vse them.
                  But S. Ambrose he saith, is so plaine, that if his mother the Church had not beene good to him, he should haue bene shut out of the doores. For Oecolampadins reiected his book of the sacraments, as Luther did the Epistle of S. Iames. Touching Luther, although he were too rash in yt censure, yet had he Eusebius for his author, twelue hundreth yeres before him. And not only Oecolāpadius, but many other learned men do thinke both the phrase, and the matter of that booke to be vnlike S. Ambrose. But for my part let it be receiued, I hope M. Hesk. shal gaine litle by it: he hath noted many short sentences which I wil rehearse one after another. First Lib. 4. Ca. 5. Antequam. Before it be consecrated, it is bread, but when the wordes of Christe are come to it, it is the bodie of Christ. Finally heare him saying: take & eate ye all of it, This is my bodie. And before the words of Christ, the cuppe is full of wine and water, when the wordes of Christe haue wrought, there is made the bloud which redeemed the people. Ibi. Lib. 4. Cap. 4. Tu forte. Thou peraduenture sayest my bread is vsuall bread, but this bread is bread before the wordes of the sacramentes, when consecration is come to it, of bread it is made the fleshe of Christ. And againe in the same Chapter. Sed audi, but heare him saying that sayeth: he saide and they were

made, he commanded and they were created. Therefore that I may answere thee. Before consecration it was not the bodie of Christe. But after consecration I say vnto thee, tha
                           •
                         now it is the bodie of Christ. He saide and it is made, he commanded, and it is created. And in the same booke Cap. 5. Ipse Dominus, Our Lord Iesus himselfe testifieth vnto vs, that we receiue his bodie and bloud, shall we doubt of his trueth and testification? Out of these places, he concludeth not onely that figures be excluded, but also that the tearme of consecration is vsed seriously. I graunt, but not in such sense as the Papistes vse it, but as the worde signifieth, to hallow or dedicate to an holie vse. How figures be excluded, and how these places are to be taken, that are so plaine, as he pretendeth, I pray you heare what he writeth in the same bookes of sacramentes. 
                        Lib. 4. Cap. 4. Ergo didicisti quòd ex pane corpu
                              •
                            fiat Christi, & quòd vinum & aqua in calicem mittitur, sed fit sanguis consecratione verbi Coelestis. Sed fortò dicis speciem sanguinis non video. Sed habet similitudinem. Sicut enim mortis similitudinem sumpsisti: ita etiam similitudinem preciosi sanguinis bibis, vt nullus horror cruoris sit, & precium tamen operetur redemptionis. Didicisti ergo quia quod accipis, corpus est Christi. Therefore thou hast learned that of the bread is made the body of Christ, and that the wine and water is put into the cup, but by consecration of the heauenly worde, it is made his bloud. But perhappes thou sayest, I see not the shewe of bloud. Yet hath it the similitude. For as thou hast receiued the similitude of his death, so also thou drinkest the similitude of his precious bloud, that there may be no horror of bloud, & yet it may worke the price of redemption. Thou hast learned then yt, that which thou takest is the bodie of Christ. Here you see it is so the bodie of Christ, as it is the similitude of his death, & so ye bloud, as it is ye similitud of his bloud. Moreouer in ye same book Ca. 5. Dicit sacerdos, &c. The priest saith make vnto vs, (saith he) this oblation, ascribed, reasonable, acceptable: which is the figure of the bodie and bloud of our Lord Iesus Christ. And Cap. 6. Ergo memores, &c. Therefore beeing mindefull of his most glorious passion and resurection

from hell, and ascention into heauen, we offer vnto thee this vndefiled sacrifice, this reasonable sacrifice, this vnbloudie sacrifice, this holie bread and cup of eternall life. And againe Lib. 6. cap. 1. Ne igitur plures hoc dicerent veluti quidam esset horror cruoris, sed maneret gratia redemptionis, ideo in similitudinem quidem accipi
                              •
                            sacramentū, sed verae naturae gratiam virtus émque consequeris. Therfore lest any man should say this, and there should be a certeine horror of bloud, but that the grace of redemption might remaine, therefore truely, thou takest a sacrament for a similitude, but thou obteinest the grace & vertue of his true nature. Thus Ambrose hath spoken sufficiently to shewe him selfe no fauourer of Maister Heskins bill, although (as the scripture teacheth,) he call the sacrament the bodie & bloud of Christ and declareth why it is so called, because it is a figure, similitude, and a memoriall thereof.
                  
               
               
                  The three and fiftieth Chapter continueth in the exposition of Christes wordes by Gregorie Nicene, and S. Hierome.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Gregorie Nicene is cited,
                        Fulk.
                      
                     Ex serus. Catatholico. De Diuinis sacram. Qua ex causa panis in eo corpore mutatus, &c. By what cause the bread in that bodie beeing chaunged, passed into the diuine power, by the same cause, the same thing it done now. For as there the grace of the word of God maketh that bodie, whose nourishment consisted of bread, and was after a certeine maner bread: So bread as the Apostle saith, by the word of God and prayer, is sanctified, not because it is eaten, growing to that that it may become the bodie of the WORDE, but foorthwith by the worde it is chaunged into the bodie, as it is saide by the WORDE. This is my bodie. This place saith Maister Heskins ouerthroweth three heresies. The first of Luther or Lutherans: that the sacrament is not the bodie of Christ, except it be receiued. Gregorie saith, it is not the bodie of Christ, because it is eaten. But that is no ouerthrow to Luthers assertion, for Gregorie meaneth, that the sacrament by nourishing our bodies, is not made the bodie of Christe, as the breade that a man eateth is turned into his bodie, and

so was the bread yt our sauiour did eat, turned into ye substance of his bodie while he liued, but by the power of God, & this notwithstanding, it is made that bodye of Christ, only to the worthie receiuer. Of which a
                        •
                     sertion M. Hesk. saith, they haue no substantial grounde in scriptures: as though an argument framed out of the scripture, of the end & vse of ye sacrament, were not a substantial ground. And as for the popish counsell of Florens, is a sorie ground without scripture. Although 
                        〈…〉
                      nor, (as he slaundereth vs) yt the power of consecration dependeth vpon the will of the receiuer, but vpon the wonderfull worke of God, with such practice as he requireth. The second supposed heresie, to be ouerthrowen, is, that the substance of bread & wine do still remaine, because Gregorie sayth, it is changed into the bodie of Christe. But this change is not of substance, but of vse, for as hee sayth, it is changed into the bodie, so he sayth it is chaunged into the diuine vertue, which words, though Maister Hesk. would racke to signifie the diuine flesh of Christ, yet cannot he auoyde a manifest figure in the speache of Gregorie, & therfore it is nothing so plaine for him, as he pretendeth. To this he adioyneth a defence of the terme of transubstantiation, which he confesseth to be but new, (as in deede the doctrine therof is) but yet he compareth it with the terme vsed of olde by the fathers Homousion, to signifie that Christe is of the substance of the father. But to be short, for termes, we will not striue, let him proue transubstantiation so olde as he pretendeth, & we will acknowledge the terme. The thirde pretended heresie to be ouerthrowen, is, that he teacheth a reall presence, and therefore the wordes: This is my bodie, are to be vnderstood without trope or figure. But this is auoyded in aunswere to the seconde, and so we leaue him discharged of M. Hesk. cauils.
                  Hierome is alledged ad Hedibiam. qu. 2. the place hath bene alreadie handled, & proued to be against M. Hesk. in the 31. Chap. of this booke, whither I referre the reader for breuities sake, only in this place I wil deale with

such points as were not spoken of there, and rehearse the whole discourse of S. Herome together, & not in patches as M. Hesk. hath done, interlacing his fond gloses. Questio secunda. Quomodo accipiendum sit, &c. 
                     The second question. How that saying of our sauiour in Mathew is to be taken: I say vnto you, I will not drinke from hence forth of this fruite of the vine, vntil that day, in which I shal drinke it newe with you in the kingdome of my father. Out of this place, some men build the fable of a thousand yeres, in which they contend, that Christ shall raigne corporally, & drinke wine, which hee hath not dronke from that time, vnto the end of the world. But let vs heare, that the bread which our Lord brake & gaue to his disciples, is the bodie of our Lord & sauiour, as he saith vnto them.
                      
                     Take & eat ye, this is my bodie, & that the cupp is that, of whiche he spake againe: drinke ye all of this: this is my bloud of the new testament, which shalbe shed for many, &c. This is that cupp, of which we read in the Prophet: I will take the cupp of saluation. And in another place, Thy cup inebriaeting is verie noble. If therfore the bread, which came downe from heauen, is the bodie of our Lord: and the wine, which he gaue to his disciples, is his bloud of the new testament, let vs reiect Iewish fables, & ascend with our Lord into the great parler, prepared & made clean, & let vs receiue of him aboue, the cup of the new testament: & there holding passouer with him, let vs be made dronke with the wine of sobrietie. For the kingdome of God is not meat & drinke, but righteousnesse, & ioy, & peace in the holy ghost. Neither did Moises giue vs the true bread, but our Lord Iesus, he being the guest & the fest, he himselfe eating, & which is eaten. His bloud we drinke, & without him we cannot drinke it, & daily in his sacrifices, wee tread out of the generation of the true vine & the vine of Sorec, which is interpreted chosen, the redde newe wines, and of them wee drinke newe wine of the kingdome of his father, not in the oldnesse of the letter, but in the newnesse of the spirite, singing a newe song, which none can sing, but in the kingdome of the Churche, which is the kingdome of the father.
                  
                  
                     This bread also did Iacob the Patriarch couet to eate, saying: if ye Lord shalbe with me, & giue me bread to eat,

and rayment to couer mee. For as many of vs as are baptised in Christ, haue put on Christ, and do eat the breade of Angels, and do heare our Lorde saying: My meate is, that I may do the will of him that sent mee, my father, that I may accomplish his worke. Let vs therefore do the will of his father which sent vs, and let vs accomplish his worke: and Christ shall drinke with vs his bloud in the kingdome of the Church. This is the whole discourse of Hierome, and by the distinction of ye letter, you see what Maister Heskins hath left out, both in the beginning, and in the ende, and yet he raileth at ye proclaimer, for snatching truncately a fewe wordes, to make a shew to deceiue his auditorie. But by this whole treatise, you may see what the question is, and howe it is answered, namely, that the promise of Christ must bee vnderstoode, of a spirituall drinking in the Church, which vtterly ouerthroweth the popish fantasie of real presence. For Christ is so present at euery celebration of the supper in his church, that he eateth his bodie, and drinketh his bloud, as Hierome sayth: which no man, except he bee mad, wil say to be otherwise then after a spirituall manner, and in the end, Hierome openeth what is his meate, and how he drinketh his bloud with vs, and that wee so eat his bodie, as we put him on for a garmēt in baptisme, and as Iacob did eat it, which must needes be spiritually. More collections, if any man desire, let him resort to the 31. Chapter of this second booke.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The foure & fiftieth Chapter testifyeth the vnderstanding of the same words by Isychius, & S. Augustine.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     Isychius is alledged in Leuit. lib. 6. Cap. 2
                        •
                     . vpon this text. He that eateth of the holie things vnwittingly, shall put the fifth parte thereunto, and giue vnto the Priest the hallowed thing. Sancta sanctorum, &c. The most holie things properly are the mysteries of Christ, because it is his bodie, of whome Gabriell said vnto the virgin: The holy ghost shall come vpō thee, and the power of the moste highest shall ouershadowe thee, therefore that holy one that shalbe borne of thee, shalbe called the sonne of God. And Esay also: The Lord is holie, & dwelleth in the heightes, that is to saye,

in the bosome of his father. For from this sacrifice he hath forbidden, not onely strangers and soiourners & hyred seruaunts, but hee commaunded also, not to receiue it by ignorance. And he taketh it by ignorance, which knoweth not the vertue and dignitie thereof, which knoweth not that this bodie and bloud is according to the trueth, but receiueth the mysteries, and knoweth not the vertue of the mysteries. Vnto whome Salomon sayth, or rather the spirite which is in him: When thou sittest to eat with a Prince, attende diligently, what things are set before thee. He also compelling openly and constraining him that is ignorant to adde a fifth parte. For this fifth parte being added, maketh vs to vnderstande the diuine mysteries, intelligibly. Nowe, what the fifth parte is, the wordes of the Law giuer may teache thee. For he sayth: he shall add a fifth parte, with that he hath eaten. And howe can a man adde a fifth parte of that which he hath alreadie eaten and consumed? For he biddeth not another thing, or from any other where. But a fifth parte to be added of it, or with it, or as the 70. interprete vpon it. Then the fifth parte of it, vpon it, is the worde which was vttered by Christ him selfe vpon the Lordes mysterie. For that being added, deliuereth and remoueth vs from ignorance, as to thinke any thing carnall or earthly of those holie things, but decreeth, that those thinges shoulde bee taken diuinely & spiritually, which is properly called the fifth part, for the diuine spirite which is in vs, and the worde which he deliuered, doth sett in order the senses that are in vs, and doth not onely bring foorth our taste vnto mysterie, but also our hearing & sight and touching & smelling, so that of these things which are verie high, we do suspect, nothing that is neare to lesse reason or weake vnderstanding.
                  
                  This place M. Hesk. noteth, that the mysteries are called a most holy thing, and a sacrifice. We confesse it is a most holy thing, & a sacrifice of thanksgiuing, for so ye fathers meant, and not a propitiatorie sacrifice. Moreouer he noteth, that it is called the verie bodie and bloud in verie deede. Although the wordes of the author sounde not so roundly, yet let that be graunted also, what is then the conclusion? Marie then, haue ye a plaine place for the proclaimer, & issue ioyned thereupon, that no one writer of like auncientie, sayth, it is not the verie bodie. For thè

plainesse of the place, I wish always, that the author may be his own expositor. First, where he sayth, that the fifth part added, maketh vs to vnderstand the mysteries intelligibly (that is as he vseth the terme) spiritually & mystically, although M. Hesk. translate intelligibiliter easily.
                  Secondly, where he sayth, wee must thinke nothing carnally or earthly of the holy things, and that the worde of God decreeth, that they should be taken diuinely and spiritually. As for the issue it was ioyned & tryed in the one and twentieth Chapter of the first booke. But wee must heare what Hesychius sayth further. Quicunque ergo sanctificata &c. Whosoeuer therfore shal eat of the things sanctified by ignorance, not knowing their vertue (at we haue saide) shall adde a fifth parte of it vpon it, and giue it to the Priest into the sanctuarie. For it behoueth the sanctification of the mysticall sacrifice, and the translation or commutation from thinges sensible to things intelligible, to be giuen to Christ, which is the true Priest, that is, to graunt and impute to him the miracle of them, because that by his power and the worde vttered by him, those things that are seene, are as surely sanctified, as they exceede all sense of the flesh. Out of these words M. Hesk. would proue transubstantiation, because he saith, there is a translation or cō
                     mutation from things sensible to intelligible, yt is, from bread, which is perceiued by ye senses, to ye body of Christ, which in this manner is not perceiued by senses. But M. Hesk. must proue the bodie of Christe to bee no sensible thing, but a thing which may be perceiued by vnderstanding only, or else his exposition wil not stand, for here is a diuision & exposition of things sensible & intelligible, which is a plaine ouerthrow of popish transubstantiatiō, & carnall presence, for yt wherunto the things sensible are changed, is not a sensible thing, as the naturall bodie of Christ is, but they are changed into things intelligible▪ yt is, which may only by vnderstanding be conceiued, & so is the spiritual feeding of our soules by faith, with ye verie body & bloud of Christ. Next Augustin is cited in Ps. 33 a place which hath ben cited & answered more then once alreadie. Et ferebatur, &c. And he was carried in his own bāds.

Brethren how could this be true in a man? &c. I will remit the reader to the 10. Chap. of this second book, where it is answered by Aug. him self, & in the same exposition. Christ caried himself, saith Aug. in his hands, quodam modo, after a certaine manner, but not simply. Maister Hesk. iangling of an onely figure, hath bene often reproued: wee make not the sacrament such an onely figure, as Dauid might carrie in his handes of him selfe, for Dauid could make no sacrament of him selfe, but such a figure, as is a diuine and heauenly worke, to giue in deede, that it representeth in signe. An other place of Augustine, is cyted De Trin. lib. 3. cap. 4. but truncately (as he termeth it) for he neither alledgeth the heade nor the feete, by which the scope of Augustines wordes might be perceiued. But the whole sentence is this. Si ergo Apostolus Paulus, &c. 
                     If therefore the Apostle Paule, although hee did yet carrie the burthen of his body, which is corrupted and presseth downe the soule, although he did as yet see but in part, and in a darke speach, desiring to be dissolued and to bee with Christ, & groning in himself for the adoption, wayting for the redēption of his body, Could neuerthelesse preach our Lord Iesus Christ by signifying, otherwise by his tong, otherwise by his Epistle, otherwise by the sacrament of his body & bloud for neither his tong, nor the parchments, nor the ynke nor the signifying sounds vttered with his tong, nor the signes of the letters written in skinnes, do we call the body and bloud of Christ, but only that which being taken of the fruits of the earth, & being consecrated with mysticall prayer, we do rightly receiue vnto spiritual health, in remembrance of our Lords suffring for vs: which when it is brought by the hands of mē, to that visible forme, it is not sanctified that it shuld be so great a sacramēt, but by the spirit of god working inuisibly: 
                     whē God worketh al these things which in that work are done by corporall motions, mouing first the inuisible parts of his ministers, either the soules of men, or of secret spirits yt are subiectes seruing him: what maruel is it, if also in the creature of heauen & earth, the sea, & al the ayre, God maketh what he wil both sensible and inuisible things, to set forth him selfe in them, as he him selfe knoweth it shuld

be: his owne substaunce as it is not appearing, which is altogether vnchangeable, and more inwardly and secretly, higher then all the spirites which he hath created.
                  He rayleth vpon Oecolampadius, for leauing out of S. Augustine that which maketh against him, as though hee him selfe hath not an hundreth times done so as he chargeth him. Although it is not to be thought, that Oecolampadius vsed any fraud, when he tooke as much as serued his purpose for which he alledged it, and nothing folowed, that was contrarie to it, for all M. Heskins lowde crying out. For Paule preached Christe by signifying in the sacrament, which is called the body & bloud of Christ, bicause it is a sacrament thereof, whereas his tong, nor his parchment, nor ynke, nor sound of words, nor figures of letters were no sacraments, and yet he preached the same Christ by signifying, in speaking, writing, and ministring the sacrament. But besides this, M. Heskins would haue vs note two things. That the bread is sanctified and made a great sacrament: and that it is sanctified and made by the inuisible worke of the holy Ghost. The first (he saith) is against Oecolampadius & Cranmer, that say, the creatures receiue no sanctification, but the soules of men. They meane, that holinesse is not included in the creatures, but consisteth in the whole action, and so Augustine addeth to the consecration the due receiuing in remembrance of Christes death, without which the bread is no sacrament. But M. Heskins would learne what he meaneth by calling it a great sacrament, and what the worke of the holy Ghost is in it? If it please him to vnderstand, the holy Ghost working inuisibly, maketh it a greate mysterie of our saluation, assuring our consciences, that we are fed spiritually with the body and bloud of Christ, as our bodies are corporally with bread and wine. As for S. Iames his Masse, and other such ma
                        •
                     king disguisings, I will not vouchsafe to aunswere, being meere forgeries and counterfetings.
                  But howe S. Augustine did expound these wordes, M. Heskins if he durst, might haue cyted this place, Contra

Adimantum. 
                     
                        Nam ex eo quod scriptum est sanguinem pecoris animam eius esse, pręter id quod supra dixi, non ad me pertinere quid agatur de pecoris anima, possum etiam interpretari praeceptum illud in signo esse positum: non enim Dominus dubitanit dicere: hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis sui. For of that which is written, that the bloud of a beast is the life thereof, beside that which I said before, that it pertaineth not to me what becommeth of the life of a beast, I may interprete that commandement to be giuen in a signe: for our Lord doubted not to say: this is my body, when he gaue the signe of his body. This place is plaine, and will not suffer M. Heskins glose, that the accidents are called a signe of his body, for then it is nothing like to the text, which he compareth to this: bloud is the life of the beast. Let this place expound Augustine, when so euer he nameth the sacrament the body of Christ.
               
               
                  The fiue and fiftieth Chapter tarieth in the exposition of the same wordes by Chrysostome and Sedulius.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Chrysostome is cyted In 26. Math. Hom. 83.
                        Fulk.
                      
                     Credamus vbique &c. Let vs beleeue in euery place, neither let vs resist him, although it seemeth to be an absurde thing to our sense, and to our cogitation, which is saide. Let his word I beseech you ouercome both our sense and our reason, which thing let vs do in all matters, and specially in mysteries, not looking vpon those things only which lye before vs, but also holding fast his wordes. For we can not be deceiued by his wordes, but our sense is most easie to be deceiued: they can not be false, but this our sense is often and often deceiued. Therefore bicause he hath saide: This is my body, let vs be held with no doutfulnesse, but let vs beleeue, and throughly see it with the eyes of vnderstanding. Here M. Heskins noteth that it passeth not reason, to make present a figure of his body, as though the mysterie of the sacrament were nothing, but a figure of his body. Secondly, that Chrysostome willeth Christes wordes to be vnderstanded as they be spoken. No doubt, but he would haue them to be vnderstoode as they were meant by Christe, and that is spiritually, for which cause he willeth vs to beholde the matter with the eyes of our

vnderstanding and by faith. And whereas M. Heskins doth further alledge this Doctours wordes In Marc. 14. Hom. 51. Qui dixis &c. He that saide, This is my body, did bring to passe the thing also with his worde. We confesse he did so, but thereof it doth not followe, that al figure is wiped away, as he saith: neither is there any plaine place for the proclamer, or in any thing that followeth in the same Homely. Quando igitur &c. When then thou seest the Priest giue the body, thinke not the hand of the Priest, but the hand of Christe is put foorth vnto thee. Surely in these wordes, we must either say that the Priestes hande is transubstantiated into the hande of Christ, or else we must acknowledge a figuratiue speach. It followeth in Chrysostome, for more persuasion. Qui enim maius &c. 
                     
                        For he that hath giuen a greater thing for thee, that is to say, his life, why will he disdaine to deliuer his body to thee? Let vs therefore heare both Priestes and other, howe great and how woonderfull a thing is graunted to vs. Let vs heare I pray you, and let vs tremble, he hath deliuered his flesh vnto vs, him selfe offered hath he set before vs. What satisfaction therefore shall we offer, when after we are nourished with such a foode, we doe offend? When eating a lambe, we are turned into woolues? when beeing satisfied with sheepes flesh, we rauine as lyons? M. H. noteth, yt here be termes to plaine for figuratiue speaches, & yet in spite of his nose, he must cōfesse al this speach to be figuratiue, or else he must make Chrysost. Authour of grosse absurdities. I will only speak of one, which is most apparant. Chrysost. saith, it is a greater matter that Christ gaue his life, then yt he giueth his body. Let me aske him this question. Doth hee giue a dead body in the sacrament, or a liuing? If hee giue a liuing body, hee giueth his life in the sacrament, and then howe is it lesse, when hee giueth both his life and his body? But Chrysostome meaneth, that he suffered death, which is a greater matter, then that he giueth vs his body in the sacrament, for that is a memoriall of his death, and receiueth all the vertue from his death, & so the giuing of his life is a greater matter, then the giuing of his body in the sacrament, for ye was in acte, this in mysterie. But let vs followe M. Hes.

The sacrament is a wonderful thing, therefore no figure, nor spiritual receit only, which are not wonderfull. This argument is false, for sacramentall figures and spirituall things are great wonders, thought not sensible myracles. As for eating the Lamb, the Sheepe, and such other, are so plaine figures, that impudencie her selfe would not deny them to be figures. Finally he noteth, that sinners receiue the bodye of Christe in the sacrament, which hee saith, the Protestantes denye, which is as grossely, for except sinners should receiue Christe in the sacrament, no men should receiue him. But the Protestantes say, that wicked men or reprobate men, vngodly men, vnpenitent sinners, receiue not the body of Christe, which though it haue bene sufficiently proued before, yet I will adde one more testimony out of Saint Augustine De ciuitate Dei. Lib. 21. Cap. 25. Nec isti ergo dicendi sunt manducare corpus Christi, quoniam nec in membris computandi sunt Christi. Denique ipse dicens: Qui manducat carnem meam, & bibit sanguinem meum, in me manet & ego in eo, ostendit quid sit, non sacramento tenus, sed reuera corpus Christi manducare, & eius sanguinem bibere. Neyther is it to be saide, that these men (meaning heretiques & other wicked men) doe eate the bodie of Christ, bicause they are not to bee accounted among the members of Christ. Finally he himself saying: He yt eateth my flesh & drinketh my blud, abideth in me & I in him: sheweth what it is, not touching ye sacramēt only, but indeed to eat ye body of Christ, & drink his bloud. But now let vs returne to Chrys. who Hom. 83. in 26. Math. hath these words, Praecipuā &. He dissolueth their chiefe solemnitie, and calleth thē to another table ful of horror saying: Take ye and eat ye, this is my body. How then wer they not troubled hearing this? bicause they had heard many & great things of these before. Here M. Hes. troubleth him self very much & his readers more, to proue yt by the doctrin which they heard before, vttered in the sixt of Iohn, they were so instructed as they were not troubled, which we confes to be true, although that doctrine doth none otherwise pertaine vnto the sacrament, then as the sacrament is a seale of the doctrine.

But Chrysostome saith further in the same Homely. Hac de causa &c. For this cause with desire I haue desired to eate this passeouer with you, that I might make you spirituall. He him self also dranke thereof, least when they had heard his wordes, they should say: what then do we drinke bloud and eate flesh? and so should haue bene troubled. For when he spake before of those things, many were offended only for his wordes. Therefore least the same thing should happen nowe also, he him selfe did it first, that he might induce them with quiet minde, to the communication of the mysteries. Here M. Heskins falleth into a sound sleepe, and then dreameth a long dreame of the reall presence, and the trouble of the Apostles, and lothsomnesse of bloud, the contradiction of Chrysostomes wordes, and I wote not what beside▪ But to a man that is awake, Chrysostom speaketh plaine ynough. He saith, this was ye cause, why Christ desired to eate the Passeouer with them, which he taketh to be, that hee did first drinke before them &c. that hee might make thē spirituall, that is, yt they might not haue carnall imaginations of eating his body and his bloud as the Capernaites had, but vnderstande those thinges spiritually, the rather when they sawe him eate and drinke of them, which if he had eaten his owne naturall body, and drunk his owne natural bloud, would haue troubled them more, then if he had not tasted of them. And how so euer M. Heskins drumbleth and dreameth of this matter, Cranmer saith truely, that if Christ had turned the breade into his body, as the Papistes affirme, so great and woonderfull a chaunge, should haue bene more plainely setfoorth in the scripture, by some of the Euangelistes.
                  Sedulius for varietie of names is cyted In 11. pri. ad Cor. Accipite hoc est corpus meum &c. Take ye, this my body, as though Paule had saide, take heede ye eate not the body vnworthily, seeing it is the body of Christ. What is there here that the proclamer will not confesse? and yet is there nothing to binde him to subscribe, for the proclamer would neuer denye, that the sacrament is the body and bloud of Christ, though after an other sort, then it is affirmed by the Papistes.
               
               
                  
                  The sixe and fiftieth Chapter abideth in the exposition of the same wordes by Theophylus and Leo.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Theophylus Alexandrinus is brought on the stage in this shewe, cyted Lib. 2. Pasch. Consequens est &c.
                     
                        Fulk.
                      
                     It is consequent, that he that receiueth the former things, should also receiue those things that follow. And he that shall say, that Christ was crucified for diuels, must allowe also that it is to be saide vnto them: This is my body, and take ye, this is my bloud. For if he be crucified for diuels (as the author of new doctrine doth affirme) what priuiledge shall there be, or what reason that onely men should communicate with his body and bloud, and not diuels also for whome he shed his bloud in his passion? Hee saith here is no mention of tropes and figures. A substantiall reason, therefore none are vsed. It is a good reason that Theophylus vseth: that Christ died not for the diuels, bicause he giueth them no participation of his body and bloud, but it hangeth on a rush that M. Hes. concludeth. Such as are partakers of his reall body, may be made partakers of his spirituall body: but diuels can not of his reall body, therefore not of his spirituall body be partakers. See how this peruerse man, maketh the sacrament to be the reall body of Christ, and that which was crucified, his spirituall body. By which he doth not only make Christe haue two bodies, but also ouerthroweth the truth of the one, to establish the falshod of ye other. But the same writer in ye first booke, doth more certainly auouch the real presence, & deny the figures in these wordes: Dicit spiritum sanctum &c. Origen saith, that the holy Ghost doth not worke vpon those things, which are without life nor commeth to vnreasonable things. Which when he saith, he thinketh not that the mysticall waters in baptisme by the comming of the holy Ghost to them are consecrated, and that the Lords bread by which our sauiours body is shewed, and which we breake for sanctification of vs, and the holy cup which are set on the table, and be things without life, are sanctified, by inuocation and comming of the holy Ghost to them. M. Hes. translateth quo saluaioris corpus ostenditur, in which the body of our Sauiour is shewed, but it is plaine ynough, Theophylus meaneth, that by the breade the body of Christe is shewed, that is signified,

or figured, or represented. As for consecration, which terme he giueth to the waters in baptisme, Maister Heskins chattereth I wot not what about it, nor to what purpose. Certaine it is, that he vseth not the terme as the Papistes doe, for they apply it only to the sacrament of the altar, as they call it.
                  Leo is cited Serm. 7. de pass. dom. Iesus confisij sui certus &c. Iesus being at a point with him selfe, and ready to doe his fathers disposition without feare, finished the olde Testament, and made the newe Passeouer. For his disciples sitting with him to eate the mysticall supper, while they in the house of Caiphas were treating howe Christ might be slaine, he ordaining the sacrament of his body and bloud, did teach, what manner of sacrifice should be offered to God, and from this mysterie remoued not the traytour. This place being against Maister Heskins, where hee calleth it the sacrament of his body and bloud &c. hee would aunswere the matter by this principle, that olde writers did so call the very naturall body of Christ in the sacrament, which is all the matter in question. But hee will proue it by an other saying in the same place. Vt vmbrae &c. That shaddowes might giue place to the body, and images might ceasse vnder the presence of the trueth, the olde obseruance is taken away with a newe sacrament, the sacrifice passeth into the sacrifice, bloud excludeth bloud, and the festiuitie of the lawe while it is chaunged, is fulfilled. These wordes must needes bee referred to the passion of Christe, whereof the sacrifice is a memoriall: for the sacrifice of Christe, and his bloud shedding on the crosse, was the very fulfilling of the shaddowe and image of the Paschall Lambe in the olde lawe, and not the institution of the sacrament, whiche is a figure or sacrament thereof. And so the groundwork of al M. Hes. building is quite ouerthrown.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The seuen and fiftieth Chapter proceedeth in the exposition of the same wordes by S. Cyrill and S. Gregorie.
                  Cyrillus is cited, as he is often, ad Colosyrium. Non dubites an &c.
                     
                        Fulke.
                      
                     Doubt thou not whether this be true, when hee saith manifestly, This is my body: but rather receiue the worde of our Sauiour in faith. For seeing hee is the trueth, hee doth not lye.
                     
Maister Heskins inferreth, that the wordes of Christe are manifest, and so to be taken in the literall sense without figure, bicause he vseth these wordes, Christ saide manifestly, this is my body: but this is a childish mockerie. Christe saide manifestly, I am the doore. Doeth it therefore followe, that it is no figuratiue speach, and that the woordes of Christe are manifest, and therefore to bee taken in the literall sense? And yet I beleeue, bicause Christ saide manifestly, I am the doore, that he is in deede the doore, though not literally but figuratiuely taken. It greueth M. Hes. that the proclamer should play with Duns his indiuid
                           •
                        um vagum, saying, that by the like meanes, hee might disgrace the faith of the trinitie, to open the quiddities of distinctions, and relations of persons, that bee spoken thereof. And I thinke the same, if hee shoulde teach that holy mysterie after the schoole manner, & not after the word of God. But he returneth to an other place of Cyrill. Ne horreremus carnem & sanguinem. Bicause this place is already rehearsed more at large, and answered in the 51. Chap. of this booke, I will send the reader backe, to consider it in that place.
                  Gregorie is cited Lib. 4. dialog. cap. 
                     
                        •
                     8. Debemus ita
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         praesens sęculum &c. We ought therfore, seing we see this present world to be passed away, with al our mind to contemne it, to offer to god the daily sacrifices of teares, the daily sacrifices of his body and bloud. For this sacrifice doth singularly saue the soul from eternal destruction, which repayreth to vs the death of the only begotten, by a mysterie. Who although since he arose from death, he doth not now dy, and death shal haue no more dominion of him: yet liuing in him self immortally & incorruptibly, is sacrificed againe for vs in this mysterie of the holy oblation. For his body is there receiued, his flesh is diuided for the health of the people, his bloud is shed, not nowe vpon the hands of the Infidels, but into the mouthes of the faithfull. Hereof therefore let vs consider, what sacrifice this is for vs, which for our deliuerance doeth followe the passion of the onely begotten Sonne. For which of the faithfull ought to haue any doubt, that in the same houre of the immolation, the heauens are opened at the Priestes voyce? that the companies of

Angels are present in the mysterie of Iesus Christ? That the lowest things are coupled to the highest: earthly things are ioyned to heauenly thinges, and that one thing is made of thinges visible and inuisible? Of these last wordes of ioyning high and lowe, heauenly and earthly thinges, he maketh a greate matter, which is (saith hee) that Christe is ioyned to the earthly formes of breade and wine. Where note (I praye you) that he nameth the accidents of things, for the thinges them selues, which is a toy to mocke an ape. And yet he pleaseth him selfe so well therein, that he would drawe Irenaeus, which is cleane contrarie to transubstantiation, to bee a great patrone thereof:
                        Li. 4. ca. 34. Irenaeus saith as wee haue shewed before more at large, that Eucharistie consisteth of two thinges, earthly and heauenly. Nowe hee inquireth of vs, what is the heauenly part of the sacrament? And he reasoneth that it is neither the grace of God, nor thanksgiuing, nor the worde of God, nor sanctification. Well: what is it then? Gregorie saith, it is the bodye of Christ, and so say we, spiritually receiued. But if I shuld aske M. Hes. what is the earthly part of the sacrament, hee wil say, the accidents of bread & wine, but sauing his wisdome, accidents be neither earthly not heauenly, but the earthly thing must needs be a substantiall thing, & what other earthly substance can there be, but the substance of bread and wine? He saith, that corporall receiuing is here auouched by Gregory. Then must he tel me how in these words, the sacrifice of teares, is matched with the sacrifice of his flesh and bloud, and how the death of Christe is repaired by a mysterie, howe the fleshe of Christ is diuided or parted, if this can not bee done, but spiritually, then Christes body can not be eaten, but spiritually.
                  The iudgement of Barnard which followeth, we leaue to be weighed according to the corruption of the age in which he liued.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The eigth and fiftieth Chapter endeth the exposition among the eldest Fathers by Euthymius and Isidorus.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     Although neither of these writers are within the compasse

of the challenge, yet bicause Euthymius vseth much to followe auncient Doctours, and Isidorus was neere the time of the challenge, I will set downe their places and examine their wordes. Euthymius is cyted In 26. Math. Sicut vetus testamentum &c. Euen as the olde Testament had sacrifices and bloud: so hath the newe, namely the body and bloud of our Lorde. Nowe he did not say: These are the signes of my body and my bloud: but these thinges be my body and bloud. Therefore we must not looke to the nature of those things that are set foorth, but to the vertue of them. For as he did supernaturally deifie (if I may so speake) his assumpted flesh: so doth he also vnspeakably transmute these thinges into the same his quickening body, and into his precious bloud, and into the grace of them. And the bread hath a certaine similitude vnto the body, and wine to bloud. For both the bread and body are earthly: but the wine and the bloud are airie and hote. And as bread doth comfort, so the body of Christe doth the same and much more, it sanctifieth both the body and the soule. And as the wine doth make glad: so the bloud of Christ doth the same, and moreouer is made a defence. Although the chiefest partes of this place are answered in the 17. Chapter of the first booke, and in the 51. Chap. of this second booke: yet as M. Hes. gathereth here two other matters, so I wil make answere to them. First he saith, That the figuratiue glose of the sacramētaries is flatly denied: But by what words I pray you▪ Marrie where he saith: Christ saide not these be signes of my body and bloud, but these are my body and bloud, if this be a flat deniall of a figure, bicause Christe saide not so, then is it likewise in these speaches, he saide not the rocke was a signe of Christe, but the rocke was Christe, the Lambe is the Passeouer &c. Euthymius meaneth not to exclude all figures from the saying of Christ, but to shew that the sacrament is not a bare, naked, and vaine signe, but a true signe of the very body and bloud of Christe, giuen to the faythfull in the administration of the supper.
                  The second matter that Maister Heskins noteth, is, of the vnspeakable transmutation, and that must needes bee meant of transubstantiation of the breade and wine into

the naturall bodie and bloud of Christe, by this reason: there be foure thinges called the bodie of Christ. 1. The figure. 2. The Church. 3. The merite, fruite, or vertue of his passion. 4. And his bodie naturall, but it can not be into the figure, nor into the Churche, Nor into the spirituall bodie of Christe, I meane the merite, vertue, and grace of Christes passion, Ergo it must needes be spoken of the naturall bodie of Christ. But vouchsafe (gentle Reader) to runne ouer once againe these wordes of Euthymius, which in Latine are these. Ita & hec ineffabiliter transmuta
                           •
                         in ipsum vinific
                           •••
                         corpus, & in ipsius pręciosum sanguinem si
                           •
                        on, & in gratiam ipso 
                           〈◊〉
                        : Euen so he doth vnspeakably transmute and change thes
                           •
                         thinges into the same his quickening bodie, and into his owne precious bloud, and into the grace of them. Now tell me whether M. Heskins doth flatly denie, that which Euthymius doeth flatly affirme, that the bread and wine are chaunged into the grace of the bodie and bloud of Christ? By whiche words he doth sufficiently expound, what kind of change he meaneth of them into the bodie and bloud of Christ, not a corporall but a spirituall transmutation. To the rest of the sentence which is a good exposition of the former parte, shewing both the bread and wine to remaine in the sacrament, and for what cause they are vsed to represent the bodie and bloud of Christe, namely, for the similitude they haue vnto the bodie and bloud of Christ: Maister Heskins sayeth nothing. But let the reader weigh it well, and he shall see it cleane contrarie both to transubstantiation, and the carnall presence.
                  Nowe we come to Isodorus, whom he confesseth to be somewhat out of the compasse of the challenge, and his wordes De Offi. Eccle. Lib. 18. are these. Sacrificium, &c. The sacrifice that is offered of the Christians vnto God, Christe our God and Maister did first institute, when he commended to his Apostles his bodie and his bloud before he was betrayed, as it is read in the Gospel: Iesus tooke bread and the cuppe and blessing them gaue vnto them.
                  
                  In this place is nothing for the carnall presence, but that Isydore calleth the sacrament the bodie and bloud of

Christ, which we also do, and acknowledg to be so rightly called. And Maister Heskins can conclude nothing but vpon a negatiue, he saith not he gaue a figure, so may I conclude, he saith not he gaue his naturall body, and no figure. After this he reasoneth as fondely of Christes blessing of the bread, which although the Euangelistes do expound to be giuing of thanks, yet admit blessing to signifie consecration, and what hath he gayned? Forsooth Christ wold not haue blessed it to make but a figure: still he playeth the foole with that bable, but a figure, onely a figure, a bare figure, which we vtterly doe forsake. But toward the ende of the Chapter, he falleth to gathering his voyces, and affirmeth that none of the olde fathers cal the sacrament a figure, except Tertullian onely, wherein he lyeth impudently, for beside Ambrose, and Augustine, which both vse the very worde figure, we haue shewed in due places, that both they & in a manner al the rest of the fathers, haue either written plainely against the carnall presence, or else nothing for it. As for his last challenge, that all the protestants must bring forth when any countrie did professe the same religion that is now preached, is vaine: and hath beene sufficiently aunswered in other treatises. It is certein, that all nations yt were conuerted by the Apostles, before they were corrupted by heresie and Antechristianitie, professed the same religion that we doe. As for the alterations in King Henries time, King Edwardes, and the Queenes Maiesties, that now is, it is easie to answere. King Henrie began the worke, whiche King Edwarde finished, and the Queene repayred and vpholdeth in spight of the diuel and the Pope. As for the consent and peace of the Popishe Church, it proueth nothing, but that the diuell had then all thinges at his will, and therefore might sleepe on both sides, but now hee is disturbed of possession of the house, nowe he stormeth, and of Robin good fellowe, which he was in the Popishe time, is become playne Sathan the Diuell.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The nine & fiftieth Chapter beginneth the exposition of the same text by the fathers of the latter days, & first Damascen, & Haymo.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     Before M. Heskins begin his pretended exposition, he chargeth Luther, to be a proude contemner of the fathers, who reuerenced them as much as it was meet they should be reuerenced, although he preferred one authoritie of scripture, before a thou
                        ••
                     nd Cyprians & Augustines. Next to Luther, he rayleth on the bishop of Sarum, whō he calleth the proclaymer, charging him with mocking of the holie fathers, whereof some he saith be saintes in heauen, what the rest be he doth not determine, he meaneth Siluester, Isodore, Innocentius, Betram, Durand, Holcot Dunce, &c. Which if they haue written any thing that is ridiculous, in defence of Poperie, it were better men should laugh at their follie, then be still deceiued with their errours. But whereas M. Hesk. will set a player on a stage, and a boy in the Pa
                        ••
                     is to answere the Bishop, I weene it be more then the reuerend M. Doctor Heskins reuested in Doctoralibus and inthronized in his Doctours chayer, dare well take vpon him to doe. That whiche followeth in this Chapter, is consumed in cyting and vrging of the forenamed wryters, whose authoritie we doe not admitte, appealing alwayes from the lower house of punys Burgesses, to the higher house of auncient Barons.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The sixtieth Chapter proceedeth in exposition of the same text by Theophylacte and Paschasius.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     Although we might demurre vpon the vnderstanding of those wordes of Theophylact, In 14. Matth. That the bread & wine are transelementated into the vertue of his flesh & bloud: yet considering the corrupt time in which he liued, his authoritie is not worth the striuing for. And whereas Maister Heskins would make him so say no more then the olde fathers, Hilar. Iren. Cyril. Chrysost. &c. Seeing we haue already considered their testimonies, it were superfluous

to repeate them againe in this place, and as often, as it pleaseth Maister Heskins to abuse their names.
               
               
                  The one and sixtieth Chapter continueth in the exposition of the same wordes by Oecumenius and Anselmus.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Oecumenius saith litle to the purpose, too or fro. But Anselmus goeth more roundly to ye matter,
                        Fulke.
                      as one yt was ye scholler of Lanfrācus, which wrote against Berengarius. Neuerthelesse vpon these wordes of his, riseth some other matter: Neque eminet. For we do neither altogether exclude a figure frō this sacrament, nor admit an only figure. This place M. Hesk. would haue to expound Tertullians figure, but we haue shewed before, it will not serue. Vnto this he addeth Augustine, cited in the Popes decrees, but not to be found in his workes in these wordes. The bodie of Christ is both the trueth and a figure: The trueth whyle the bodie and bloud of Christ in the vertue of the holie Ghost is made of the substance of bread and wine: but that is the figure which is outwardly perceiued. De cons. Dist. 2. Cap vtrum. When these wordes are found in any worke of S. Augustines, we will make aunswere to them, otherwise we may not receiue them of the onely credit of the Popes law. Vnlesse they haue such meaning as the saying of Hilarius B. of Rome which followeth. Corpus Christi, &c. The bodie of Christ which is takē at the altar is a figure, whyle the bread & wine are seene outwardly, and a truth, while the bodie and bloud of Christ inwardly are beleeued. It seemeth to me this saying to be playne ynough, that the sacrament is an outward figure of the bodie and bloud of Christ, which is inwardly receiued spiritually by faith. As Gratian also reporteth the wordes of the same Hilarie. De Cons. Dist. 2. Vbi pars est. Non enim est quantitas visibilis in hoc aestimanda mysterio, sed virtus sacramenti spiritualis. The visible quantitie is not to be regarded in this mysterie, but the spirituall vertue of the sacrament. But M. Heskins proceedeth, and by Anselmus authoritie he will auoide the trifling sophysticall argument, made by Maister Pilkinton in the open disputation holden in Cambridge.
                  
                  
                     By like Maister Heskins had not learned the solution at that time, and therefore nowe he sendeth it ouer the sea to him. The argument was this: Christe tooke bread, he blessed bread, he brake bread, wherfore he gaue bread to his disciples: if he gaue bread, then not his bodie. M. Heskins saith, he so vseth the words, as though by the actes which the verbes expresse, nothing had beene done. Yes M. Heskins he chaunged the vse, but not the substance. But by the like sophisme (saith Maister Heskins, he might proue that he gaue no sacrament of his bodie. For that he deliuered which he tooke, but he tooke bread, no sacrament: therfore he deliuered bread, no sacrament.
                  But by his patience, this sophisme of his, is nothing like Maister Pilkintons argument. For in one proposition, he speaketh of the substance, in the other of another qualitie or affection beside the substance, as in this example: that which you bought in the shambles you haue eaten, but you bought cowe fleshe, therefore you haue eaten caulfes fleshe. Euerie childe seeth this followeth not. But if I speake of the substance in both alike, it followeth as thus. That which you bought in the market, you haue eaten, but you bought mutton, therfore you haue eaten mutton. Vpon the premises graunted, this argument followeth of necessitie, and such is the argument of Maister Pilkinton, which all the Papistes in Louayne can not answere.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The t
                        •
                     o and sixtieth Chapter abideth in the exposition of the same wordes by Rupertus, and Nicholaus Methonen.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     In this whole Chapter is nothing worth the reading, and much lesse the aunswering, for he doeth nothing but cite and vrge the sayings of these two late writers, of whose authoritie he knoweth we make none account, as there is no reason why we should, they being members of the Popish Church. For the auncient writers whome he nameth, their sayinges haue beene already weyghed and aunswered.
               
               
                  
                  The three and sixtieth Chapter, taryeth in the exposition of the same wordes by Innocentius & Germanus.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The authoritie of Pope Innocent the third, which called the Laterane Counsell,
                        Fulk.
                      in which transubstantiation was first decreede, must needes be of great credite with vs. But Germanus, bishop of Constantinople, the Popes sworne enimie, I marueile why hee is ioyned with the Pope. For that he saith, is small to M. Heskins purpose, and therefore he helpeth him out with Damascen: yet he confesseth his saying subiect to cauilling. For where he writeth, that in the sacrament, Dominus & conspicitur &c. Our Lorde is both seene and suffereth him selfe to be touched, by the fe
                           ••
                        full and holy mysteries, &c. and so sayeth Chrysostome, thou seest him, thou touchest him, thou eatest him, &c.
                  
                  Maister Heskins sayeth we reason (and so wee maye in deede) that we eat him, as we see him, which is onely by faith: But M. Heskins with profound Logike, wil aunswere this argument, that a thing is sayde to bee seene, when the outwarde formes are seene: and so Christe is seene, when the formes of bread and wine are seene. But by his fauour, a thing is seene: when the proper formes & accidents thereof are seene, but the forme or accidents of bread and wine are not the proper formes of Christes bodie, therefore Christes bodie is not seene by them, no more then I see a man, when I see the house wherein he is, or then I see a knife, when I see the close case or sheath wherein it is. And the words of Germanus can abyde no such boyish sophisme, for hee sayeth: Christ is seene by the fearefull and holie mysteries, but neyther bread nor wine by M. Heskins confession, & much lesse the accidēts of them are fearfull & holie mysteries, therfore the whole sacrament is so called, by which Christ is seene, & touched, and eaten, but with the eye, hand, and mouth, of faith.
               
               
                  The foure and sixtieth Chapter, sheweth the exposition of Petrue Çluniacensis & Bessarion vpon the same,
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  
                     In this Chapter, beside the sayings of this Dan Peter of Clunye & Bessarion, which for a Cardinals hatt in the counsell of Florence, forsooke the vnitie of the Greeke church, he maketh a short repetition of all the authors names & sayings, whom he hath cited vpō this text: This is my bodie, which because I haue aunswered at large, it were needelesse to recapitulate in this place. I trust the indifferent reader will confesse, that not one of the highher house hath giuen a cleare voyce on his syde, but all are most cleare against him.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The fiue and sixtieth Chapter, treateth of the bread, blessed, and giuen by Christ to the two disciples in Emaus, and proueth by Theophyl
                        •
                     st & Bed
                        •
                     , that it was the sacrament,
                  It shalbe easily graunted him, that not only these two whome he nameth of late time,
                        Fulk.
                      but also diuerse of the auncient doctours, are of opinion, that Christ did giue ye sacrament at Emaus, but yet it followeth not, that it was so. For no certeine circumstance of Scripture, can leade vs or them so to thinke. Beda in 24. Luke writeth thus: 
                        
                           •
                        erti mysterij causae, &c. It came to passe for the cause of a certein mysterie, that another shape shoulde bee shewed to them in him, and so they should not know him but in the breaking of bred▪ left any man should say, that he hath knowen Christ, if he bee no
                           •
                         partaker of his bodie, that is to say, of his Church, whose vnitie, the Apostle commendeth at the sacrament of the bread, saying: one bread, we many, are one bodie, that when he reached to them the blessed bread, their eyes were opened, that they might know him. This place indeed sheweth, yt Beda his opinion was, that ye sacrament was there giuen, but either for transubstantiation, or the real presence, or for the communion in one kinde, he sayth nothing. For the English church in his time knewe none of all these monsters.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The sixe & sixtieth Chapter, proueth the same by S. Augustine and Chrysostome.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     I sayd before, we confesse, that not Augustine onely, but other also of the fathers were of this opinion. The

place of Augustine hath ben alreadie cited & considered. I would also omit the place of Chrysostome, but that he gathereth further matter out of it, then the pretence of this Chapter. He is cited in Hom. 17. in Math. Quia de sanctis, &c. Because we haue begon to speake of holy things, it is not to be left vnspoken, but that sanctification is one thing, and the thing sanctified another: For that is a sanctification that sanctifieth another thing: but that which is sanctifyed cannot sanctifie another thing, although it selfe be sanctified. As for example, thou 
                           •
                        ignest the bread which thou eatest, as Paule saith, it is sanctifyed by the worde of God & by prayer. Thou hast sanctified it, thou hast not made it sanctification. But that which the priest giueth from his hand is not onely sanctified, but also it is sanctification, because that onely is not giuen which is seene, but also that which is vnderstoode. Of the sanctified breade therefore it is lawfull to cast to beastes, and giue it to infidels, because it doth not sanctifie the receiuer. But if that which is taken of the hande of the priest, were such, as that which is eaten at the table, all men would eate of the table, and no man receiue it of the priestes hands. Wherefore our Lord also did not onely blesse the bread in the waye, but gaue it with his hand to Cleophas & his fellowe. And Paul fasting did not onely blesse the bread, but also reached it with his hande to Luke, and the rest of his disciples.
                  
                  Three things M. Heskins noteth. First, that Chrysostome calleth the sacrament, not only a sanctified thing, but also sanctification it selfe. And here he would haue the aduersarie to answere him, where this sanctification resteth? in the bread, or in the priest. I answere in neither of both, but in Christ, which is the heauenly matter of ye sacrament receiued by faith: for if sanctification rested in the bread, then all they that receiue the bread should bee sanctified, but all they that receiue the bread, receiue not sanctification, neither be they sanctified, therefore sanctification resteth not in the breade: and so consequently, ye bodie of Christ is not in ye bread. And whereas M. Hesk. reasoneth, that ye priest giueth sanctification, I answere, yt is said, because he giueth the outward sacrament, as Iohn baptised, yet speaking properly of the ministerie of man,

he restraineth it to the washing of water. The seconde thing he would haue noted, is, that Christe deliuered the sacrament to Cleophas and his fellow, wherof, as Chrysostome hath no ground in the scripture, so that which he affirmeth, that Paule in the ship should minister the sacrament (which is the third thing M. Hesk. obserueth) is vtterly false, and confuted by the text. For his exhortation was to the whole multitude, whereof the greatest parte, and almost all, were infidels. And the text sayeth, that they did all receiue foode; & being satisfyed, cast the rest ouer borde to lighten the shippe. But the place, Actes 2. that they continued in the doctrine of the Apostles & communication, & breaking of bread & prayers: I confesse may well and aptly be vnderstood of the participation of the Lords table, & yet nothing lesse may be gathered out of it, then that horrible sacriledge of robbing the church of the Lords cupp, because bread is onely named, as in the next Chapter shalbe shewed.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The seuen and sixtieth Chapter, proueth by the scripture
                        •
                     , and practises in the last Chapter handled, that the Communion vnder one kinde is lawfull and good.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     It aunswereth to one parte of the challenge (he saith) to proue, that the communion was ministred within 600 yeres after Christe in one kinde onely. And this he will do verie easily. For he beginneth with Christ himselfe, whome moste impudently and blasphemously, he affirmeth to haue ministred the Communion in one kinde onely, to the disciples at Emaus. First, although diuerse of the olde writers are of opinion, and yet wthout asseueration, that Christe there gaue the sacrament, yet none of them is so bolde, to gather any such diuision of the sacrament out of that place. Secondly, notwithstanding their opinion, it is most probable, that hee neuer ministred the sacrament after his first institution thereof, not onely, because there is no mention thereof, but because he gaue that as the last pledge of his presence with them, immediatly before he departed from them. And

although after his resurrection hee appeared to them at sundrie times, by the space of fourtie dayes, eating and drinking with them, to shewe the certeintie of his resurrection, speaking of the kingdome of God: yet is there no worde of celebrating of the sacrament with them. And it is altogether vnlikely, that he would giue ye sacrament, the comfort of his absence, at his first returne againe to them, and that he woulde celebrate the same to two disciples, and not to the whole number of his Apostles, who had as great neede to be confirmed in faith, as those two.
                  Finally, if euer he had repeated the vse of ye sacrament, it is moste probable, he woulde haue done it immediatly before his assention, but then he did not (which S. Luke, who sheweth that storie exactly, would not haue omitted) therefore there is no likelihood, that he did it before. But admitt that he did then minister the communion, doth it followe because bread is onely named, therefore the cuppe was not giuen? But Maister Heskins woulde haue it proued, that the figure Synechdoche is here vsed, that is, part named for the whole. For profe, the institution of Christe, and practise of the church, for more then a thousand yeres after Christ, may serue a reasonable man.
                  Also the vsuall phrase of the scripture, which by bread meaneth whatsoeuer is ioyned with it to be receiued: as Math. 15. & Mark. 7. The disciples are accused for eating bread with vnwashed handes, &c. shall wee here exclude meat and drinke, because bread is onely named? Also, Marke the 3. they had no leysure to eat breade: & Luke 14. Christe came into the house of the Pharizee to eate bread. And Iohn. 6. You seeke mee not because you haue seene the signes, but because you haue eaten of ye breade and are satisfied. And 2. Cor. 9. He that giueth seede to the sower, shall minister bread for foode. And 2. Thess. 3. wee haue not eaten our breade freely. And in the same Chapter, the disordered persons are exhorted, to labour and eat their owne bread.
                  
                     In all these places and a great number more, breade onely is named, in which it were mere madnesse to affirme, that only bread is spoken of, & not meat or drink. So the whole supper of Christ cōsisting of bread & wine, for the outwarde or earthly parte: vnder the name of breade, the cuppe also is comprehended. Wherefore the practise of Christ is not contrarie to his institution, as M. Heskins most arrogantly, wickedly, and vnlearnedly affirmeth. The second reason he vseth is, that the institution perteineth onely to priestes, because Christ did then minister it onely to priests. But first, that is not proued nor like to be true: for, seeing our Sauiour Christe did minister the communion in the house of one of his disciples, with whom he did eat the passeouer, it is not like that he excluded him from the sacrament of the new testament, with whome he was partaker of the sacrament of the olde testament. For proofe that both he and his familie were partakers of the Passouer with him, it is manifest, that it was not possible for thirteene persons to eate vp a whole sheepe and other meat also at one meale. For it was a sheepe of a yeare olde, although it were a verie small one, and must be eaten with the head, feete & the purtenaunce, and nothing reserued vnto the morrowe. But graunt that onely the Apostles were partakers of the first institution by the same reason, yt the one part of the sacrament perteined to them only, the other parte also might be left to them onely, and so the people should haue neither of both kindes, because onely priestes had both kindes deliuered vnto them.
                  Further he sayeth, the doctrine of Saint Paule is not sufficient to proue, that the sacrament ought to bee ministred in both kindes: for Saint Paule doth but onely set foorth the institution without an exclusiue, excluding all other maners but this. O shamelesse dogge: is not the institution of Christe an exclusiue of all other manners? take example of baptisme, is it lawfull to baptise with any other lycour then water? into any other name, then the name of the Father, the Sonne▪ and the holy Ghost? yea,

it is sayed in the Actes, that the Apostles baptised in the name of Iesus Christe: and yet no man will saye, yt they brake the institution of Christe, and baptised onely in the name of Christe, excluding the father and the holy ghoste. Euen so it is sayde, they continued in breaking of breade, shall wee not vnderstande this after the institution, as well as the other? Againe, if the institution of Christ, had not heene an exclusiue of all other manners, howe doth the Apostle, by the institution of Christ, reproue another manner brought in by the Corinthians? Finally, when the holy Ghost by Saint Paule, commaundeth euery Christian man and woman to trye themselues, and so not onely to eate of that breade, but also to drinke of that cupp: what Lucifer is that, which wil oppose him selfe against the flatt commaundement of the holie ghost, 1. Cor. 11. and saye, the lay people shall not drinke of that cuppe, or may be without the cupp well ynough? But the doctrine of the Catholike church (as he sayeth) is, that the whole sacrament is in either of both kindes, the bloude is in the bodie, and the bodie in the bloud. But this is neither the doctrine of Christ, nor the doctrine of the church of Christ. For Christ to shewe, that he is a perfect nourishment vnto vs, which of necessitie consisteth of meate and drinke, and neither of both can be lacking, for the nourishment of our bodies: hath instituted his sacrament both in bread and drinke, to testifie vnto vs, that wee are perfectly fedd in him, and therefore hath deuided the sacrament into two signes, the one to signifie his bodie, as meate, the other to represent his bloud, as drinke: and therefore confounded be he, ye confoundeth these things, which his heauenly wisedome hath thus mercifully distinguished. Iustinus also a moste auncient writer of the church affirmeth, that the sacrament consisteth of a drye and moyst nourishment, in Dialog. Cum. Tryphone aduersus Iudęos.
                  
                  And euen this verie diuision of the sacrament, sufficiently confuteth both transubstantiation & the carnal presence. For, if he had purposed to giue vs his naturall

bodie in the forme of bread, or otherwise in the bread, he would not haue deuided his bloud from his bodie. But euen hereby he taught vs, that hee spake of an heauenly, mysticall, and spirituall manner of eating his bodie, and drinking his bloud by faith, and not of a swallowing or gulping in of the same at our mouth and our throte. But the cuppe (saith Maister Heskins) is the bodie of Christ, and howe is it consecrated? by these words, This is my bloud. Why? where is nowe the plaine wordes of scripture, where bloud is taken for a whole bodie? But seeing Christ sayth further, This is my bloud which is shed for you, and that bloud, which was shed for vs, was separated from his bodie, therefore this bloud in ye cuppe is separated from his bodie. And in verie deede, the mysterie of the cuppe is sett forth, in that he sayeth, his bloud was shedd for vs, and not as it remayned in the veynes of his bodie: for, not his bloud in his bodie, but the shedding of his bloud, hath washed our consciences from dead workes, to serue the liuing God. So the breaking of his bodie on the crosse, hath made it a spirituall meat for vs to feede vppon, and therefore he saith: this is my bodie which is giuen for you. And so sayeth Hesychius verie well of the crosse, Quae etiam superimpositam Dominicam carnem esibilem hominibus reddit: nisi enim superimposita fuisset cruci, nos corpus Christi nequaquam mysticè perciperemus. The crosse maketh our Lordes fleshe layde vpō it eatable of men: for except it had been layde vpō the crosse, we should not receiue mystically the bodie of Christ in Leu. lib. 2. Cap. 6.
                  
                  But M. Heskins by miserable detorting of a worde or two, woulde make the auncient fathers patrones of his monstrous sacriledge, as though they taught whole Christ to be vnder eche kinde, of which opinion, there is not one title to be found in all their workes. First, Cyprian de Cana Domini, Panis iste communis in carnem & sanguinem Domini mutatus, pro
                           •
                        urat vitam. This common bread being changed into the bodie and bloud of our Lorde, procureth life. But here Maister Heskins playeth his olde parte most impudently,

falsifying the wordes of Cyprian, by adding Domini, and leauing out that which followeth, and maketh all out of doubt, that Cyprian speaketh not here of the sacramentall bread, but of common breade. His wordes are these: Panis iste communis in carnem & sanguinem mutatus, procurat vitam & incrementum corporibus, ideo
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ex consueto rerum effectu fidei nostrae adiuta infirmitas, sensibili argumento edocta est, visibilibus sacramentis inesse vitae ęternae effectum, & non tam corporali, quàm spirituali transitione nos Christo vnitos. This common breade being chaunged into fleshe and bloud, procureth life and increase to our bodies: therefore the weakenesse of our faith being holpen by the accustomed effect of thinges, is taught by a sensible argument, that in the visible sacrament, is the effect of eternall life, and that wee are vnited to Christ, not so much by a bodily, as by a spirituall transition. You see therefore, howe shamefully hee abuseth Cyprian.
                  Who seeing hee was so vehement against them that vsed water onely in the cuppe, would he (think you) allowe, that neither wine nor water shoulde be giuen? Especially, when hee giueth a generall rule, that the institution of Christe bee precisely obserued, and that nothing else is to be done concerning the cuppe, then that Christe him selfe did before vs, lib. 
                     
                        •
                     . Ep. 3. Caecilio. But are Papistes ashamed of forgerie, to mainteine their false doctrine of transubstantiation?
                  After Cyprian, hee depraueth the wordes of Irenaeus lib. 5. Calicem qui est creatura suum corpus confirmauit. 
                     
                        The cuppe which is a creature, he confirmed to be his bodie: but it followeth, which he craftely omitteth, Ex quo nostra auget corpora. Quando ergo & mixtus Calix & factus panis percipit verbum Dei, fit Eucharistia sanguinis, & corporis Christi, &c. Of which hee doeth increase our bodies. When then the mixed cuppe and breade that is made, receiueth the worde of God, the Eucharistie or sacrament of the bodie and bloud of Christe is made.
                  
                  Whether there bee eclipsis or synechdoche in the former

wordes, thou mayst see plainly here, that hee meant not to exclude the bread, but that they both together make the sacrament. But Maister Heskins alledgeth further out of Irenaeus: Sanguis non est nisi a venis, & carnibus & reliqua quae est secundùm hominem substantia. Bloud is not but of vaines and fleshe, and other substance of man. By these wordes which he vseth to proue, that Christe had a true bodie, because he had bloud, M. Heskins like a wise man would proue that wheresoeuer bloud is, there must be fleshe, and vaines also, wherein all the pudding wiues of Louayne will holde against him. In deede, bloude commeth from vaynes and fleshe, (as Irenęus sayeth) but it doth not followe, that where bloud is, there must be vaines and fleshe. As for the saying of Bernarde, wee are as little moued withall, as M. Heskins with Melancthon, to whome in his brauerie, he sayeth vale, and will cleaue to the substantiall doctrine of the fathers for the communion in one kinde, of which he is not able to bring one. But to conclude this Chapter, If he be asked why Christe did institute the sacrament vnder both kindes, if it bee sufficient to receiue one: he aunswereth, to frequent the solemne memoriall of his death and passion. But all Christian men ought to frequent the solemne memoriall of his death and passion, therefore he did institute it, for all Christian men to receiue vnder both kindes. And so S. Paule concludeth, as often as you eate of this bread, and drink of this cuppe, you shewe the Lordes death vntil he come. Wherefore the scripture is directly contrarie to the sacrilegious decree of the Papistes, of receiuing the sacrament in one kinde onely.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The eyght and sixtieth Chapter, proueth the same receipt vnder one kinde to be lawfull, by the auncient practise of the Church.
                  Before these substantiall proues come in, he taketh vpon him to aunswer the obiections of the aduersaries.
                        Fulke.
                      And first of the Bohemnians, who vsed that place out of the sixt of S. Iohn, Except you eat the fleshe of the sonne of

man, and drinke his bloud, you shall haue no life in you. These & such like textes out of that Chapter, must needes be inuincible argumentes against the Papistes, which holde that those sayinges are to bee vnderstoode of the sacrament, first and principally. And otherwise, for as much as the Lordes supper is a seale and sacrament of that doctrine and participation of the fleshe and bloude of our sauiour Christ, which he there teacheth: we may necessarily gather, yt seeing he ioyneth eating and drinking in ye thing, we may not omitt either of them in the signe.
                  And where as ye Papistes would shift off that matter with their concomitans of bloud with the bodie, it will not serue, seeing he requireth drinking, as necessarily as eating, euen as he is a perfect foode: and therefore, is not meate without drinke, but both meate and drinke.
                  Therefore, diuerse counsels, and specially Bracarense tertium Capitul. 1. and it is in the decrees De Con. Dis. 2. cum omne, as it reformed many corruptions, that were crept into the Church about the ministration of the cup, so this was one, which they reproued, that they vsed to dippe the breade in the cup, and so deliuer it to the people. 
                        Illud verò quod pro complemento communionis intinctam tradunt eucharistiam populis, nec hoc probatum ex Euangelio testimonium receperunt, vbi Apostolis corpus suum commendauit & sanguinem, Seorsim enim panis & seorsim calicis commendatio memoratur. Nam intinctū panem alijs Christum praebuisse non legimus, excepto illo tantùm discipulo, quem intincta buccella magistri proditorem ostenderet, non quae sacramenti huius institutionem signaret. That also is to be condemned, that to make perfect the communion, they deliuer to the people, the sacrament dipped in the cupp, neither haue they receiued this testimonie brought out of the Gospell, where he deliuered to his Apostles both his bodie & his bloud, for seuerally of the breade, and seuerally of the cupp, the deliuerie is mentioned. For we read not that Christ gaue dipped bread to others, except that disciple only, whome the dipped soppe shewed to be the traitour of his maister, but did not set forth the institution of this sacrament.
                     
Note here the iudgement of this Counsell, that the institution of Christ is to be obserued. Secondly, that they are condemned, that receiue not the testimonie of that first institution, as an onely rule to followe in the ministration of the sacrament, as the Papistes do. Thirdly, that the bloud must not be deliuered in the bread, and the body in the cuppe, but seuerally the breade, and seuerally the cup must be deliuered. Fourthly, that the communion is not perfect, without both kindes, which euen they confessed, that dipped the bread in the wine, and so gaue it foorth. Fiftly, consider if this Counsel could not allowe the ioyning of both kinds in one soppe, what would they haue thought of taking one kinde cleane away?
                  But to follow Maister Heskins. The second obiection, and that presseth him hardest, is the saying of Gelasius bishop of Rome: That the diuision of one and the same mysterie cannot be done without great sacriledge. To auoyde this most manifest and cleare authoritie, he thinketh it sufficient to shewe, that the decree was made against other heretiques, namely, the Manichees & Eutychians, as though it were sacriledge in one kinde of heretiques, and lawful in an other. He saith, the Manichees, to cloake their heresie, would dissemblingly receiue the breade, and would not receiue the cup, bicause they held that Christ had but a fantasticall body, without bloud. And the Eutychians ioyned with them, which receiued the breade as a sacrament of the diuine body of Christe, in which was no bloud.
                  Concerning the Eutychians, there might bee some such fantasie, if they ioyned with the Manichees in this point, which presently I doe not remember that I haue read. But concerning the Manichees, it is certaine, there was an other cause of their refusall of the cup, bicause they condemned all drinking of wine. And of them it seemeth, that Leo spake, Serm. 4. de quadra. which M. Heskins rehearseth. Abducunt se &c. They withdrawe them selues from the sacrament of the health of man, and as they deny Christe our Lorde to be borne in the veritie of our flesh, so they doe not beleeue,

that he did verily die, and rise againe, and therefore they condemne the day of our health and of our gladnesse, with the sadnesse of their fasting. And when to couer their infidelitie, they are so bold to be present at our mysteries, they so temper them selues in the communion of the sacraments, that sometimes they are more safely hidden. With vnworthy mouth they receiue the body of Christe, but the bloud of our redemption they altogether refuse to drinke: which thing we will your holinesse to vnderstand for this cause, that suche kinde of men may be knowne to you and by these tokens, and that they whose sacrilege and dissimulation shall be found out being noted and bewrayed, by the Priestly authoritie, may be banished the societie of the Saints. This M. Hes. confesseth to be spoken against the Manichees. And I wold he would further note, that Leo chargeth them with dissimulation ioyned with sacriledge, which yet is more tollerable, then the Papistes open impudencie and violent sacriledge. But here he noteth a plaine place for the proclamer, in that Leo saith: with vnworthy mouth they receiue the body of Christe, but that Leo so calleth ye sacrament of the body of Christ, which after a certaine manner is the body of Christe, and not simply or absolutely, it appeareth by that which followeth imediatly, that those heretiques refuse to receiue the bloud of our redemption, whereby hee meaneth the cup and the sacrament of his bloud, for if hee should not meane the outward sacramentes, but the body and bloud of Christ indeed, how could his body be receiued without his bloud? Therefore it is manifest hee speaketh of the signes and not of the things signified euen by their owne rule of concomitance.
                  And nowe followeth the whole saying of Gelasius, Comperimus autem &c. We haue found out of a certaintie, that certaine men after they haue receiued a portion of the holy body, do abstaine from the cup of the holy bloud, who (bicause I knowe not by what superstition they are taught to be withholden) let them without all doubt receiue the whole sacramentes, or else let them bee forbidden from the whole. For the diuision of one and the same mysterie, can not be done without great sacriledge. Maister Heskins to shift off this place, saith, it was

written against the Manichees. But that is altogether vnlike, for then Gelasius would not haue saide, he knewe not by what superstition they were led, for he knewe well the blasphemies of the Manichees. Wherefore it is certaine, they were other such superstitious people, as the Papistes be nowe. But if it were written against the Manichees, the Papistes following their steppes, shall gaine nothing, but proue them selues to ioyne with the Manichees.
                  Secondly Maister Heskins saith, the diuision of one mysterie, is not the diuiding of the cuppe from the breade, but of the body of Christ from his bloud, which the Manichees did. Although hee bee worthie to be knocked in the head with a mall, that will not vnderstand Gelasius, to speake of the sacrament, yet there is no shadowe of reason to shrowde him most impudently affirming the contrarie. For the Manichees did not diuide the body of Christe from his bloud, but vtterly denyed him to haue either body or bloud. Againe, when hee saide immediately before, that they should eyther receiue the whole sacramentes, or abstaine from the whole, hee addeth this for a reason. For the diuision (sayth hee) of one and the same mysterie, can not bee done without greate sacriledge. Hee therefore that denyeth him to speake one title of diuiding the one kinde from the other, is woorthie to bee diuided in peeces, and to haue his partes with hypocrites, where shall bee weeping and gnashing of teeth. But as though he had not passed impudencie her selfe alreadie, hee falleth on rayling against the proclamer, that had not brought foorth past halfe a score wordes of this place, suppressing the rest for very shame, they make so much against him. Surely, in all reasonable mens consciences, what so euer hee left out of this place, hee left the aduauntage of his owne cause, and no title againste him.
                  But let vs see here what Maister Heskins, a man of inuention passing Sinon the Gręcian, hath gathered out of it. There bee two thinges in this place plainely

taught: The first is, the reall presence of Christes body and bloud, in that he so reuerently calleth the sacrament vnder one kinde, the portion of the Lords body, and the other he calleth the cup of the holy bloud. For the spiritual bloud is not contained in external or material vessels. No syr, but the sacramēt of his natural bloud is, wherof he speaketh: as it is manifest by the words immediatly before, the portion of the Lords body, for his natural body is not broken into portions, but the bread which is a sacrament thereof, is broken, and therby is shewed, what wicked men receiue both in this saying of Gelasius, & in the other of Leo, not the naturall body of Christe, which cannot be receiued in portions, but a portion of the sacramental bread, which is therfore called the body of Christ, bicause it is so indeed to them that receiue it worthily, & is consecrated to that vse, that it may be the cōmunication of the body of Christ. And as it hath ben often shewed, sacraments beare the names of the very things wherof they are sacramēts. The second thing that he teacheth (saith M. Hes.) is, that he calleth not these two kindes, Sacramentum, a sacrament, but, Sacramenta, sacramentes, in the plural number signifying therby, that each of them is a whole sacrament. O new Diuinitie! thē ye Papistes haue eight sacraments. But are you such a prudent gatherer M. Hes? it appeareth you wil lease none aduantage for the taking vp. I commend you. But for all yt, doth not your Authour Leo call both kindes sacramentum a sacrament? and that is more (for it is too too childish, to reason of the singular number) doth not Gelasius call the sacrament in both kindes, Vnum idémque mysterium, one and the same mysterie? And when he vseth ye plural number, the ground of your Achillean argument, doth he not say, Integra sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur. Let them take the whole sacramentes, or else let them be kept from the whole, signifying, that they which tooke the bread onely, tooke but halfe the sacramentes, and none took the whole, but they that tooke the cup also.
                  But nowe for the practise of the Primitiue Church to haue receiued in one kinde: he saith, that in time of persecution, the Priest deliuered them of the sacrament wrapped

in fine linnen clothes to carie home with them, and to receiue it secretly by them selues, and this could bee none other, but the sacrament vnder the fo
                        •
                     ne of breade. Admit it were so, that they caried home the sacrament, yet it followeth not, but they might as well carie the wine in a faire pot, as they caried the breade in a faire cloth. And although Tertulliā writing to his wife, name bread only, yet doth it not followe, but that he comprehendeth the cup also. The wordes of Tertullian are before rehearsed and answered, Lib. 1. cap. 24. & 27.
                  Next is brought in Basil. Episto. ad Caesareant patriciam. Illud autem &c. As for that to be a grieuous thing in the times of persecution, any man to be inforced to receiue the communion with his owne hand, the Priest or Deacon not being present, it is more then nedeth to proue, for bicause the same thing is by a long custome, and by the very vse of things established. For all they that in the wildernesse lead a solitarie life, where there is no Priest, keeping the communion at home, communicate of them selues. But in Alexandria and Ae
                           •
                        ypt, euery one of the people for the most part, haue the communion in their owne house. For when the Priest doth consecrate the sacrifice and distribute it, we must well beleeue to participate and receiue it. For in the Church the Priest giueth part, and he that taketh it receiueth it with all libertie, and putteth it to his mouth with his owne hand It is therfore the same thing in vertue, whether a man take one part of the Priest, or many parts together. Of the credite and authoritie of this Epistle, which being cited in the name of Saint Basil, is not to be found in all his workes, I haue spoken before sufficiently, as also of the reseruation of the sacrament gathered out of it in the first booke cap. 27. But for the communion in one kinde, I see nothing that he saith, sauing that Maister Heskins gathereth, that Such small portions of wine will not be kept in those hote countries conueniently in their own kind such long time, as they were forced to reserue the sacrament in the wildernes and else where. But I aunswere him, that such strong wine as they haue in those hote countries, will bee kept longer from sowring, then the breade will bee from moulding, and therefore his gathering is altogether fond & ridiculous.

                     But now you shall heare a more plaine testimoine for this receipt vnder one kinde, if you will hearken to S. Cyprian. He is cited In sermone de Lapsis, a long saying & to litle, yea to no purpose at all. Praesente ac teste meipso, &c. Heare what came to passe, my selfe beeing present and witnesse. The parentes of a childe flying by chaunce, while for feare they tooke no good aduisement leaft their young daughter vnder the cherishing of a nource, the nource brought her so left, vnto the Magistrates. They before an Idole where the people were gathered, because for her age she could yet eate no flesh, gaue vnto her bread mixed with wine, which remained also of the sacrifice of them that perish. Afterwarde the mother receiued her daughter. But the litle mayde could no more speake and declare the offence, that was committed, then vnderstand it before and forbidde it. Through ignorance therfore it fell out that her mother brought her in with her, whyle we were sacrificing. But truely the girle beeing among the Saintes, not abiding our prayer and supplication, sometime was constrained to crie out, sometime with vehement greefe of minde was tossed here and there, euen as though a tormentor compelled her, the ignorant soule, by such tokens as she could, acknowledged the conscience of her fact in those yong and tender yeres. But after the solemnities beeing accomplished, the Deacon began to offer the cup to them that were present, and when the rest had receiued, and her place was next, the little one by the instinct of Gods Maiestie, turned away her face, pressed her mouth with her lippes stopped, refused the cuppe. Yet the Deacon persisted, and though it were against her will, powred in somewhat of the sacrament of the cuppe. Then followed belking and vomite. In a bodie, and a mouth that was defiled, the Eucharistie could not remaine. The drinke sanctified in the bloud of our Lord, brake out of her polluted bowels, &c. Out of this Historie, Maister Heskins gathereth two thinges. First, that the sacrament in that time was ministred to infantes which was in deede a great abuse, contrarie to the worde of God. Secondly, that this childe receiued onely the cup, which is false, for though she was not so troubled at the receipt of the bread, yet it followeth not that she receiued no bread, but contrariwise Cyprian saith, the Eucharistie (by whiche wordes the fathers alwayes vnderstand the

whole sacrament) could not remaine in her bodie. And whereas he reasoneth foolishly, that if she had receiued the bread, she should like wise haue beene troubled: he must vnderstand, that when God worketh a miracle, he taketh times and occasions at his pleasure. And it is like he would not discouer her pollution that come by bread and wine, before she had receiued both bread and wine as the sacrament. If I should vrge vpon this place, as the scoole men doe, whether this that was vomited, was the bloud of Christ, and what should be done with it, or what was done with it in this storie, I should trouble him more then he could easily answere.
                  Another tale he telleth out of Sozomenus. Eccl. hist. lib. 8. Cap. 5. Ioanne Constantinopolitanum, &c. When Iohn Chrysostome did very well gouerne the Church of Constantinople, a certeine man of the Macedonian heresie, had a wife of the same opinion. When this man had heard Iohn teaching what was to bee thought of God, he praysed his doctrine, and exhorted his wife to be of the same minde with him. But when she did more obey the words of noble women, then his conuersation, and after many admonitions her husband had profited nothing: Except (quod he) thou be a cōpaniō with me in Diuine matters, thou shalt not be hereafter a partaker of liuing with me. When the woman heard this, & promised her consent dissemblingly, she cōmunicated the matter with a certeyne maide seruant, which shee iudged to be trustie vnto her, and vseth her seruice to deceiue her husband. And about the time of the mysteries, (they that be receiued to them know what I say) she keping that she had receiued, fell downe as though she would pray. Her maide, standing by, giueth her priuily, that which she brought in her hand with her, which thing, when it was put to her teeth, it congeled into a stone. The woman beeing astonnied fearing least any euil should happen to her, for that thing whiche came to passe from God, made hast to the Bishop, and bewraying her selfe, sheweth the stone, hauing yet vpon it, the markes of her bit, and shewing an vnknowen matter, and a wonderful colour, and also desiring pardon with teares, promised that she would agree with her husband. And if this matter seeme to any man to be incredible, this stone is a witnesse which is kept to this day among the Iewels of the Churche of

Constantinople. If this storie be true, as it is no article of our beleefe, yet proueth it not, that the communion was ministred in bread only, to all the rest, that would receiue the cuppe, although I wote not what was turned into a stone, before the time came she should receiue the cuppe. If M. Heskins will vrge, she could not haue any thing to conuey into her mouth in steede of the wine, I answere, she might easily counterfet the drinking, by kissing the cuppe, and so letting it passe from her, without tasting thereof. Wherefore this is but a blind and vnreasonable coniecture of Maister Heskins, that the sacrament was ministred in one kinde, because she that had dissembled in the receipt of one kinde, was punished with depriuation from both kindes.
                  The last reason he vseth, Is that it is testified by learned men, that the manner of receiuing vnder one kinde, which is vsed in all the Latine Church vpon good Friday, on which day the priest receiueth the hoste consecrated vpon maundie Thursday, hath been so vsed from the primitiue Church. 
                     But what learned men they be, except such as him selfe, and what proofes they haue of this vsage, he sayeth not so much as halfe a word. The whole matter standeth vpon his owne credite. But if he, and all the learned of that side, should fast from good Friday vntill they haue shewed proofe of such an vse in ye primitiue church, (not as they vse to fast in Lent,) but from all manner of nourishment, there would not one learned Papist be left aliue on gang Monday to shew what proofes they haue found. Thou hast seene (Reader) what his reasons and authorities are, iudge of the answers according to thy discretion.
               
               ¶ The end of the second Booke.
               
            
            
               
               THE THIRD BOOKE OF MAISTER HESKINS PARLEAment repealed by W. Fulke.
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The first Chapter entereth by Preface into the first text of S. Paule, that toucheth the sacrament, and expoundeth it according to the letter.
                  
                     TThe Preface is out of Didymus, that diuine matters are to be handled with reuerence,
                        Fulk.
                      and considering the difficultie of the scriptures by Hierome, that in matters of doubt, recourse must be had, by Irenęus his aduise, vnto the most auncient Churches, in which the Apostles were conuersant. In so much that Irenaeus saith: Libro 3. Cap. 4. Quid autem, &c. And what if the Apostles, had left vs no writinges, ought we not to haue followed the order of tradition which they deliuered to them to whome they had committed the Churches? Wherevpon Maister Heskins gathereth, that not onely for matters conteined in scripture, but also for traditions vnwritten in the holie scriptures, the fathers are to be credited. But he goeth farre from Irenaeus minde, who confuted the heretiques both by the scriptures, and by the authoritie of the moste auncient Churches, whose traditions must haue beene all our institution, if there had ben no scriptures: But seeing yt scriptures inspired of God by his gratious prouidence, are left vnto vs, al traditions are to be examined by them, & that is twise proued (after Irenaeus minde,) whiche is proued both by the scriptures, and by the authoritie of the Churches. Otherwise the scriptures are sufficient of them selues. 2. Tim. 3. And no tradition or authoritie is to be receiued which is repugnant or contrarie vnto them. The text of Saint Paule, that he speaketh, is written, 1. Cor. 10. Brethren I would not haue you ignorant, that all our fathers were vnder the cloude, and all passed through the sea, and were all baptised by Moses in the cloude and in the sea, and did all eate the same spirituall meate, and did all drinke the same spirituall drinke, for they

dranke of the same spirituall rocke, which followed them, and the rocke was Christe. Where it is to be noted, that Maister Heskins in steede of the same spirituall meate, and the same spirituall drinke, translateth one spiritual meate, and one spirituall drinke, as though the sense were, that the Fathers did all eate & drinke of one spiritual kind of meate and drinke, but not of the same that we doe. Which is directly contrarie to the meaning of the Apostle, as it appeareth by many reasons, whereof some I will set downe, because this one text of scripture, if it be rightly vnderstoode, is sufficient to determine all the controuersies that are betweene vs and the Papistes, concerning the sacramentes. First therefore the argument of Saint Paule is of no force to conuince the Corinthians, except he shewe, that the fathers of the olde Testament, had the same sacraments in substance, that we haue, and yet pleased not God by meanes of their wicked life, no more shall we, hauing the same sacramentes if we followe their wicked conuersation. Secondly, except he had meant to make the fathers equal vnto vs in the outwarde signes or sacramentes of Gods fauour, he would rather haue taken his example of circumcision, and the pascal lambe, which all men knowe to haue beene their principal sacraments: then of their baptisme and spiritual foode, which in them was so obscure, that except the spirite of God had by him reuealed it vnto vs it had beene very harde for vs to haue gathered. Thirdly, when he saith the fathers were all baptised, there is no doubt, but that he meaneth, that they all receiued the sacrament of the bodie and bloud of Christ, for there were no reason, why they should receiue the one sacrament, rather then the other. Fourthly, seeing the Apostle saith expressely, they did eate the same spirituall meate, and drinke the same spirituall drinke, and after doth precisely affirme, that they dranke of the same rocke, which was Christe, it is moste euident, that their spiritual meate was our spiritual meate, namely the bodie of Christ, and their spiritual drinke was our spirirituall drinke, namely the bloud of Christ.
                  
                     And this place ouerthroweth transubstantiation, the carnal presence, the cōmunion vnder one kinde, the grace of the worke wrought, the fiue false sacramentes, the Popish consecration, the Popish reseruation for adoration, and in a manner, what so euer the Papistes teache of the sacraments contrarie to the truth. For if we haue no prerogatiue aboue the fathers concerning ye substance & outward signes of the sacramentes, then we receiue the bodie and bloud of Christ in the sacramentes, none otherwise then they did before his bodie was conceiued of the virgine Marie, and that is spiritually by faith, not carnally with our mouth. The rest of this Chapter is consumed in rehearsing out of Chrysostome, the general purpose of the Apostle in these wordes, which we haue shewed before, & it is most plaine, by the text as it followeth: Finally in declaring what temporall benefites the Israelites receyued by the cloude, the sea, manna, and the water of the rocke. But that which is principall, and for which cause the Apostle alledgeth their example, namely, for the spirituall grace that was testified by these outwarde signes, Maister Heskins speaketh neuer a worde.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The second Chapter sheweth what these foure thinges done in the olde Law, did figure in the newe Lawe.
                  In this Chapter he laboureth to shewe, that these sacraments of theirs,
                        Fulk.
                      were not in deed the very same in substance, that ours are, but onely figures of them. And for this purpose, he citeth diuers authorities of the fathers, especially Chrysostome, and Augustine, which cal them figures of our sacraments, whereof we will not striue with him. But he doth not consider, yt in so calling them, they compare not the substance, or thinges signified by these auncient sacramentes, with the substance or thinges signified by our sacraments, but the outward signes of theirs with the substance and things signified by ours. As it appeareth in sundrie places of S. Augustine, whose authorities in this Chapter he citeth: which affirmeth that the

fathers also receiued, not only ye signes of our sacraments, as bare figures, but also the grace and substance of them, whereof they were no counterfet seales. Neither doeth Chrysostome or Origen say any thing to the contrarie, for Chrysostme saith, that as all sortes of men, riche and poore were vnder the cloude, passed through the sea, and were fedde with the same spirituall foode, so in our sacramentes of baptisme and the supper, there is no respect of persons, but all members of the Church are partakers of them alike.
                  And Origen saying that: Baptisme was then in a darke manner, in the clowde, and in the sea, but nowe in cleare manner regeneration is in water and the holie Ghoste: Doeth both affirme the same sacrament to haue beene then, which is nowe, namely baptisme, and also sheweth the onely difference betweene this and that, when he sayeth, that was after a darke manner and this after a cleare manner. But Augustine is moste playne in many places, namely: Tract. in Ioan. 26. speaking of the bread of life, in the sixt of Ihon, he sayeth: Hunc panem significauit manna, hunc panem significauit altare Dei. 
                     
                        Sacramenta illa fuerunt: in signis diuersa sunt, sed in re, quae significatur, paria sunt. Apostolum audi. Nolo enim (inquit) vos ignorare fratres, quia patres nostri omnes sub nube fuerunt, & omnes mare transierunt, & omnes per Mosen Baptizati sunt in nube & in mari: & omnes eandem escam spiritualem manducauerunt: spiritualem vtique eandem, nam corporalem alteram: quia illi manna, nos aliud: spiritualem verò, quam nos. This bread did manna signifie, this bread did the altar of God signifie. Those were sacramentes: in signes they are diuerse, but in the thing which is signified, they are equall. Heare what the Apostle saith. For I would not haue you ignorant brethren (sayeth he) that our fathers were all vnder the cloude, and all passed the sea, and were all baptised by Moses in the cloude and in the sea, and they did all eate the same spirituall meate: I say the same spirituall meate, for they did eate another corporall meate, for they did eate manna, and we another thing: but they

did eate the same spirituall meate that we doe.
                  
                  
                     Likewise in his exposition of the 77: Psalme vpon this very text in hand, he saith thus: Idem itaque in mysterio cibus & potus illorum, qui noster, Sed significatione idem non specie: quia idem ipse Christus illis in Petra figuratus: nobis in carne manifestatus. The same meate and drinke in mysterie was theirs, which is ours: but the same by signification, not in cleare manner: because the selfe same Christe was figured to them in the rocke, whiche is manifested in the flesh vnto vs.
                  
                  
                     The same S. Augustine also in his booke De vtililate poenitentiae Cap. 1. writeth thus, vpon the same text. Eundem inquit cibum spiritualem manducauerunt: Quid est eundem? Nisi quia cundem quene nos. They did eate (saith he) the same spirituall meate, what is the same? but the same that we eate? and a little after. Eundem (inquit) cibum spiritualem manducauerunt. Suffeceras vt diceret: cibum spiritualem manducauerunt: Eundem inquit: eundem non inuenio quomodo intelligam, nisi eum quem manducamus & nos. Quid ergò, ait aliquis
                              •
                            Hoc erat manna illud quod ego nunc accipio? Ergo nihil modò venit si antè iam fuit. Ergo euacuatum est scandalum Crucis? Quomodo ergo eundem, nisi quod addidit spiritualem.
                      They did eate (saith he) the same spirituall meate. It had suffised that he had said, they did eate a spirituall meate: he saith the same. I can not finde, how I should vnderstande the same, but the same whiche we doe eate. What then sayeth one? Was that Manna the same thing that I doe nowe receiue? Then is there nothing come nowe, if it were then before. Then is the slaunder of the crosse made voide? Therefore how should it be the same, but that he added spirituall? I coulde cite other places out of Augustine, but that I will not cloie the Reader, with two many at once.
                  
                  "The last parte of the Chapter, would proue, that the baptisme of Iohn was not the baptisme of CHRIST, wherevppon I will not stande, because it is an other controuersie, out of the purpose of the booke, onely I will note these grosse absurdities: that hee denyeth

the baptisme of Iohn to be the very baptisme, and then it followeth, that CHRISTE was not baptised with the very baptisme, who was baptised of Iohn.
                  Secondly, he denieth, that sinnes were remitted in the Baptisme of Iohn, whiche is directly contrarie to the Scripture: Luke. 3. verse 3. He alledgeth Chrysostome for his proofe, but the blinde buzzarde can not see the difference betweene the ministerie of Iohn in his baptisme, and the worke of CHRISTE in the same, whiche maketh him with his fellowes to imagine a difference of baptismes, by as good reason as they might make a difference betweene the Supper whiche was celebrated by CHRISTE him selfe, and that whiche was ministered by his Apostles.
                  Finally, where the Apostle sayeth expressely, that the Fathers were baptised, hee is so bolde as to say, they were not baptised in deede, but onely receyued a bare figure of baptisme, whiche is as muche for the Apostles purpose, as if hee hadde saide nothing at all.
               
               
                  The thirde Chapter expoundeth the residue of the texte: Et omnes candem escam spiritualem, &c.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  First he declareth that this one meate, whiche the Fathers did eate, was Manna,
                        Fulke.
                      and that hee proueth by the authoritie of Saint Chrysostome, and Saint Augustine, as his manner is to heape vppe testimonies of the Fathers, where no neede is of any proofe.
                  Secondly, he determineth wherefore it is called spirituall meate, and the water that flowed out of the rocke, spirituall drinke. Namely, because it was giuen vnto them miraculously, and not naturally, and for none other cause, whiche is altogether vntrue: for as it hath beene prooued before, both out of the text, and confirmed by the iudgement of Saint Augustine, manna was called spirituall meate, because it fedde the faithfull, not onely bodily, but also spiritually, with

the bodie of CHRISTE, and the water with his bloud. But Maister Heskins seemeth to builde vpon Chrysostomes authoritie, who in 1. Cor. 10. writeth thus. Quanuis, &c. Although those thinges that were giuen were perceiued by sense: yet they were giuen spiritually, not according to the nature of consequences, but according to the grace of the gifte. By these wordes Chrysostome meaneth, that although Manna and the water were sensible things, yet had they a spirituall signification and vertue giuen with them: for as they were not giuen by the ordinarie course of nature, but by speciall Diuine power: so they had more then a naturall propertie of nourishment, and were to be esteemed according to the speciall grace, by whiche they were giuen. But Maister Heskins will acknowledge nothing in this miracle of manna, but the feeding of their bodies, nor in the water of the rocke, but the quenching of their thirst, and seruing their bodily necessitie. In whiche grosse madnesse, hee maketh no difference betweene the faithfull, and their brute beastes, whose thirst and bodily necessitie, that water did satisfie, as muche as their Maisters.
                  So that if the water bee called spirituall drinke, only because it was miraculously giuen, this horrible absurditie will followe, that the cattell whiche dranke thereof, did also drinke of the spirituall rocke whiche followed them, which rocke was Christ: which euerie Christian man detesteth to heare. But contrariwise, seeing that water was a sacrament of the bloud of Christe, we may see no lesse then three heresies of the Papistes about the sacrament ouerthrowen thereby.
                  First, because all the people did drinke of the sacrament of Christes bloud, and not the Priestes onely.
                  Secondly, that the elementes are no longer sacramentes, then they be in vse of ministration. For the water which was a sacrament of Christes bloud vnto the Israelites, so often as they dranke of it, was no sacrament when they occupied it to other necessarie vses.
                  
                     Thirdly, that bruite beastes, as Dogges, Apes, and myse, eating and drinking the bread and wine that hath beene consecrated to the vse of the sacrament, doe not eate and drinke the bodie and bloud of CHRISTE. For the bruite beastes did drinke of this water, which to the faithfull was consecrated in the right vse thereof, to be the bloud of CHRISTE. Yet did not the bruite beastes touche the sacrament of his bloud.
                  But Maister Heskins will haue vs to note, That Saint Paule saith not, they dranke of that materiall rocke: but they dranke of a spirituall rocke which followed them, whiche spiritual rocke was Christe. And herevpon he condemneth Oecolampadius, for abusing Saint Paules wordes. The rocke was CHRISTE, to make it a figuratiue speache, whereas the saide proposition is to be vnderstoode grammatically or literally, and not tropically, or figuratiuely: And so is nothing like, to this proposition. This is my bodie. Peraduenture the Reader looketh for a newe transubstantiation, when hee heareth Maister Heskins exclude all tropes and figures from this saying, The rocke was Christe. But vouchsafe to heare his reason, and you shall more maruell at his monstruous impudencie. Because it is called a spirituall rocke, therefore there is no trope or figure in the speache.
                  But admitte that Saint Paule had no relation to the materiall rocke, out of which the waters did flowe, is this a proper and essentiall praedication to say, Christe is a spirituall rocke? will not all the Grammarians, Logicians, and Rhetoricians in the worlde throwe stones at him, that will so affirme? But all men endewed with reason will confesse, that Manna and the rocke are in one sense of Saint Paule, called spirituall: but the materiall manna was the spirituall meate, by Maister Heskins owne interpretation, therefore the materiall rocke was the spirituall rocke out of whiche flowed the spirituall drinke.
                  But Maister Heskins hath another reason, to proue that the material rock was not called the spiritual rocke, because

the materiall rocke stoode still in the Wildernesse, but the spirituall rocke followed them. Although Saint Paule meane of the streames and riuers of water, which flowing out of the rocke, followed them all along their iourneys in the wildernesse: Yet if wee vnderstande it (as he doeth) of Christe who rather went before them then followed them, it proueth not, that the materiall rocke was not called the spirituall rocke. For in sacraments, that is spoken of the signe often times, which is proper to the thing signified, & wrought by them, as baptisme is called regeneration, the Pascall Lambe, the passing ouer, so the spirituall rocke followed them, and was Christe. But he woulde faine father his monstrous absurditie, vppon Chrysostome, 1. Cor. 10. Cum dixisset, &c. When he had sayed, that they dranke spirituall drinke, he added: For they dranke of the spirituall rocke which followed them, and ioyned to it, and that rocke was Christ. For not of the nature of the rocke (sayeth he) flowed out the water, for then it would haue flowed out before that time, but a certeine other spirituall rocke, wrought all things, that is Christ, which being present euery where, did all the miracles, therefore he sayde following them.
                  
                  In these wordes, Chrysostome putteth a difference betweene the signe, and the thing signified, that is, the materiall rocke, and Christe whome because it represented, it was called a spirituall rocke, as Manna being a corporall foode, was called spirituall meate, because it represented Christes flesh, which is the spirituall meat of our mindes. Otherwise, that the materiall rocke was not called the spirituall rocke, Chrysostome sayeth not. But Saint Augustine, as wee haue shewed before, affirmeth plainly, that which Maister Heskins denyeth impudently.
                  Proceeding in his confutation of Oecolampadius his principle, that figures bear the names of things, of which they be figures, as the fierie tongues, the Doue, and the breathing of Christe vppon his Apostles, of the holie Ghoste, and Iohn Baptist, of Helias, he denyeth that any

of these examples doe proue it: for that neither any of these is called the holie Ghoste, nor Iohn called Helias. But he is fouly beguiled: for although hee quarrell at the aduerbe veluti, as it were fyerie, alledging Chrysostome to proue, that it was not naturall fyre, or winde, but the holie Ghoste: yet was that visible forme, called the holie Ghoste, as both in the seconde of the Actes, and in the eleuenth it is plaine: Hee sat vppon euery one of them.
                  If Maister Heskins were posed (as boyes bee in the schoole) who or what sat? hee may not saye the fierie tongues, which is the plurall number, but the holie Ghoste which was represented by them. And Actes. 11. Peter sayeth: The holie Ghoste fell vppon them, euen as vppon vs at the beginning, that is those visible signes, of his inuisible and incomprehensible presence. And whereas hee cauelleth, that the Doue is not called the holie Ghoste: I aske him howe could Iohn saye, he sawe the holie Ghoste which is inuisible, but that he sawe the bodily shape of a Doue, which was a sacrament of him? And as for the breathing of Christe, to signifie the holie Ghoste, and to bee so called: howe coulde the Apostles vnderstande it otherwise, at that time, when giuing them his breath, he sayde, receiue the holie Ghost, then when he gaue them bread, and sayed: receiue this, it is my bodie? for in both, by an outwarde and visible sacrament, hee testified, what he did giue them in deede, no more turning the breade into his naturall bodie, then his breath into the substaunce of the holie Ghoste.
                  But of all the rest, it is moste intolerable impudence, that he denyeth Iohn Baptist to bee Helias that was prophesied by Malachie, affirming that the prophesie speaketh of the comming of Helias before the seconde comming of Christ, which shall be to iudgement: saying that Christe doeth not assertiuely saye, that Iohn was Helias, but if ye will so take it, this is hee. But to knocke his blockishe ignorance, or rather serpentine mallice in the head, the Angel in Luk. 1. doth assertiuely

applye that Prophesie to Iohn Baptiste, saying: Hee shall goe before him in the spirite and power of Helias, to turne the heartes of the fathers vnto the children, which be the verie wordes of the Prophet. And our sauiour Christe him selfe, Math. 17. and Marke the 9. doth assertiuely saye, that Helias was alreadie come, according to the Prophesie, and his disciples vnderstoode, that he spake to them of Iohn the Baptist. What a shamelesse beast is this Heskins, to reason against so manifest a trueth, to mainteine so false an errour? But wee must aunswere his reasons, although no argumentes are to bee heard against the expresse authoritie of the scriptures.
                  First, he sayeth, that Prophesie cannot be expounded of the first comming of Christ, because he sayth, Helias shall come before the greate and fearfull daye of the Lorde: whereas the first comming of Christe, was not fearfull, but peaceable, not to iudge, but to saue. But he will not vnderstand, that Christes comming, as it was moste comfortable to the penitent sinners, so moste terrible to the hypocrites and obstinate wicked men: witnesse Iohn Baptist him selfe, Math. 3. from the seuenth verse to the ende of the twelfth. What shoulde I spende time in so cleare a matter? His seconde reason is of the authoritie of Euthymius, and Chrysostome, which if they go against the plaine authoritie of Christe, who will receiue them? Although neither of them both in the places by him cited, affirme that hee sayeth. For Euthymius, in 11. Math. Si vultis recipere quod suturum esse dictum est de hoc tempore, siue suscipere, id est, rebus animuni aduertere, ipse est Helias qui venturus erat, vtpote ipsum illius ministerium perficiens: If you will receiue that which is sayed shalbee of this time: or if you will giue your myndes to marke the thinges, he is Helias, which was to come, as one perfourming his ministerie: which Maister Heskins hath falsified by translating thus: If ye will receiue that that is spoken to be done hereafter to be of this present time.
                     
                  
                  
                     And although Euthymius do hold, that Helias shall come before the seconde comming of Christe: yet doth he affirme, that Iohn is called Helias for similitude of office: Sicut primus Helias, secundus praecursor dicitur: 
                        ita sanè & primus praecursor secundus Helias appellatur, propter simile ministerium. As the firste Helias is called the second forerunner: so the seconde forerunner, is called the first Helias by reason of like ministerie.
                  
                  The place of Chrysostome, although either the wordes going immediately before, or comming after, doe plainly expresse his minde, which Maister Heskins hath fraudulently concealed: yet as it is cited by him, it maketh nothing for him, but against him. I wil only rehearse the place, and leaue the iudgement to the readers. Rectè apposuit, &c. He hath well added, if you will receiue it: I came not to compell any man: that hee might seeme to require a thankefull minde of all men. And he signified that Iohn is Helias, and Helias is Iohn. For both they haue taken vppon them one administration, and both are appointed forerunners, wherefore he sayde not, this truely it Helias, but if ye will receiue it, this is hee:
                      
                     That is, if with diligent studie, and with a gentle, not a contentious mynde, you will consider the dooings of them both. Thus Chrysostome. And yet I am not ignorant, that else where, he supposeth that Helias the Thesbite shall come before the day of iudgement, which sauoureth of a Iewish fable, more then of a Christian trueth, as is plainly proued before.
               
               
                  The fourth Chapter beginneth to declare by the holy fathers of what things Manna and the waters be figures.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  He beginneth this Chapter, with a shamelesse lye:
                        Fulke.
                      for he sayeth, that wee affirme Manna to be a figure only of the worde of God, which is vtterly false: for wee affirme, that it was a sacramentall figure of the bodye of Christe, and so a figure, that it was in deede the bodie

of Christ, after a spirituall manner, to them whiche receiued it worthelie. But Maister Heskins will haue it a figure, not onely of the worde of God, but also of the bodie of Christe in the sacrament, and so a figure, that is was nothing else but a bare figure, and not a sacrament.
                  And this hee hopeth to prooue out of Sainct Ambrose ad Iren. Ep. 62. Quaeria
                           •
                         me, &c. Thou askest mee, why the Lorde God did rayne Manna to the people of the fathers, and doeth not nowe rayne it? If thou knowest, he rayneth and daily rayneth from heauen Manna to them that serue him. And that bodily Manna truely, is founde at this day in many places. But nowe it is not a thing of so greate miracle, becaus
                           •
                         that which is perfect is come. And that perfecte is the breade from heauen, the bodie of the virgine, of which the Gospell doeth sufficiently teache thee. Howe much better, are these things then the former? For they which did eate that Manna, that is that breade, are deade. But whosoeuer shall eate this breade, shall liue for euer. But it is a spirituall Manna, that is, a rayne of spirituall wisedome, which is powred into them, that be wittie and searching is from heauen, and deweth the myndes of the Godly & sweeteneth their iawes.
                  
                  Because there is nothing in this saying of Saint Ambrose for his purpose, hee falleth into a greate rage against Oecolampadius, for leauing out of this sentence: Quanto praestantiora sunt haec superioribus? Howe much more excellent are these, then the other aboue rehearsed? Which, howesoeuer it was, as I am sure, it was not of a falsifying mynde, so no man in the worlde, might worse exclaime against falsifying of the doctours then Maister Heskins, as I haue often shewed, and doubt not but I shall shewe hereafter.
                  But to the purpose, it is euident, that Saint Ambrose in the former sentence, speaketh of Manna, as a corporall foode, not as a sacrament, in which respect, there is no comparison between it, & the body of Christ. And he is so farre from saying, that Manna, as it was a sacrament, was but a figure of the bodie of Christ (as M.

Heskins belyeth him) that he saith not at all, that it was a figure.
                  But hee chargeth vs with two other wicked opinions, namely, That the sacramentes of the newe lawe giue no grace, and that they are of no more excellencie then the sacraments of the olde lawe. To the first we aunswere, and say, that the sacramentes giue not grace of the worke wrought, as they teach, but that GOD giueth grace by his sacramentes in all his elect, wee affirme. And to the second, wee aunswere, that as in substaunce the sacramentes of the olde time were not inferiour to oures, so in cleerenesse of reuelation and vnderstanding, oures are farre more excellent then theirs, and that the place of Saint Ambrose, which Maister Heskins doeth next alledge, doeth very well shewe. Oriente autem &c. The sonne of righteousnesse arising, and more bright sacramentes of Christes body and bloud shining foorth, those inferiour thinges or sacramentes should cease, and those perfect should be receiued of the people. Maister Heskins noteth, that if the sacrament were but a bare signe, it should not be so magnified by Saint Ambrose. But so often as hee chargeth vs with a bare signe, so often must we charge him againe with an impudently. For wee doe as much detest a bare signe or figure, as hee doth a signe or figure.
                  As for the three kindes of Manna that Maister Heskins gathereth, is altogether out of Saint Ambrose his compasse. For hee hath no more but the bodily Manna, and the spirituall Manna, as the signe and the thing signified. And the rayne of spirituall wisedome, is the spirite of GOD, which sealeth inwardly in the heart, that whiche is expressed outwardly by the externall signes. I maruell Maister Heskins alledgeth not Saint Ambrose vpon this text 1. Cor. 10. whose woordes might seeme to haue more colour of his bare figure, although they be flat against it in deede. 
                        Manna & aquaquae fluxit de Petra, haec dicit spiritualia, quia non mundi lege parata sunt, sed Dei virtute sine elementorum commixtione ad tempus creata, habentia in se figuram futuri mysterij

quod nunc nos summus in commemorationem Christi Domini. Manna, and the water which flowed out of the rocke, these he calleth spirituall, bicause they were not prepared by the order of the world, but by the power of God, with out commixtiō of the elements created for a time, hauing in them a figure of the mysterie to come, which nowe we receiue in remembraunce of Christe our Lorde. By these wordes it is euident, that our sacraments do so differ from theirs, as a figure of that which is to come, and a remembrance of that which is past do differ. For all sacramentes haue their strength of the death of Christ. Secondly, we see that this father calleth our sacrament, a mysterie in remembrance of Christ: which speach is farre from a corporall manner of presence, that M. Heskins would maintaine by his authoritie.
                  The other places cited out of Euthymius a late writer, as we haue often saide, affirme that Manna was the figuratiue bread, and a figure, but not Christe which was the trueth. Howbeit, he meaneth nothing else, but that Christ was not in flesh present to the fathers in Manna, before he was incarnate, and so vseth the terme, figure, as a prefiguration and shadowing, not of the sacrament, but of Christ him selfe, which is the matter of the sacrament, euen as Christ him selfe in the 6. of S. Iohn, opposing Manna against the true bread that came downe from heauen, speaketh not of that spirituall meat which Manna was to the faithfull, but of the outward creature, which was onely considered of the wicked, to fill their bellies, and not to feede their soule.
                  But M. Heskins remitteth his reader, for al matters concerning the 6. of Iohn, to the second booke 36. chapter &c. and so do I to the same places for answere. Neuerthelesse, he will touch a word of Oecolampadius, where he saith, that the inward man is fed by faith, which is so straunge to him, that he neuer read the like phrase in any authentike authour. By which woondring, he sheweth him selfe to be a great stranger in S. Augustine, who saith In Ioan. Tr. 25. &c. Vt quid paras dentes & ventrem? crede & māducasti.
                        
Why preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? Beleeue, & thou hast eaten. Here faith feedeth the soule, for it feedeth not the belly. The last text he citeth out of Chrysostom, is alledged more at large in the 30. Chapter of the second booke, where it is also answered.
               
               
                  The fift Chapter, teaching that Manna and the water of the stone be figures of the body and bloud of Christ, by Origen and Saint Ambrose.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  That the olde writers called Manna and the water, figures of the body and bloud of Christ,
                        Fulk.
                      it shal be no controuersie betweene vs and M. Heskins: but whether they denied them to be sacraments of the body and bloud of Christe, or affirmed them to bee nothing but prefigurations of the sacrament, is nowe the question betwixt vs. And therefore these long sentences out of Origen and Ambrose make nothing for him, but much against him. But let vs viewe them: Origen is cited In Num. Hom. 7. Modo enim &c. Nowe when Moses came vnto vs, and is ioyned to our Aethiopesse, the lawe of God is not nowe knowne in figures and images as before, but in the very apparence of the truth. And those things, which were first set foorth in darke speaches, are nowe fulfilled in plaine shewe and trueth. And therefore he, which declared the plaine forme of figures and darke speaches, saith, we knowe that all our fathers were vnder the cloude, and all passed through the sea &c. Thou seest howe Paule assoyleth the darke riddles of the lawe, and teacheth the plaine shewe of those darke speaches. And a little after. Then in a darke manner Manna was the meate, but nowe in plaine shewe, the flesh of the sonne of God is the true meat, as he himselfe saith▪ my flesh is meat in deed, and my bloud is drink in deede. M. Heskins thinketh, this is as plaine as neede to be, for his onely figure, and the bodily presence: and me thinke it is as plaine for the contrarie. For he affirmeth, that Manna was the same spirituall meate, that the flesh of the sonne of God is nowe, and layeth the difference in the obscure manner of deliuering the one, and the plaine manner of deliuering the other, which can not be vnderstoode

of the outwarde signes, which are in both of like plainenesse or obscuritie, but of the doctrine or worde annexed to the signes, which to them was very darke, and to vs is very cleere, that Christes fleshe and bloud are our meate and drinke. For it is well knowne, that Origen knewe neither the Popishe transubstantiation, nor the bodily presence. For writing vpon the fifteenth of Saint Matthewe, after hee hath shewed that the materiall part of the sacrament goeth into the bellie, and is cast foorth, hee addeth: Nec materia panis sed super illum dictus sermo est, qui prodest non indignè comedenti illum. Et hae
                              •
                            quidem de typico symbolicóque corpore. Multa porro & de ipso verbo dici possent, quod factum est caro veríssque cibus, quem qui comederie omnino viuet in aeternum, quem nullus malus edere potest. Neyther that matter of the breade, but the woorde which is spoken of it, is that, which doth profite to him which eateth it not vnwoorthily. And these thinges are of the typicall or symbolicall bodye: Many thinges also might bee sayde of the Worde it selfe, which was made flesh and the true meate, which hee that shall eate, shall vndoubtedly liue for euer, which no euill man can eate. Doest thou not here see (Christian reader) what Origens minde was of transubstantiation, when hee speaketh of the matter of the breade whiche is eaten? And what his iudgement was of the bodily presence, when hee calleth it the typicall and symbolicall, or figuratiue bodye, distinguishing it from the woorde made fleshe, and the meate in deede? Finally, whether hee thought that any euill man could eate of the bodye of Christ, which is the spirituall part of the sacrament?
                  To Origen he ioyneth Ambrose, or rather disioyneth him, for hee diuideth his saying into two partes, pretending to inueigh against Oecolampadius, for leauing out the former parte, but in deede, that hee might raise a dust with his stamping and staring, least the latter part might be seene to be, as it is, a cleare interpretation of the former, and an application of the writers minde

concerning the corporall manner of presence,
                        In Ps. 118. Serm. 18. I will rehearse them both together. Ille ego ante despectus &c. Euen I before despised (speaking in the person of the Gentiles conuerted) am nowe preferred, am nowe set before the chosen. Euen I before a despised people of sinners, haue nowe the reuerend companies of the heauenly sacramentes, nowe I am receiued to the honour of the heauenly table. The rayne is not powred downe on my meate, the spring of the earth laboureth not, nor the fruite of the trees. For my drinke no riuers are to be sought, nor welles. Christe is meate to me, Christe is drinke to me. The fleshe of GOD is meate to me, the bloud of GOD is my drinke. I doe not nowe looke for yearely increase to satisfie me: Christe is ministred to mee daily. I will not bee afrayde; least any distemperature of the ayre, or barrennesse of the countrie shoulde hang ouer mee, if the dilligence of godly tillage doe continue. I doe not nowe wishe the rayne of Quayles to come downe for me, which before I did maruell at. Not Manna which earst they preferred before all meates, bicause those Fathers which did eate Manna, haue hungered. My meate is that, which doeth not fatten the bodye, but confirmeth the heart of man. Before, that breade which came downe from heauen, was woonderfull to mee. For it is written, hee gaue them bread from heauen to eate, but that was not the true breade, but a shaddowe of that was to come. The father hath reserued for me that true breade from heauen.
                  
                  
                     That breade of GOD descended from heauen to mee,
                     
                        Here beginneth Oecolampadius.
                      
                     which giueth life to this worlde. It hath not descended to the Iewes, nor to the Synagogue, but to the Church, to the younger people. For howe did that breade which giueth life, descend to the Iewes, when all they, that did eate that breade, that is Manna, which the Iewes thought to bee the true breade, are deade in the wildernesse? Howe did it descend to the Synagogue: when all the Synagogue perished and fainted, beeing pyned with euerlasting hunger of fayth? Finally, if they had receiued the true breade, they had not sayde: Lorde giue vs alwayes this breade. What doest thou require, O Iewe, that hee shoulde giue vnto thee? The bread which he giueth to all, which he giueth daily, which hee giueth alwayes, it is in thy selfe, that thou maiest receiue this bread.

Come vnto this bread, and thou shalt receiue it. Of this bread it is said, all they that estrange them selues from thee shall perish. If thou estrange thy self frō him, thou shalt perish. If thou come neere vnto him, thou shalt liue. He is the bread of life. He that eateth life can not die. For howe doth he die▪ whose meate is life? How shall he fayle, which hath that vitall substance? Come ye vnto him, and be satisfied, for he is breade. Come ye vnto him and drinke for he is a wel Come ye vnto him and be lightened, for he is light. Come ye vnto him, and be deliuered for where the spirite of the Lord is, there is libertie. Come ye vnto him, and be absolued, for he is remission of sinnes. You aske who this may be? Heare ye him selfe saying I am the breade of life, he that commeth to me shall not hunger, and hee that beleeueth in me, shall neuer thirst. You haue heard him, and you haue seene him, and you haue not beleeued him, therefore you are dead.
                  
                  The latter part of this long discourse sufficiently expoundeth the former. That Christe and the flesh and bloud of God (which M. Heskins noteth to be a plaine place for the proclamer) is so our true meate and drinke, as he is breade, as he is a well, as he is light, as he is libertie, as he is remission of sinnes: that is, after a spiritual maner. And where he saith, Manna was a figure or shaddowe, and not the trueth of that which was to come: he meaneth of Manna, as it was corporall meate, and eaten of the vnfaithfull that are dead, and not as it was spiritual meat, and eaten of the faithfull which are aliue, as S. Augustine saith. Moreouer, it is to be noted, that S. Ambrose saith, that he which eateth this bread which is life, can not dye. Therefore no wicked man eateth this bread, this meate, this flesh of God, which with S. Ambrose are all one. As for the difference of our sacramentes, what it is, we haue shewed before, and this place sheweth none. For Ambrose speaketh of Manna as a corporall meat, and not as it was a spirituall meate and sacrament.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The sixt Chapter declareth, that Manna was a figure, by the testimonie of S. Cyprian and Chrysostome.
                  
                     It hath bene often confessed,
                        Fulke.
                      that Manna of the olde fathers is called a figure of the body of Christ, but that it was only a bare figure, and not the body of Christe vnto the faithful, that is it we deny. Cyprian is cited to litle or no purpose in ser. de Coen. Dom. Huius panis &c. Of this bread Māna was a figure, which rayned in the desert. So whē we are come to the true bread in the land of promise, that meat fayled. M. Heskins saith, it is more manifest, then that it can be denyed, that this bread he speaketh of, is the holy bread of the sacrament: in which he acknowledgeth to be no breade at all. Then as manifest as he maketh it, it was a figure of Christ, which is the spiritual matter of the sacrament, and not of any holy breade thereof. But this he saith, will be proued by the last wordes of that sermon, which in deede, proue the cleane contrarie to his purpose. Sed & nos ipsi &c. But we also being made his body, both by the sacrament, and by the thing of the sacrament, are knit and vnited vnto our heade, euery one being members one of an other, shewing the ministerie of loue mutually, do communicate in charitie, are partakers of one cup, eating the same meate, and drinking the same drinke, which floweth and runneth out of the spirituall rocke, which meate and drinke is our Lord Iesus Christ. Here is a plaine place for the proclamer, the meate and drinke is our Lorde Iesus Christe. But what proclamer denyeth, that our meat and drinke in the sacrament, is the body and bloud of Christe? This we deny, that the same is present after a bodily maner, or after a bodily manner receiued, but spiritually onely, or by faith: euen as the same writer faith immediatly before Haec quoties agimus &c. 
                     As often as we doe these things, we sharpen not our teeth to eate, but with sincere faith wee breake and diuide that holy bread. But how can M. Heskins auoyde this, that we are made the body of Christe, as we are partakers of his body in the sacrament? whiche must needes be spiritually. Howe liketh he the distinction of the sacrament, and the thing or matter of the sacrament, when with Papistes, either there is no difference made betweene the sacrament of his body and his body it selfe, or else the sacrament is nothing else, but the accidents

of breade and wine, by which we are neither made the body of Christ, nor vnited to him. But to auoyde our glose of spiritualitie, he fleeth backe to the saying of Cyrillus in 15. Ioan. which he hath so often repeated, and yet mangled and gelded, least the true sense might be gathered out of it. Non tamen negamus &c. 
                     
                        Yet do we not denye, but that we are spiritually ioyned to Christ, by right faith and sincere loue, but that we haue no manner of coniunction with him after his flesh, that truely we doe vtterly deny, and say it to be altogether repugnant to the holy scriptures. For who hath doubted that Christe is also a vine, and we the branches, which from thence receiue life into vs. Heare what Paule saith, that we are all one body in Christ. For although we be many, yet are we one in him. For we all take part of one breade. 
                     Or doeth he thinke, perhaps that the vertue of the mystical benediction is vnknown to vs? Which when it is done in vs, doth is not make Christ to dwell in vs corporally, by communication of the flesh of Christ. For why are the members of the faithfull the members of Christ? &c. In these wordes Cyrillus reasoneth against an Arrian, which abusing this text, I am a Vine, and my father is the husband man, saide it was spoken of the deitie of Christ, and could not be expounded of his manhoode, which Cyrill denyeth, shewing that we are not onely spiritually ioyned to Christe, as to God, but also corporally, that is, to his body as to man, yet after a spirituall manner, as the textes by him alledged doe proue sufficiently, and namely the argument taken of the vertue of the mysticall blessing, which by communication of his fleshe, maketh vs his members of his body, which all men confesse to bee so after a diuine manner, that euen they which neuer receiued that sacrament, are yet members of Christe, hauing put him on, and beeing ingrafted to him in baptisme.
                  But Maister Heskins will tell vs the difference of the sacrament, and the thing of the sacrament, out of August. in deede out of the sentences of Prosper: Hoc est quod dicimus &c. This is that we say, that by all meanes we labour to

proue, that the sacrifice of the Church is made of two thinges, consisteth of two thinges, the visible forme or kinde of the elementes, and the inuisible flesh and bloud of our Lorde Iesus Christe, both of the sacrament and of the thing of the sacrament, that is, the body of Christe. &c. This visible forme, Maister Heskins will haue to be the accidentes onely, then hee will haue a sacrifice, whereof one part by his owne interpretation is bare accidentes without a subiect: and thirdly, that it is the body of Christe corporally receiued. But let vs heare, not Prosper, an vncertaine Authour, but Augustine him selfe, declare these thinges vnto vs in Ioan. Tr. 26. 
                        Huius rei sacramentum, id est vnitatis corporis & sanguinis Christi, alicubi quotidie, alicubi certis interuallis dierum in Dominica mensa pręparatur, & de mensa Dominica sumitur, quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium. Res verò ipsa, cuius sacramentum est omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium quicunque eius particeps suerie. The sacrament of this thing, that is, of the vnitie of the bodie and bloud of Christe, in some places daily, in some places with certaine distaunces of dayes, is prepared in the Lordes table, and from the Lordes table is receiued, of some persons to life, and of some to destruction. But the thing it selfe whereof it is a sacrament, is life to euery man, and destruction to no man, who so euer shall bee partaker of it. Nowe iudge whether S. Augustine esteemeth the sacrament to bee onely accidentes, and the thing of the sacrament to bee a bodily presence, whiche the wicked can not bee partakers of: or whether the wicked receiue nothing, but the accidents to their destruction, seeing they receiue the sacrament, but not the thing of the sacrament.
                  Chrysostome the second barron named in this Chapter, is cited in dictum Apost. Nolo vos igno. Dixi enim quod. &c. For I saide, that the trueth must haue a certaine excellencie aboue the figure. Thou hast seene concerning baptisme, what is the figure, and what the trueth. Go to, I will shewe thee also the tables, and the communion of the sacramentes, to be described there: if thou wilt not againe require of me the whole, but so requirest

these things that are done, as it is meete to se
                           •
                         in shadowes and figures. Therefore bicause he had spoken of the sea, and of the clo
                           •
                        d, and of Moses, he added moreouer: And they all did eate the same spirituall meate. As thou (saith he) comming vp out of the l
                           •
                        
                        uer of the waters, camest to the table, so they also cōming vp out of the sea, came to a newe and wonderfull table: I speake of Manna. And againe, as thou hast a wonderfull drinke the wholesome bloud: so had they also a wonderfull nature of drinke. Here Maister Heskins gathereth, that our drinke is the wholesome bloud of Christe, which we confesse spiritually receiued; as it was of the Fathers: likewise to proue that by the table, he meant the body of Christ, he citeth an other place. Sicut autem &c. Euen as he saide, that they all passed through the sea, so he prefigured the nobilitie of the Church, when he saide: They did all eate the same spirituall meat. He hath insinuated the same againe: for so in the Church, the rich man receiueth not one body, the poore man an other, nor this man one bloud, and that man an other. Euen so then the rich man receiued not one Manna, and the poore man an other, neither was this man partaker of one spring, and that man of a lesse plentifull. Not content with this, he addeth another sentence out of the same Homely. Sed cuius gratia &c. But for what cause doth S. Paule make mention of these thinges? For that cause which I tolde you at the first, that thou mayest learne, that neither baptisme, nor remission of sinnes, nor knowledge, nor the communion of the sacraments, nor the holy table, nor the fruition of the body, nor the participation of the bloud, nor any other such thing can profite vs, except we haue a right life, and a wonderfull, and free from all sinne.
                  
                  Heere Maister Heskins gathereth, that Christes bodye and bloud may bee receiued of wicked men, but eyther hee must vnderstand Sainte Chrysostome speaking of the sacramentes, by the name of the thinges whereof they be sacramentes, or else hee will fall into a great absurditie, for he saith, forgiuenesse of sinnes shall not profite, by which he meaneth, the ceremonie of absolution, and not the forgiuenesse of God in deede. Againe he must note an hyperbole or ouerreaching speach in this

sentence, or else whom shal the body and bloud of Christ profite, when no man is free from sinne? But we yet must heare a sentence or two more out of Chrysostome, in 1. Cor. 10. Hom. 23. Quae autem &c. Those thinges that followe, doe signifie the holy table. For as thou eatest the Lordes body, so did they eate Manna. And as thou drinkest his bloud, so did they drinke water out of the rocke. But here Maister Heskins playes his old part, for he leaueth out that which following immediately expoundeth Chrysostome contrarie to his purpose. 
                        Quamuis in sensu quae dabantur, perciperentur, spiritualiter tamen dabantur, non secundùm naturae consequentiam, sed secundùm muneris gratiam, & cum corpore etiam animam in fidem adducentem nutriuit. Although those thinges that were giuen, were perceiued by sense, yet were they giuen spiritually, not according to the consequence of nature, but according to the grace of the gift, bringing into faith, he nourished ye soule also with the body. By these words it is most euident, that Manna and the water, were not bare figures or corporall foode onely, but also foode of the soule through fayth, howe so euer Chrysostome in other places speaketh of them as figures, and as corporall food, and in those respectes preferreth our sacramentes before them.
                  
                  But let vs heare the last sentence: Qui enim illa illis &c. For he which gaue those things vnto them, euen he hath prepared this table: And euen he him selfe brought them through the sea, and thee through baptisme: And to them gaue Manna and water, and to thee his body and bloud. Vpon all these places of Chrysostome, Maister Heskins reasoneth, that the Fathers onely receiued a figure, and we the veritie, or else there were no difference, if we both receiue a veritie spiritually, and a figure outwardly. I haue shewed the difference before, to be, not in the substance or vertue, but in the manner of reuelation, which was to them obscure, to vs cleere, to them in expectation of that which was to come, to vs in assuraunce of that which is fulfilled, namely, the redemption by Christes death. For Iesus Christe was the Lambe slaine from the beginning of the worlde, and the

onely foode that came downe from heauen, to giue eternall life to all them that did receiue him in all ages past and to come.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The seuenth Chapter proceedeth to declare the same by Saint Hierome, and Saint Cyrill.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     In the beginning of this Chapter Maister Heskins maruelleth that we (whom he counteth the aduersaries of the truth) would leaue a doctrine so vniuersally taught and receiued, as though he had prooued their doctrine of the sacrament to be such, comparing the protestantes, to Esopes dogge that snatching for a shadowe lost the bone out of his mouth: neuerthelesse he will proceede on his matter, if there be any hope to reclayme vs. And first he will choke vs with the authoritie of Saint Hieronyme In 1. Cor. 10. expounding that saying: They did eate the same spirituall meate, &c. Manna figura corporis Christi suit. Manna was a figure of the bodie of Christe. It is very true, we neuer saide the contrarie. But the same Hierome in the same place vpon that saying: The rocke was Christe, Saith, that the rocke was a figure of Christe, which Maister Heskins vtterly denyeth. Quia Christus erat postmodū sequnturus, cuius figuram tunc Petra gerebat: idco pulchrè dixit consequente eos Petra. Because Christe was afterward to followe, of whom the rocke was a figure: therfore he saide very fitly of the rocke, that followed them. By which wordes it is most manifest, that by his iudgement, they dranke of Christes bloud, who was to come, and consequently did eate his bodie, whereof Manna was a figure. But it followeth after in Hieronyme which Maister Heskins rehearseth at large, and to no purpose Omnia enim, quae in populo, &c. For all thinges, which at that time were done in the people of Israell in a figure, now among vs are celebrated in truth: for euen as they by Moses were deliuered out of Egypt, so are we by euerie priest or teacher deliuered out of the worlde. And then beeing made Christians, we are ledde through the wildernesse, that by exercise of contempt of the worlde, and abstinence, we may forget the pleasures of Egypt, so that we

knowe not to go backe againe into the worlde. But when we passe the sea of Baptisme, the diuell is drowned for our sake with all his armie, euen as Pharao was. Then wee are fedde with Manna, and receiue drinke out of the side of Christ. Also the clearenesse of knowledge, as a piller of fire, is shewed in the night of the worlde, and in the heate of tribulation, we are couered with the clowde of Diuine consolation. In these wordes Maister Heskins noteth two thinges, the applications of the truthes to the figures, and the drinke flowing out of the side of Christe. concerning the first, it is cleare, that he maketh their temporall benefites, figures of our spirituall benefites, and in that sense he vseth the tearmes of figures and trueth: for otherwise hee confesseth, that those thinges were truely done among them, and in a figure were the same, that ours are, immediately before these wordes before rehearsed by Maister Heskins: 
                        Ipsis verè facta sunt, quae in figura erant nostra, vt 
                              •
                           imeamus talia agere, ne talia incurramus. Those thinges were truely done vnto them, whiche in figure were ours, that we might feare to doe suche thinges, least we incurre such thinges. As for the drinke flowing out of his side, we confesse to be the bloud of Christe, as I haue shewed a hundreth times, receiued after a spirituall manner. But Maister Heskins reasoneth wittily (as he thinketh) when he sayeth: as the Iewes did verily eate Manna, so we doe verily eate the bodie of Christ. But he marketh not howe Hieronyme saith: We are fedde with Manna, and we receiue drinke flowing out of the side of Christ. Wherevpon I will inferre, as we are fedde with Manna, so we eate and drinke the bodie and bloud of Christe: but are not fedde with Manna corporally, but spiritually: so we eate and drinke the bodie and bloud of Christ, not corporally but spiritually. After this, least we should doubt of this authoritie, as falsly ascribed to Hierome, he returneth to Hierome Ad Hedibiam qu. 2. which we cannot refuse to be S. Hierome. But seeing that place is sufficiently answered in the 53. Chapter of the second booke, I wil not trouble the Reader with the repetition.
                  
                     Likewise the place of Cyprian De Coena Dom. in the 17. Chapter of the first Booke. Likewise the other parcels of Chrysostome he citeth In Matth. 25. Hom. 83. In the 55. Chapter of the second Booke. The other named and not rehearsed be oftentimes answered throughout ye Booke, and none of them all haue any thing in them for his purpose. Now commeth Cyrill In 6. Ioan. Cap. 19. Non enim prudenter, &c. Those thinges that suffice but for a shorte time, shall not wisely be called by this name, neither was that bread of God which the elders of the Iewes did eate & are dead for if it had bene from heauen, and of God, it had deliuered the partakers of it from death. But contrariwise, the bodie of Christe is bread from heauen, because it giueth eternall life to them that receued it.
                  
                  Here (saith M. Heskins) is a breefe and plaine testimonie, that manna was a figure, and the bodie of Christ is the thing figured. This is graunted, but that Cyrill meant to make it only a figure, or a bare figure, it is vtterly false, as appeareth in his commentarie vpon the same Chapter, Lib. 3. Cap. 34. Manna verò figura quaedam vniuersalis Dei liberalicatis, loco arrhae hominibus concessa. Manna truely, was a certeine figure of the vniuersall liberalitie of God granted to men, in place of a pledge, or earnest. By these words you see, that Manna was not a bare figure, but an earnest, or assurance of all the bountifulnes of God. And in the same place he saith. Sic enim planè videbitur quod verum Manna Christus erat, qui per figuram Mann
                              •
                            priscis illis a Deo dabatur. For so it shall plainely be seene, that Christ was the true Manna, which was giuen of God to those auncient fathers by the figure of Manna. Thus it is moste euident, that Manna was not a figure onely of Christe, but that Christe in deede was giuen by that figure, as hee is by our sacrament, and so no corporall presence by his iudgement. Neuerthelesse M. Heskins harpeth on his old string, really, and substantially, and that by this authoritie of Cyrillus Cap. 14. in 6. Ioan. Quoniam, &c. Because the flesh of our sauiour is ioyned in the WORDE of God, which is naturally life, it is made able to giue life when we eate it, then haue we life in vs, beeing ioyned to him which is made life.
                  
                  
                     These wordes indeede doe declare, that whosoeuer eateth the fleshe of Christ is partaker of eternall life, which M. Heskins will not graunt, but with his distinction, spiritually: therefore this place maketh nothing for him, for Cyril speaketh generally. So that no man eateth Christe, but he that eateth him spiritually, and hath life by him. Then no wicked man eateth him, which hath not life, & consequently no man eateth him corporally. But heare what the same Cyril writeth in the same Booke & Chapter. 
                        Haec igitur de caussa Dominus quomodo id fieri possit non enodauit, sed fide id quaerendum hortatur: sic credentibus discipulis fragmenta panis dedit dicens, accipite, & manducate, hoc est corpus meum: calicem etiam similiter circuntulit dicens: Bibite ex hoc omnes, hic est calix sanguinis mei, qui pro multis effunditur in remissionē peccatorum. Perspicis quia, sine fide quęrentibus mysterij modum nequaquam explanauit, credentibus autem etiam non quęrentibus exposuit. For this cause thefore, the Lorde did not expound how that might be done, but exhorteth that it be sought by faith, so to his disciples which beleeued, he gaue peeces of bread, saying take ye, & eate ye, this is my bodie: likewise he gaue the cuppe about and saide: drinke ye all of this, this is the cuppe of my bloud, which shal be shed for many for remission of sinnes. Thou seest, that to them which inquire without faith, he hath not explaned the manner of the mysterie, but to them which beleeued, although they inquired not, he hath set it foorth. In this saying of Cyril, beside that he teacheth yt Christe his flesh & bloud are receiued in a mysterie, it is good to obserue that he calleth the sacrament, which Christ gaue to his Disciples fragmentes or peeces of bread, which vtterly ouerthroweth Popish transubstantiation.
                  
               
               
                  The eight Chapter proceedeth in declaration of the same by S. Augustine and Oecumenius.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The first place of Augustine he citeth, but nameth not where it is written, is this: Cathechumeni iam credunt, &c.
                     
                        Fulk.
                      
                     The learners of Christian faith doe nowe beleeue in the name of Christ,

but Iesus committeth not him selfe to them, that is he giueth not vnto them his bodie and his bloud. Let them be ashamed therefore because they knowe not: let them goe through the red sea: let them eate Manna, that as they haue beleeued in the name of Iesus so Iesus may commit himselfe vnto them. M. Heskins himselfe vpon this place saith: It is common by the name of the figure, to vnderstand the thing figured. Therfore as Manna is called the bodie of Christ, so is the sacramentall bread and wine called his bodie and bloud. What is here for a Papist? But Augustine in his Booke De vtilitate poenitentiae (as he weeneth) maketh much for him. I am ergo lumine illato &c. Now therefore the light being brought in, let vs seeke what the rest signifie? What meaned the sea, the clowde, Manna. For those he hath not expounded. But he hath shewed what the rocke is. The passage through the sea is baptisme, but because baptisme that is the water of health, is not of health, but beeing consecrated in the name of Christ, which shed his bloud for vs, the water is signed with his crosse, and that it might signifie this, the redde sea was that baptisme. Manna from heauen is openly expounded by our Lord himselfe. Your fathers (saith he) haue eaten Manna in the wildernesse and are dead. For when should they liue? For the figure might pronounce life, it could not be life. They haue eaten manna (saith he) & are dead. That is, Manna which they haue eaten could not deliuer them from death, not because Manna was death vnto them, but because it deliuered not from death. For he should deliuer thē frō death, which was figured by Manna. Surely Manna came from heauen, consider whome is figured: I am, saith he, the bread of life that came downe from heauen. M. Heskins ioyneth another place of Augustine Lib. Nou. & vet. Test. Quast. 65. Manna cypus est, &c. Manna is a figure of that spirituall meate, which by the resurrection of our Lorde is made trueth, in the mysterie of the Eucharistie. By this he will proue, that Manna in the former place, was meant to be a figure of the body of Christ in the sacrament.
                  But in spite of his beard he must vnderstande it of the spiritual maner of receiuing therof, by faith, wt ye benefites of his death which are made perfect in his resurrection, or else how saith he, yt the figure was made trueth by the resurrection

of Christe? For the trueth of Christes bodie, did not depende vppon his resurrection, and the sacrament was instituted before his death, but it tooke and taketh force of his death and resurrection. And concerning the former sentence, I can but marueile at his impudencie, yt woulde alledge that treatise which is directly against him, as partly you may see by the places cited by mee out of the same, and followeth immediatly this place, in the second Chapter of this booke: partly by these places following, taken out of the same booke: 
                        Patres nostri, inquis 
                              •
                           undem cibum spiritualem manducauerunt: & eundem potum spiritualē biberunt. Erant enim ibi qui quod manducabant intelligebant. Erant ibi, quibus plus Christus in corde, quàm Manna in ore sapiebat: Our fathers (sayeth he) did eat the same spirituall meate, and drinke the same spirituall drinke. For there were there, which did vnderstande what they did eate: There were there, to whom Christe sauoured better in their heart, then Manna in their mouth. And again: Breuiter dixerim: Quicun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            in Manna Christum intellexerunt, eundem quem nos, cibum spiritualem manducauerunt: Quicun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            autem de Manna solam saturitatem quae fierunt patres infidelium, ma
                              •
                           ducauerun
                              •
                            & moriui sunt: Sic tui am eundem potum. Petra enim Christus. Eudem ergo potum quem no
                              •
                            sed spiritualem: id est qui fide capiebatur, non qui corpor
                              •
                            hauriebatur. I will saye briefely: whosoeuer vnderstoode Christe in Manna, did eate the same spirituall meate that wee doe. But whosoeuer sought onely to fill their bellyes of Manna, which were the fathers of the vnfaithfull, they haue eaten and are deade. So also the same drinke. For the rocke was Christe. They drinke therefore the same drinke that wee doe, but spirituall drinke, that is, which was receiued by faith, nor which was drawen in, with the bodie. And againe: Eundem ergo cibum, eundem potum, sed intelligentibus & credentib
                              •
                           s. Non intelligentibus autem illud solum Manna, illa fola aqua, ille cibus osurienti, potus iste suienti: nec ille, nec iste credenti: Credenti autem idem qui nunc: Tunc enim Christus venturus, modò Christus venit. Venturus & venit diuersa verba sims, sed

idem Christus. The same meate therefore, and the same drinke, be to them that vnderstoode and beleeued. But to them which vnderstoode it not, it was onely Manna, that was onely water: that meate to the hungrie: this drinke to the thirstie: neither that, nor this to the beleeuer: But to the beleeuer, the same which is nowe: for then Christ was to come: nowe Christe is come. To come, and is come, are diuerse wordes, but the same Christe.
                  
                  Let M. Heskins nowe go and saye, that Manna was a figure onely of Christe, and not Christ him selfe to the beleeuers: let him saye, that our sacraments in substance are not all one with theirs. Finally, that we eate Christ corporally, which eate him none otherwise then they did before he had a bodie. For in all these Augustine is directly contrarie to him, though he be not ashamed to abuse his name, as though he were of his opinion. Nowe followeth Oecumenius a writer, farre out of the compasse of the challenge. But what sayeth he in 1. Cor. 10. Comederunt nempe Manna, &c. They haue eaten Manna, as wee the bodie of Christ. They haue dronke the spirituall water flowing out of the rocke or stone, as wee the bloud of Christ.
                  
                  Maister Heskins inferreth, that the fathers did eate Manna, and drinke the water corporally, therefore wee eate and drinke the bodie and bloud of Christe corporally. By the same Logike he may conclude, the fathers did eate manna visibly and sensibly, therefore wee eate the bodie of Christ visibly and sensibly. Or else, as the wordes of Oecumenius sounde, wee eate the bodie of Christe inuisibly, so the fathers did eate Manna inuisibly. But euery man that hath but halfe an eye, seeth these grosse inconsequences, and yet they are as good as Maister Heskins argument and illation. Oecumenius therefore meaneth, that as Manna and the water were their sacraments, so we haue ours, whose spirituall substance is the bodie and bloude of Christ, the earthly substance, is bread and wine, and Manna and the water were to them sacramentes of the same Christ, whome wee receiue.

And whereas M. Heskins sayeth, that no catholike doctour teacheth the sacrament to be only a figure, we agree with him, for we hold him accursed that compteth it to be onely a figure, or a bare figure, as he doeth often most iniuriously charge vs. The rest of the Chapter is spent in vaine repetitions of sentences & collections before set downe and aunswered.
               
               
                  The ninth Chapter, proceedeth in the declaration of the same by Haimo & Theophylact.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Although neither Haimo nor Theophylact, speake more for M. Hesk. then the former auctors,
                        Fulke.
                      yet because they are but burgesses of the lower house, which whether they giue their voyces with the bill or against it, it shall passe neuer the sooner, I will spende no time in aunswering their authorities. They are both but late writers. The patches of Chrysostome, Ambrose, & Cyprian are often aunswered at large in their proper places. But, whereas he challengeth the spirit of vnitie vnto the Papistes, and chargeth the Protestants with the spirite of diuision: it is well knowen, that in the cheefest articles of religion, we agree, God be thanked, better then the Papistes do, who haue not yet agreed, whether the Pope, or the counsell bee to bee followed in matters of faith, so that they disagree in the verie foundation of their religion. Finally, where he chargeth vs with the heresies of the Anabaptistes, we may be bolde to charge him with the spirite of Sathan, who was a lyer & a slaunderer of Gods Saintes from the beginning.
               
               
                  The tenth Chapter, proceedeth vpon the same text, by Ruper
                     
                        •
                     us & Rich. Holkot and endeth with Gagnegus.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  If a man should vouchesafe to admitt such authorities as these, there should be no end of quarrelling.
                        Fulk.
                      I am content to yelde them to Maister Heskins, and fiue hundreth more such as they be: as for the sayings of Ambrose

and Cyrill, which he enterla
                        •
                     eth, they are answered in other places, although that of Ambrose be flat against him, the other of Cyrill nothing for him.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The eleuenth Chapter declareth the prophesies of the sacrament vnder the names of Manna & the water of the rocke.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     These Prophesies hee imagineth to be conteined in 77. Psalme, & 104. Psalme, which as the whole Psalmes declare to them that read them, be praises and thankesgiuings for Gods benefites past, and not prophesies of things to come. The first sentence is this: Hee commaunded the clowdes aboue, and opened the gates of heauen. And he rayned to them Manna to eate, and gaue them the bread of heauen. So man did eate the bread of Angels. Vppon this text he citeth Hierome: Sed & fantem, &c. But the same stone also sheweth out the founteine of baptisme. For out of his side, when he was striken, came foorth water and bloud, which figured baptisme and martirdome. Here he maketh the water a figure of baptisme and martirdom, not of the bloud of Christe in the sacrament, and much lesse a prophesie, except Maister Heskins be so madde, as to make a figure and a prophesie all one. But Hierom sayeth more: Panem C
                           ••
                        
                        
                        
                           •
                        i dedit &c. He gaue them the bread of heauen, man did eate the breade of Angels. Hee him selfe gaue meate vnto man, which saide, I am the breade of life, which came downe from heauen: he that shall eate of this bread, shall liue for euer. 
                     This is so farre from a prophesie of the time to come, that hee declareth, that God did feede the Israelites with the fleshe of Christe, which is the breade of life that came downe from heauen, figured in Manna, being the foode of all the Saintes of God, from the beginning of the worlde: as is moste manifest by the verie next wordes following in Hierome, which Maister Heskins hath craftily left out: Ex hoc enim pane coeli, Sancti reficiuntur & Angeli: For of this breade of heauen, both the Saintes are fedd, and the Angels. Where note also, that hee sayth: the Angels to be refreshed with this breade of life, euen a
                        •
                     
                     
the Saintes are: but the Angels eate not the fleshe of Christe corporally, therefore neither do the Saintes.
                  Finally, Hierome in that place is so farre from a corporall manner of eating and drinking, that he writeth thus: 
                        Praestita sunt haec Haebries, sed & modò in ecclesia Prophetis & Apostolis praecipitur, vt nobis verbum praedicationis, quo anima spiritualiter pascatur, annuncient. These things were perfourmed to the Hebrues: but nowe also in the churche it is commaunded to the Prophets and Apostles, that they declare to vs the worde of preaching, wherewith our soule is spiritually fedd. In these wordes, hee maketh Manna and the water, figures of the preaching of Gods worde, which is a spirituall foode of our soules.
                  
                  Nowe vppon the other texte, Psalm. 104. Hee satisfied them with the breade of heauen: Saint Hierome sayeth: For, as they were refreshed by Manna rayning from heauen, so wee at this day are refreshed, receiuing the bodie of the Lambe. He brake the rocke, and the waters flowed. For that precious corner stone was striken, and brought foorth vnto vs vnmeasurable fountaines, which washe away our errours, and water our drynesse. Here is as before, a comparison of Gods benefites towarde them, and towarde vs, which he seemeth to make equall, as they were in deede in substance, and all matters perteining to aeternall life: but here is no prophesie spoken of, neither doeth Maister Heskins gather one worde out of it, for that intent.
                  The like is to be sayde of Saint Augustine vppon the 77. Psalme: Quid enim, &c. For he which commanded the clowdes aboue, and opened the gates of heauen, and rayned to them Manna to eate, and gaue them the bread of heauen, so that man did eate the breade of Angels: Hee which sent vnto them meate in aboundaunce, that he might fill the vnbeleeuers, is not vnable to geeue to the beleeuers, the verie true breade from heauen, which Manna did signifie, which is in deede the meate of Angels, which WORDE of God feedeth them that are corruptible incorruptibly, which that man might eate, was made flesh and dwelled among vs.
                  
                  
                     Here is no worde of Prophesie, neither can Maister Heskins himselfe finde any, and the wordes which doe immediately followe, do plainly shewe that Augustine spake neither of corporall presence, nor corporall maner of eating: 
                        Ipse enim panis per nubes Euangelicas vniuerso orbi pluitur, & apertis praedicatorum cordibus tanquam coelestib
                              •••
                            ianuis, non murmur anti & tentanti synagogae, sed credenti & in illo spem ponenti ecclesiae praedicatur. For this bread thorough the cloudes of the Gospell is rayned vnto all the worlde, and the hearts of the preachers, as it were ye heauenly gates being opened, is preached, not to the murmuring and tempting synagogue, but to the church beleeuing and putting her trust in him. Here Augustine sayth, that the VVORDE, which became fleshe, is rayned from heauen, by the preaching of the Gospell, and eaten by faith: Vnto Augustine he ioyneth Cassiodorus, as he sayeth, and truely nothing dissenting from the former writers, but altogether from M. Hesk. purpose, he is cited in Psalm. 77. Et pluit illis, &c. And he rayned to them Manna to eate, he sayeth he rayned, that he might shewe the great plentie of the meat, which like vnto rayne came down from heauen. And lest thou shouldest doubt, what rayne that was, it followeth: To eate Manna: Manna is interpreted, what is this? which we verie fuly applye to the holie Communion: for while this meat is sought by wandring, the giftes of the Lordes bodie are declared. He hath added. He gaue them the breade of heauen. What other breade of heauen is there, but Christe our Lorde, of whome the heauenly things receiue spirituall foode, and doe enioy inestimable delight? Finally, thus it followeth: Man hath eaten the breade of Angels. Therefore, Christ is saide to be the breade of Angels, because they are fedde with his eternall praise. For the Angels are not to be thought to eate corporall breade, but with that contemplation of our Lorde, with the which, that high cr
                           •
                        ature is fedd, they are fedd: but this breade filleth the Angels in heauen, and feedeth vs on earth. In this exposition, it is worthie to be noted, that Cassiodorus affirmeth, that Christe our Lorde was the breade from heauen, which God gaue to the fathers, in the sacrament of Manna. Also, that the

Angels in heauen, and we vppon earth are fedde with the same bread, which must needes be a spirituall foode: For as he saith, the Angels eate no corporall bread, so doe they not eate any corporall thing, or after any corporall manner. The last authoritie hee citeth out of fryer Titelman, I will not trouble the reader withall, although, if he neuer had spoken worse, then in this sentence, he were not greatly to be reprehended. But to M. Heskins, all is fishe that commeth to the nett.
               
               
                  The twelfth Chapter, proueth by occasion of that that is sayde with further authoritie, that the sacraments of the newe lawe, are more excellent then the sacraments of the olde lawe.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The first reason is taken out of S. Augustines rule,
                        Fulk.
                      cited in the firste booke, That all good things figured, are more excellent then the figures, which wee graunt: for Christ figured by Manna, was more excellent then. Manna, as he is more excellent then the breade & wine, by which he is likewise represented. The second reason he vseth is this, yt if the bodie of Christe were not so present in the sacrament, as they imagine, Manna shoulde be better then the sacrament: for Manna hath twelue wonders declared by Roffens. lib. 1. Chap. 12. The firste: that he that gathered moste, had but his measure. The seconde, that he that gathered least, had his measure full also. The thirde: that which was kepte vntill the next day, putrified, except on the Saboth day. The fourth: it was kept many yeres in the Arke vnprutrified. The fift: it would melt in the Sonne, and be harde in the fire. The sixth: it fell all dayes, sauing vppon the Sabboth day. The seuenth: that on the daye before the Saboth day, they had two gomers full, and all other days but one. The eyght: that whether they gathered more or lesse, they had that day two gomers full. The ninth: that measure sufficed all stomackes and appetites. The tenth: that to them that were good, it tasted to euery one, according to his desire. The eleuenth: although to the godly it was a most pleasant taste, yet to the vngodly, it

wa
                        •
                      lothsome. The twelfth: the children of Israel were fedd with it fortie yeres in the Wildernesse. Of some of these speaketh Chrysostom in dict. Apost. Nolo vos: which, because it is long and conteineth nothing more then is collected by Fisher, I will not set downe. Augustine also witnesseth for one miracle, that Manna tasted to euery man as hee woulde. Hereuppon he concludeth, that Manna farre excelleth the sacramentaries sacramentall bread, which shalbe graunted, and so it doeth the Papists consecrated host, which is subiect to putrifaction, and in none of the twelue miracles comparable to Manna. But Manna for all this doth not excell the bodie and bloud of Christe, which is giuen vs that are faithfull with our sacramentall bread and wine. He sayeth the Iewes receiuing Manna, receiued Christe spiritually. Nowe at the length he sayth trueth. And we also receiuing the sacramentall bread and wine receiue Christ spiritually. Neither are our sacraments, as I haue sayde, concerning the spirituall or heauenly substance more excellent then theirs, as our saluation is the same with theirs, but in clearnesse of signification more excellent, as the doctrine of our saluation, is more plainly reuealed vnto vs. But M. Hesk. replyeth, that if our sacramēts excel not theirs, then their sacraments and figures farre excell ours, and that in three things. The first: In excellencie of ye thing signified. The second: in ye fulnesse & liuelinesse of the signification. The third: in the worke of God about the same figures. But I aunswer, concerning the first, they are aequall: concerning the second, ours are superior & more excellent: and concerning the thirde, I distinguish of outward working of God, & inwarde. Concerning the outward work of God, about their sacraments & figures, it was meete it should be more notable, because the doctrine was more obscure, & that the creatures themselues, that were the elements of their sacraments & figures should be more excellent & glorious, because ye inwarde grace, was not so clearely reuealed: and it was meant, the sacraments & figures should be many more in nomber,

because the doctrine was much lesse manifest, then it is to vs. But concerning the inward working of God, there is no doubt, but it is as marueilous, & as wonderfull in our sacraments, as in theirs: and in respect of illumination, according to the doctrine, which is more lightsome, and of full assurance, as of that mysterie, which is alreadie accomplished, it is much more excellent & notable in our sacraments, which are (as Augustin sayth) in number most fewe, in matter most simple, in signification most excellent. Ep. ad Ian. 118. 
                        Primò ita
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            tenere te volo, quod est huius disputationis caput: Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, sicut ipse in euangelio loquitur, leui iugo suo nos subdidisse & sarcinae leui. Vnde sacramentis numero paucissimis, obseruatione facillimis, significatione praestantissimis, societatem noui populi colligauit, sicut est baptismus Trinitatis nomine consecratus, communicatio corporis & sanguinis ipsius, & si quid aliud in scripturis canoni
                              •
                           is contineatur. First therfore I would haue thee hold this, which is the head of this disputation: that our lord Iesus Christ, as he him selfe speaketh in the Gospell, hath submitted vs to his gentle yoke & easie burthen. Therfore, by sacraments in number most fewe, in obseruation most easie, in signification most excellent, hee hath bound together ye fellowship of the newe people, as is baptisme being consecrated in the name of the Trinitie, the communication of his bodie and bloud, & if any thing else be conteined in the canonicall scriptures. Thus you see, notwithstanding the vaine cauils of M. Hesk. wherein our sacraments are equall with theirs, and wherein ours are more excellent then theirs: so that we haue no neede of his reall presence, to make a difference betweene ye sacraments of the newe testament, & the sacraments of the olde fathers, which though they liued vnder the old testament, yet were they saued by the newe testament, in the forgiuenesse of their sinnes, by Christ as we are.
               
               
                  The thirteenth Chapter, proueth the same by scriptures & Doctors.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  In the beginning of this Chapter,
                        Fulk.
                      he rayleth against Luther, Oecolampadius, Caluin, &c. but without proofe

of any thing, and therefore I count it not worthie of aunswere. Secondly, he will proue, that the sacraments of the olde lawe, are weake and beggerly elements, not onely nowe when they be abrogated, but also when they were in their greatest strength, and therefore in no respect equall with ours. For proofe hereof, hee alledgeth the Apostle to the Hebrues, 7. that the lawe brought nothing to perfection, & Chap. 10. The law hauing the shadowe of good things to come, and not the verie facion of the things them selues, can neuer with sacrifices which they offer, make the commers thereunto perfect. But hee is verie ignorant, if he knowe not, as he pretendeth, or else verie obstinate, if he will not acknowledge, that the Apostle, as he writeth to the Hebrues, so he speaketh of the lawe, as the vnbeleeuers esteemed it, that is altogether seperated from Christ, & so of the ceremonies therof: and not as the lawe and the ceremonies thereof, were considered of the faithfull, with Christ the ende and accomplishment of it and them. For otherwise Christ him selfe is called a minister of circumcision, for the trueth of God, to establish the promises of the fathers, Rom. 15. ver. 8 After this he gapeth and cryeth out vppon Oecolampadius, for saying, that our bread is no better then ye Lamb of the spirituall fathers. Whereas, if hee speake of the elements in both, there is no question, if of the heauenly parte, that he sayth is true, neuerthelesse, there is a dignitie, & an excellencie of our sacrament about these, and that is in clearnes of vnderstanding the mysterie therof, as I haue often shewed. And all the textes and authorities that Maister Heskins citeth, proue nothing else. As first, Iohn Baptist was greater then all the Prophets, because he spake more clearly of Christ being present, whō they described to come, when he sayed: beholde the Lambe of God, that taketh away the sinne of the worlde: that confirmeth Chrysostome, in Math. Hom. 38. comparing Iohn to that noble man that commeth next to the King. And Oecumenius preferreth Iohn, because he prophesied of him, whome he sawe and baptized. Wherupon

Maister Heskins gathereth, that if Iohn were the more excellent Prophet, because he sawe Christ present, of whome he prophesied, then the sacrament must bee more excellent, because he was present whome it figured. By like reason, he may gather, that they yt were baptized in Christs presēce were better baptized then we are now. But the reason holdeth (as I sayd before) not of the bodily presence, but of the clearer doctrine, that was by meanes of his presence. So Abraham desired to see the day of Christ, and sawe it, Ioan. 8. yet blessed are your eyes (sayeth he) which see that you see, for many Prophets & righteouse men, desired to see, & haue not seene the things that you see, that is, although they haue seene them by faith, yet not so clearely as you haue seen them, and so be the verie wordes of Chrysostome, which M. Hesk. citeth in 13. Math. Hom. 46. vpon that place: Manye Prophets and righteous men, haue desired, &c. that is saith Christ, My comming, presence, myracles, voice. For here he doth not onely preferre them before those lost and damned men, but also he affirmeth them to be more excellent and happie, then the Prophets & righteous men. Why so? Because they do not only see these things which they haue not seene, but also those things which they desired to see, these men sawe with their eyes. For they also by faith, did beholde these things, but these much more clearly did see all things. You see therefore, howe vainly he cauelleth against Oecolampadius and the trueth, when the texts and authorities he citeth, be al cleane contrarie vnto him selfe.
               
               
                  The fourteenth Chapter, proceedeth in the proofe of the same, by the Scriptures and doctors.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  His first proofe shalbe,
                        Fulke.
                      that the sixt Chapter of Iohn is to be taken of the blessed sacrament, and this is proued in his second booke: where also I haue aunswered, how it is taken, and in what respecte it perteineth to the sacrament: namely, as the sacrament is a seale of the doctrine conteined in that Chapter. To this proofe he addeth the consent of the church vntil Luther, in so much that when

the heresie of the Communion vnder both kindes wa
                        •
                      raised in Bohemia, they grounded it vpon that Chapter. Note by the way, that the Communion vnder both kinds instituted by Christ, and practised in the Church a thousand yeares after Christ, is called of Maister Heskins an heresie. The third proofe is, that Iohn spake nothing of the institution of the sacrament, bicause hee spake of it most plentifully in this Chapter by Augustines iudgement. Ioannes &c. Iohn saide nothing in this place of the body and bloud of our Lord, but plainely in an other place he testifieth, that our Lord spake of them most plentifully. Here he will haue vs note, that Augustine calleth it not a signe or figure, but plainly the body and bloud of Christ, therefore it is not a figure or signe. By ye same reason he may say, Augustine calleth it not a sacrament, therefore it is no sacrament. But Christ him selfe saith: Not as your fathers did eate Manna in the wildernesse and are dead. He that eateth this bread shall liue for euer. In which wordes M. Heskins noteth two thinges: The first, that Manna is a figure of Christe in the sacrament, for proofe of which he sendeth vs backe to the 4.5.6.7.8.9. & 10. Chapters of this booke: The second is the excellencie of the body of Christ in the sacrament, aboue Manna, the eaters whereof are dead: but the eaters of the body of Christe in the sacrament shall liue for euer. M. Heskins saith he wot not what, for if you aske him whether all they that eat the body of Christ in the sacrament shall liue eternally, he will say no. For wicked men (as he saith) eate it, which shall not liue eternally. Againe, if you aske him, whether al they that did eat Manna are dead, he will say no. For though they be dead in body, yet bicause many did eate Christ spiritually by faith, they shall liue for euer. You see what pith is in his reason, and substance in his doctrine. But in very deede, Christe compareth his flesh with Manna, as it was a corporall foode only, and so all that did eate it are dead: but all they that eat the flesh of Christe, which is eternall life, shall liue eternally; for though they dye corporally, yet will be raise them vp in the last day.
                  
                     And whereas Maister Heskins voucheth S. Augustine to warrant, De vtilita, poenit. Manna de coelo &c. I must send the reader to the eight Chapter of this booke, where that authoritie is cited and answered, to be flat contrarie to M. Heskins. Likewise, the sentence of Cyprian de Coen. Dom. Coena disposita &c. is handled in the first booke, Chapter 17. and the other beginning Significata in Lib. 1. Cap. 39. The saying of Ambrose Lib. 4. de sacra. Cap. 5. is also against Maister Heskins, as we shall plainely see. Ipse Dominus &c. The Lorde Iesus him selfe testifieth vnto vs, that wee receiue his body and bloud, ought we to doubt of his fidelitie and testification? Nowe returne with me to my proposition. It was truely a great and a venerable thing, that he rayned Manna to the Iewes from heauen. But vnderstand which is the greater, Manna from heauen, or the body of Christe? The body of Christe truely, who is the maker of heauen. Further, he that hath eaten Manna hath dyed, but he that shall eate this body, it shall be made to him remission of sinnes, and he shall not dye for euer. By the effectes of the sacrament, which are remissiō of sinnes & eternal life, M. Hes. saith, ye excellencie thereof is proued aboue Manna. I answere, Ambrose folowing our sauiour Christ, doth not compare Manna the sacrament with our sacrament, but Manna the corporall foode, with the body of Christ the heauenly substance of our sacrament, & so it is more excellent without comparison.
                  But Maister Heskins skippeth ouer with a drye foote, that Ambrose saith, Whosoeuer shall eate of this body, it shall be made to him remission of sinnes, and he shall not not die for euer, by which words it is euident, that no wicked man eateth this body, but they only which eat it spiritually by faith. An other place of Ambrose hee citeth: De myster initiand. Cap. 9. Considera nunc &c. Consider nowe whether is better, the bread of Angels, or the flesh of Christ, which truly is the body of life. That Manna was from heauen, this aboue heauen: that of heauen, this of the Lorde of heauens: that subiect to corruption, if it were kept vntill the next day, this farre from all corruption, which who so euer shall taste religiously, he can feele no corruption. The water did satisfie them for an houre,

the bloud doth wash thee for euer. The Iewe drank and thirsteth, when thou hast dr
                           •
                        nke thou canst not thirst. And that was in a shaddowe: this in the trueth. And after a fewe wordes he saith. Thou hast knowne better thinges, for light is better then a shaddowe, the trueth then a figure, the body of the Authour then Manna from heauen. This place of Ambrose vtterly denieth the body of Christ to be receiued of the wicked which perish, and so consequently denyeth it to be corporally present. But least we should obiect that Ambrose speaketh not of the sacrament, he addeth a long discourse following immediatly. Forte dica
                           •
                         &c. which bicause it is contained in the 51. Chapter of the second booke, I will send the reader thither, where he shall see it aunswered by Ambrose him selfe, and in the same place, and in the tenth Chapter of the second booke, where some part of it is touched. For it were in vaine to trouble the reader with one thing so often as M. Heskins listeth to repeat it.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The fifteenth Chapter prouing all our sacraments generally to be more excellent then the sacraments of Moses.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     First baptisme in respect of The noble presence of God the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, must bring with it some more noble gift, then a bare signe or token. See howe this impudent beast would make Popish fooles beleeue, that we teach baptisme to be nothing else, but a bare signe or token. We thinke and speake of it, as honourably as the scripture teacheth vs. Let the forme of baptisme vsed in the Church of England testifie, whether we make it nothing but a bare signe or token. Let our catechismies of al sorts beare witnesse of the same. But nothing will stop a slanderous mouth. Yet to aunswere the title of that Chapter, S. Augustine is cited, contra Faust. lib. 19. cap. 13. Prima sacramēta &c. The first sacraments, which were obserued & celebrated by the lawe, were the foreshewing of Christ, that was to come, which when he had fulfilled by his cōming, they were taken away, & therfore they were taken away, bicause they were fulfilled. For he came not to breake the law, but to fulfill it. And other are instituted greater in power, better in profite, easier to be done, fewer in number.
                  
                  
                     Maister Heskins asketh wherein bee they greater in power, but in this that the sacramenets of the olde lawe had no power but to signifie onely, oures not onely to signifie, but also to giue that they signifie? And I will aske him, seeing he maketh the sacraments instruments of Gods grace, by what instrument did they receiue the grace of God, if they receiued it not by the sacraments? But Augustine, as I haue often shewed before, is farre from M. Heskins iudgement, wherefore in this place against the Manichees, which denyed the olde testament, he sheweth the abrogation of those rites, not bicause they were euill, but bicause their time was expired, and they fulfilled in Christ: who hath instituted newe sacraments, more effectuall and more profitable, bicause according to the doctrine whereof they be seales, they doe more liuely strengthen the faith of the receiuers, in respect of the mysterie of redemption already accomplished, then those olde sacraments did, which obscurely and darkely preached vnto the receiuers yt redemption, which was not accomplished in acte, yet was as effectuall in power, for their saluation. And that this is Augustines minde, it appeareth plainely in that which followeth immediately in the same booke, 14. Chapter. 
                        Veruntamen si antiqui iusti, qui sacramentis illis intelligebant venturam pręnunciari reuelationem fidei: ex qua, licèt adhuc operta & abscondita munera pietatis tamen intellecta, etiam ipsi viuebant quia in hac vita nemo esse potest iustus, nisi qui ex fide viuit. Neuerthelesse, if those auncient righteous men, which by those sacraments vnderstood the reuelation of faith that was to come to be foreshewed, by which, although the giftes of godlinesse were yet couered and hid, were notwithstanding vnderstoode, euen they also did liue: bicause in this life no man can be righteous, but he that liueth by faith.
                  
                  And afterward in the same Chapter. 
                        Tunc ergo & occulta erat fides: Nam eadem credebant, eadémque sperabant omnes iusti & sancti etiam temporum illorum, & promissiua erant illa omnia sacramenta, omnis
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            vitus ille sacrorum, nunc autem reuelata est fides, in quam conclusus erat populus quando sub lege custodi
                              •
                           batur,

& quod fidelibus promittitur in indicio, iam completum est in example, per 
                              〈◊〉
                           , qui legem & Prophetas non venit soluere, fed adimplere. Then therefore saith was hid, for all the iust and holy men euen of those times beleeued the same thinges, and hoped for the same things, and all the sacraments and holy ceremonies of those times conteined promises, but nowe that faith is reuealed, into which the people was inclosed while they were kept vnder the lawe, & that which is promised to the faithfull in iudgement, is already accomplished in the example, by him which came not to breake the lawe and the Prophetes, but to fulfill them. And following the same matter in the 16. Cap. Interim aduersus calumniosam imperitiam Fausti demonstrare suffecerit, quanto errore delirent, qui putent signis sacramentis
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            mutatis, etiam res ipsas esse diuersas, quas ritus Propheticus pręnuncianis promissas, & quas ritus Euangelicus annunciauit impletas: aut qui censent cum res eaedem sins, non eas alijs sacramentis annunciari debuisse completas, quaem his quibus adhuc complendae praenunciabaentur. Si enim soni verborum, quibus loquimur pro tempore commutantur, eadémque res aliter enunciatur facienda, ali
                              •
                           er facta, sicus ista ipsa duo verba quae dixi, Facienda & Facta, nec paribus morarum interuallis, nec ijsdem vel totidem literis sillabisue sonu
                              •
                           
                           runt: quid mirum si alijs mysteriorum signaculis Passio & Resurrectio Christi futura promissa est, alijs iam facta annunciatur? quandoquidem ipsa verba futurum & factum, passurus & passus, resurrecturus & resurrexit, nec tendi aequaliter, nec similiter fon
                              •
                           re potuerunt. In the meane time against the slaunderous vnskilfulnesse of Faustus, it shall suffice to shewe, in howe great errour they doate, which thinke, that the signes and sacraments being chaunged, the thinges them selues bee diuers, which the Propheticall ceremonie foreshewed to be promised, and which the ceremonie of the Gospel hath declared to be fulfilled, or which thinke, that seeing the thinges be the same, they should not haue bene declared to be fulfilled alredy by other sacraments, then those by which they were foreshewed as yet to be fulfilled in time to come. For if the sound of wordes which we vse in speaking, are changed according to the time, & the same

thing is pronounced otherwise when it shal be done, & otherwise when it is done, as these two very wordes which I spake it shalbe done, and it is done, haue not founded wt like distance of spaces, nor with the same or equal number of letters and sillables: what maruell is it if the passiō & resurrection of Christ was promised to come by other signes of mysteries, and is declared to be accomplished by other? Seeing the very words, that shalbe and that is done, he shal suffer and he hath suffered, he shall rise againe & he is risen againe, could neither be equally extended nor sound alike. Thou seest now by these places, in what respect he calleth our sacraments greater in vertue then the old sacraments: not that another thing is giuen in them, but ye same after a more cleare maner of reuelation. And consequently thou seest, how Christe is present in our sacramentes. But M. Hesk. wil confute vs by the definition of a sacrament, which he saith by cōmon consent of learned men, to be this. A sacrament is a signe of an holie thing in such manner as it may beare the image, and be the cause. If we do admit this definition, being rightly vnderstood, what gaineth he thereby? Forsooth, that the sacrament is an instrumental cause by which God giueth grace. Wel, grant this, what then? Marie Then it is not a bare signe. Gods curse light on him, that teacheth Gods sacraments to be bare signes. And then sacraments giue grace. Nay M. Heskins holde you where you were before, God giueth grace by thē, but not Opere operato, of the worke wrought, which is all the question, but to the elect freely, for grace is called so, because it is freely giuen. After much quarelling about this definitiō, which is neither so cleare nor so perfect as yt which Aug. giueth. A sacrament is a visible signe of an inuisible grace. He cōmeth to a large text of August. In prol. Ps. 73. Opportune non, &c. It came to passe fitly, not by our, but by Gods disspensatiō, that we heard euen now out of the gospel, that the law was giuen by Moses, but grace & truth by Iesus Christ. For if we discern the two testamēts, the promises are not the same, yet most of the precepts are the same. Thou shalt not kil, Thou shalt not cōmit adultery. Thou shalt not steal. Honor thy &c. Thou shalt beare no, &c. Thou

shalt not co
                           •
                        et thy neighbors goods, thou shalt not couet thy neighbors wife is cōmanded to vs, and who doth not obserue these things, goeth out of the way, & is not worthie at all to obteine the holie hill of God, of which it is said: Who shal dwel in thy tabernacle, or who shal rest in thy holie hil? He that is innocent of hands, & of a cleane hart. These things we say most deare brethrē, that you may al learn out of the new Testament, not to cleane to earthly things, but to obteine heauenly thinges. The precepts therefore beeing discussed, are found to be all the same, or else scarse any in the Gospel, which haue ben said of the prophets. The precepts are the same, the sacraments are not the same, the premises are not the same. Let vs see wherfore the praecepts are the same: because that according to them we ought to serue God. The sacramentes are not the same, because they be other sacraments giuing saluation, other promising the sauiour. The sacramentes of the new Testament, do giue saluation: the sacramēts of the old Testament promised the sauiour. Therefore now that thou holdest the thinges promised, what seekest thou things promising the sauiour, now hauing him? I say, holdest the things promised not that we haue already receiued eternall life, but because Christe is already come, which was foreshewed by the prophets. The sacraments are changed, they are made easier fewer, holsomer. Notwithstanding the vain exclamation of M. Hesk. vpon this place, (except we wil make S. August. contrarie to him selfe in ye places before alledged) we may plainly see, how he expoundeth himself in the latter end of this long passage, whereof the greatest part might altogether haue ben spared. Namely yt there is no difference in ye substance of our sacramēts frō theirs, but ye Christ is already come. And our sacraments do not giue saluation, as though we had eternal life deliuered by them in possession, but because Christ ye authour of eternal life, yt in the other was promised, is now come. Not yt grace in them was only promised, & not giuen for them. M. Hesk. own definition of a sacrament should be false, wherin he wil not allow any thing yt is superfluous, & much lesse vntrue. But M.H. is not content with this interpretation, saying yt S. Augustine compareth ye sacraments of the olde lawe to childrens trifles in ye same place: Numquid quiniam puero, &c. Because there are giuen to a childe

certein childish playing trifles, by which the childish minde is called away, are they not therefore plucked out of his hands, when he waxeth a great one? No more therfore God, because he hath plucked away those things as childrens trifles, out of the handes of his sonnes by the new Testament, that he might giue thē something more proprofitable they beeing now waxed greater, is to be thought not to haue giuen those former things. Gentle Reader, I wish thee to turne ouer to this place in S. Augustine, and except thou be too much blinded in affection toward M. Hesk. thou wilt confesse that he hath aduouched a manifest vntruth, when yu shalt see that Augustine vttereth not these words of the sacraments of the olde Testament, but of the promises of earthly benefites, made vnto the Fathers of those times. I can say no more, conferre and iudge.
               
               
                  The sixteenth Chapter proceedeth to the next text of S. Paule, which is: Calix cui Benedi.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  This text which he pretendeth to expound is written in 1. Cor. 10. The cup of blessing which we blesse,
                     
                        Fulke.
                      
                     is it not the communion of the bloud of Christ? The bread which we breake, is it not the cōmunion or partaking of the bodie of Christ? This text (he saith) proueth the reall presence and sacrifice. And first he will haue no trope or figure to be vnderstoode in this place, but the very things themselues: with how grosse absurditie it is, I referre it to the iudgment of al reasonable Papists, that know what a trope meaneth. Secondly he saith, it is an euil manner of disputation, to go about to proue like effectes, of vnlike causes. Wherein I will agree with him. But what vpon this? Forsooth, then it followeth, that as the Iewes, of whom S. Paule taketh example, were partakers of the altar, because they did eate the sacrifices, so we are partakers of the bodie & bloud of Christ, because we eate and drinke the bodie and bloud of Christ corporally, and not because we eate a peece of bread and drink a litle wine. Againe, as the Corinthians, by eating meate offred to idols were made partakers of idols: so ye Christians, because they did eate ye bodie of Christ, are made partakers thereof. But to discusse this vaine cloude of sophistrie, I wil reason vpon his own Maxime: like causes, haue

not vnlike effectes: S. Paule saith, he would not haue the Corinthians partakers of Diuels by eating meate offered to idols, which in effect was offred to diuels. As they that were made partakers of Diuels, bycause they did eate meat offred to diuels, were not partakers of the substance and nature of diuels, neither did they eate the substance of diuels, no more doth it follow, yt we eating & drinking the bread of thanksgiuing, & cup of thanksgiuing, which are a cōmunication of the bodie and bloud of Christ, do corporally eate and drink the bodie & bloud of Christ, or be made partakers corporally of the nature & substance of the bodie & bloud of Christ. The like I say of ye altar. Now concerning the sacrifice M. Hesk. saith, yt if S. Paule did not as well take the cup, & table of the Lord to be a sacrifice, as the cup and table of diuels to be a sacrifice, & as the sacrifices of the Israelites, he would not haue vsed like termes, but shewed a difference. I answer, if the sacrament had ben a sacrifice, he would haue so called it, especially in this place, or at least in some other place, therefore it is no sacrifice: & he shewed a sufficient difference, when he called the one a sacrifice, and not the other. Although if I shold grant it to be a sacrifice of thanksgiuing M. Hes. were neuer the neere of his propitiatorie sacrifice.
                  But the fathers of Christes Parleament house must be heard to establish this interpretation of M. Hes. and first Chrysost. In 1. Cor. 10. Maximè, &c. With these wordes he doeth get greatly to him selfe, both credite and feare. And the meaning of them is this, That which is in the cup, is the same, which flowed one of his side, and thereof we are partakers. And he called it the cup of blessing, because that when we haue it in our handes with admiration and a certeine horror of that vnspeakable gift, we prayse him giuing thankes, because he hath shed his bloud, that we should not remaine in errour. Neither hath he onely shed it, but made vs all partakers of it. Therefore (saith he) if thou desirest bloud do not sprinkle the altar of idols with the slaughter of bruite beasts, but my altar with my bloud. What is more maruelous then this? Tell me I pray thee wha
                           •
                         is more amiable? This also louers when they see those whom they loue allured with desire of other mens things, giue their owne vnto them, and counsel them to absteine from these. But

louers truely doe shewe this desire in mony, garments, possessions: no man euer in his owne bloud. But Christ in this hath shewed both his care, and his vehement loue toward vs. And in the olde Testament, when they were more vnperfect, that bloud which they offered to idol
                           •
                         he himselfe would accept, that he might turne them away from idols, which also was a signe of inspeakable loue. But here he hath prepared a much more wonderfull and magnificall sacrifice, both when he changed the sacrifice it selfe, and for the slaughter of brute beaste: commanded him selfe to be offered. Although M. Hesk. hath disioyned this place to make shew of varietie, I haue set it down whole and entire. Here M. Hesk. triumpheth not a litle, rayling against blessed Cranmer for abusing S. Paules words, because Chrysostome saith, that which is in the cup is that which flowed out of Christes side, therfore it must needs be his bloud, & that corporaly receiued, neither can he abide to heare tell of a trope or figure in these wordes. Bu
                        •
                      in spight of his heart, Chrysostom must be vnderstood with a trope or figure, because he saith immediatly after yt Christ willeth the Corinthians to sprinkle his altar with his bloud. I am sure M. Hesk. wold not dip his holiwater sprinkle in the challice, and shake it ouer the altar. Therefore the whole speech of Chrysostom is a continued trope and allegorie. And therfore neither M. Hes, his presence, nor his sacrifice cā be proued out of this place. Concerning the sacrifice, I haue often shewed, how the ancient fathers called the sacrament a sacrifice, namely of thanksgiuing. First, not of propitiation, & so we grant that Christ did institute a sacrifice in the supper. Secondly vnproperly, as a remēbrance of Christes sacrifice, and so doth Chrysostome expound him selfe, vpon the tenth to the Hebrues: Non aliud, &c. 
                     We offer not another sacrifice, as the high priest, but ye same we do always, but rather we worke the remēbrance of that sacrifice. Another place of Chrysostome he citeth out of his Ser. de Eucharist. in Enconija. Reputate salutarē, &c.
                      
                     Esteeme that wholsome bloud to flowe, as it were out of his Diuine, and vnpolluted side, and so comming to it, receiue it with pure lippes. This (saith he) must needes proue a reall presence, because it is receiued

with lip
                        •
                     , as ye spiritual receiuing is not. And these words must be spoken in a plaine maner without all figure, because he spake them in a sermon, to the common people. O blockish reasons: surely he hath not read this place in Chrysostom, but borowed it of some note book. For immediatly before these wordes, is a place that hath a great shewe of transubstantiation, but in deede it cleane ouerthroweth both ye corporal maner of receiuing, & M. Hesk. two doughtie reasons. Num vides panem, num vi
                           •
                        um
                     ▪ 
                     
                        No
                              ••
                            ficut reliqui 
                              •
                           ibi in secessum vadunt? Absit ne sic cogites, quēaed
                              •
                           o
                              ••
                            enim si cera igni adhibita illi assimulatur, nihil substantia vemanet, nihil superfluit: sic & hic pu
                              •
                           a mysteria consumi corporis praesentia, Prop
                              •
                           er, quod & accedentes ne putetis, quod accipiatis Diuinum corpus ex homine, sed ex ipsis Seraphim forcipe ignē, quem scilices Esaias vidit, vat accipere. What doest thou see bread or wine? Do they go into the drought like other meal? God forbid, that thou sholdest so thinke. Fo
                           •
                         as waxe if it be put to the fire, is made like vnto it, none of the substance remaineth, nothing ouerfloweth: so here think the mysteries, to be consumed by the presence of ye bodie. Therfore you that come to it, think not that you receiue the diuine bodie of a man, but that you receiue, the fier which Esaie saw with a paire of tongs of the Seraphims themselues. 
                     If M. Hesk. will not allow any figures in this sermon, because it was made to the common people, that we receiue not the Lords bodie at the Priests hand, but fire from the altar by an Angels hande: and yt Chrysostome allowed none but a spirituall receiuing of Christ, not corporally present on the altar, but in heauen, he teacheth sufficiētly, both by this place, & more plainely following ye former place which M. Hesk. cited before In 1. Cor. 10. Ad hoc 
                              〈◊〉
                            nos inducis sacrifici
                              •
                           on formidand
                              ••
                            & admirabile, quod iubet nobis vt cum concordia & charitate maxima ad se accedamis, & aquilae in hac vita facti, ad ipsum c
                              •
                           lum euotemus, vel potius supra 
                              〈◊〉
                           . Vbi enim cad
                              •
                           uer, inquit, illic & aquilae. Cadauer Domini corpu
                              •
                            propter mortem, nisi enim ille cecidisset, nos nō resurrexissemus Aquilas 
                              〈◊〉
                            appellat, vt oftendat ad alta eum oportere contēdere, qui ad hoc corpus ac
                              •
                           edit, & nihil cum terra debere ei esse commune,

neque ad inferiora trahi & repere sed ad superiora sēper volare, & in solem institiae intueri, mentisqué oculum acutissimum habere. Aquilaerum enim non gracculorum hec mensa est. For vnto this doeth the fearefull and wonderful sacrifice bring vs, that he cōmandeth vs, that we come vnto him with concord and great charitie, and beeing made eagles in this life, we flie vp into heauen or rather aboue heauen. For where the carkase is, saith he, there are the Eagles. The Lords bodie is the carkas in respect of his death, for except he had fallen, we had not risen againe. And he calleth them Eagles, to shew, that he must get vp on high yt cōmeth to this body, & must haue nothing to do with the earth, nor be drawn and creepe to the lower places, but alwayes to flie vp on high, and to beholde the sonne of righteousnesse, and to haue a most cleare eye of the minde. For this is the table of Eagles and not of Iayes. These words may satisfie a reasonable man, that Chrysostom in this homily, ment none other, but a spirituall manner of receiuing of Christe in heauen, and not transubstantiated in the sacrament on the altar, in earth: ye other places he soweth together after his manner, to peece out his Chapter, out of Cyprian De Coen. Chrysost. De prodition. Iudae. August. contra literas Pet. Iren. Lib. 4. Cap. 32. are answered at large before in seuerall places, namely in order. Lib. 1. Ca. 17. Lib. 1. Cap. 18. Lib. 1. Cap. 19. and Lib. 2. Cap. 49. The place of Ambrose In prima oratione praepar. &c. Deserueth none answere, beeing none of his workes but a counterfet, as Erasmus, and all learned men do iudge, that be not wedded to their owne affection.
               
               
                  The seuententh Chapter proceedeth vpon the same text by the exposition of Chrysostome and S. Hierome.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Chrysostome is cited as before vpon this text In 1. Cor. 10. vpon these wordes: The bread which we breake,
                        Fulke.
                      is it not the communication of the bodie of Christ? Quare non dixit participatio? Why said he not the participatiō? because he wold signifie somewhat more, for we do not communicate only in participation and receiuing, but in vnitie: for as that bodie is vnited to Christ, so are we by this bread ioyned together in an vnion. But why

doth he adde: Which we breake? This may we see in the Eucharisty but in the crosse not so, but altogether contrariwise. There shall no bone of his be broken, (saith he) but that he suffred not in the crosse, he suffereth in the oblation and permitteth for thee to be broken. Here first he misliketh ye translation of the English Bible, that calleth it participation. A simple quarrel. I would see the Bible perfectly translated into English by the Papists. And yet the vulgar Popish Latine hath Participatio, & M. Heskins himselfe translateth it the partaking. But beside the communion whiche hee passeth ouer, M. Heskins gathereth his reall presence and sacrifice. I will adde none other place of Chrysostome, to explane his meaning, this is so manifest of it selfe against both. First whereas M. Heskins reasoneth for the reall presence of the communion, which is such with vs & Christ, as is with Christ and his bodie, and that is substantially, and not spiritually: I answer he vtterly falsifieth Chrysostoms meaning, for he speaketh of our coniunction one with another, which is spiritually, & not of Christe with vs: we communicate (saith he) in vnitie, that we might be ioyned one with an other in an vnion. Therefore M. Heskins argument holdeth not. Secondly, yt he speaketh of breaking of Christ in the sacrifice, is so manifest to be vnderstood spiritually, that it ouerthroweth, both the presence and the sacrifice: for Christ is not broken but spiritually: therefore he is not present but spiritually. M. Heskins 
                        •
                     ombleth out the matter with a foolish caueat, yt though Christ suffer & be broken in ye sacrament, yet he suffreth no violence nor paine. But let him speake plainely, if he dare for his eares, that Christe is really and substantially broken, though wtout pain, for that breaking of his body, which Christ speaketh of in the institution of ye sacramēt was perfourmed really and substantially vpon the crosse. Wherefore vpon Chrysost. authoritie I will conclude against all ye Papistes in the world: Christ is so present in ye sacrament, yt he is broken therin, but he is not broken corporally but spiritually, therefore he is not present corporally, but spiritually. Beside this, it is to be noted in yt
                     
saying of Chrysost. that he compareth yt bodie, with this bread. As that bodie is vnited to Christ, so are we by this bread ioyned together in an vnitie or vnion. Hoc & il
                           •
                        ud be spoken of diuers things, else he wold haue said: so by the same body we are ioyned in an vnion, but he saith, by this bread, therfore the body is one thing, & this bread another thing in corporal substance. S. Hierom is cited 1. Cor. 10. Calix. benedictionis &c. The cup of blessing, &c. Therefore he named the cup first, that he might dispute more at large of the bread. Is it not the cōmunication of the bloud of Christ, as our sauiour himselfe saith? he that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my bloud abideth in me & I in him. Here is nothing but yt we do all confesse, sauing yt M. Hes. will denie the bread yt S. Hierome speaketh of, to al men, & ye cup to all lay men. The other place of Hierome yt he interlaceth after his maner, In Psal. 110. is answered before Lib. 1. Ca. 30. The third place followeth in Hierome immediatly after the first. Et panis quem frangimus nōne participatio corporis Domini est? Ita & panis idolatrie, daemonū participatio esse monstratur. And is not the bread which we breake a participation of the bodie of our Lord? Euen so also the bread of idolatrie is a participation of diuels. Here M.H. to mainteine his fond quarrel against the translation of the English Bible hath falsified S. Hier. & in steede of Participatio, set downe Cōmunicatio corporis, &c. a cōmunication of ye body, &c. The place it self is directly against M. Hesk. bil, because ye participation of ye Lords bodie is cōpared wt the participation of diuels, which cannot be a corporal maner of partaking. And it foloweth: Omnes quidē de vno pane, & de vno Calice participamus. Ita si cū idololatris de vno pane comedimus, vnū cūillis corpus efficimur. videte Israel secundū carnē. Carnalis Israel carnales hostias offerebat sicut spiritualis sacrificia spiritualia offert Christo. We al truly are partakers of one bread & of one cup, so if we eat of one bread wt idolaters, we are made one body with them. Behold Israel according to the fleshe. The carnal Israel did offer carnal sacrifices, euen as ye spiritual Israel doth offer spirituall sacrifices to Christe. In these wordes obserue, that we are so made one bodie, by partaking of one bread and cup, as by eating one bread with idolaters, which can not be after a corporall manner.
                  
                     Secondly, that we offer not Christ in sacrifice, but offer spiritual sacrifice to Christ. Finally he saith vpon ye same Chapter: Non potestis calicem Domini bibere, & calicem Daemoniorum. Non potestis Dei & Daemonum esse particip
                              •
                           s. You can not drinke of the cup of our Lorde and the cup of diuels: you can not be partakers of God and of Diuels. See nowe by S. Hieromes iudgement, yt to be partaker of the cup of the Lord, is to be partaker of God, & not of the bloud of Christ after a corporal, but after a spiritual maner. For if the bloud of Christ were conteined locally & substantially in the cup, & that wicked men might drink ye bloud of Christ, (as Papistes holde) then a man might be partaker both of the cup of the Lord, & of the cup of diuels, yea of the bodie of ye Lord, & of the table of diuels, which Saint Paul doth so expresly denie. As touching his bald reason of the sacrifice, it is answered before, and out of Hierome euen now, and his real presence being taken away, it passeth away with it.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The eighteenth Chapter proceedeth in the exposition of the same text by S. Augustine, and Damascen.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     He citeth S. Augustine Contra Inimic. Leg. & prophet. naming neither what booke nor Chapter, to cloake his shamefull corruption, and falsification. For in the very middes he leaueth out a sentence or two, beside that, he cutteth off the later parte, which doth clearely open Saint Augustines mind, & thus he citeth it: Nol
                           •
                         vos socies Daemorum, &c. I will not that ye be made fellowes of Diuels. He did truely forbid them from idolatrie. For the which thing he would declare to them, that they should euen so be made fellowes of diuels, if they did eate Idolathytes of the sacrifice, as the carnall Israel whiche did eate of the sacrifices in the Temple▪ was fellow of the altar. By occasion of that he began, that he would say this: wherefore my most beloued flye from the honouring of Idols. Afterward following he sheweth to what sacrifice they ought to appertein: saying, I speak as vnto wise men, iudge what I say, is not the cup of blessing which we blesse a communication of the bloud of Christ? and is not the bread which we breake a communication of the bodie of our Lord? In this saying, after the worde, altar, he hath gelded out thus

much: 
                        Ideo quippe addidit carnaliter, vel secundùm carnem, quia est Israel spiritualiter vel secundùm spiritum, qui veteres vmbras iam non sequitur, sed eam consequentem quae his vmbris praecedentibus significata est, veritatem. For therfore he added carnally or after ye flesh, because there is a Israel spiritually or according to the spirite, which doth not now followe the olde shadowes but the trueth following, which was signified by those shadowes. All this is left out of the very middest. From the end he cutteth of these wordes following. Quia vnus panis & vnum corpus multi sumus: omnes enim de vno pane participamus. Et propter hoc subiunxit, videte Israel secundùm carnem, nonne qui de sacrificijs manducant, socij sunt altaris? vt intelligerent ita se iam socios esse corporis Christi quemadmodum illi socij sunt altaris. Because there is one bread, and we beeing many are one bodie, for we are all partakers of one bread. And for this cause he added: Behold Israel according to the flesh, are not they which eate of the sacrifices fellowes or partakers of the altar? That they might vnderstand, that they are now so fellowes or partakers of the bodie of Christe, as those are partakers of the altar. What can be saide more playne, for the spirituall manner of participation of the bodie of Christe? Except M. Heskins will say, that the Iewes were really, corporally, and substantially partakers of the altar. And this is conteined in the first booke & Cap. 19. And wheras M. Hesk. iangleth of the sacrifice mentioned in this place, heare what sacrifice it may be, by Augustines owne wordes in the 18. Chapter of the same booke. 
                        Sed nec laudibus nostris eget, &c. But neither hath he need of our prayses, but as it is profitable for vs and not for him, that we offer sacrifice to God, and because the bloud of Christe is shed for vs in that singular and onely true sacrifice, therefore in those first times God commanded the sacrifices of immaculate beastes to be offered vnto him, to prophecie this sacrifice by such significations: that as they were imaculate from faults of their bodies, so he should be hoped to be offered for vs, who alone was immaculate frō sins. Here the sacrifice of death is ye singular sacrifice, & the only

true sacrifice propitiatorie of the Church, otherwise for the sacrifice of praise and thankesgiuing, or for the sacrament to be called vnproperly a sacrifice of the auncient fathers, I haue often confessed before. As for Damascenes authoritie, li. 4. Ca. 14. it is not worth the aunswering, being a late writer, more then 100. yeares out of the compasse, and full of grosse absurdities, and in the place by M. Hesk. alledged, denyeth that Basill calleth breade & wine 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , or exemplaria, exemplaries of the bodie and bloud of Christ after the consecration, which is an impudent lye: for before the consecration they are no sacraments, and so no exemplars of the bodie and bloud of Christe: therefore if he called them exemplars, it must needs be when they are sacraments, & yt is after consecration: but such lippes such lettyce, he is a sufficient author for M. Heskins, and yet hee is directly against transubstantiation. For he saith: cum sit mos hominum edere panem & bibere vinum, ijs rebus adiunxit suam diuinitatem: whereas it is the manner of men to eate beead and drinke wine, hee hath ioyned his diuinitie to these things. In these words he acknowledgeth the bread and wine to remaine in the sacrament, & the diuinitie of Christ to bee ioyned to them.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The nynteenth Chapter continueth the exposition of the same text, by Isidore & Oecumenius.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     M. Hesk. hath many friends in the lower house, as hee hath neuer a one in the vpper house that fauoureth his bil: Yet Isidorus saith litle for him, but rather against him. He citeth him, lib. 1. offic. Cap. 18. Panis, &c. The bread which we breake, is the bodie of Christ, which sayth I am the bread of life, which came downe from heauen, and the wine is his bloud, and this is it that is written, I am the true vine. M. Hesk. saith truely, that Isidore is the rather to be credited, because he alledgeth the scripture: and therefore, according to these two textes of scripture, he must be vnderstoode, but neither of both these texts, is to be vnderstood litterally, but figuratiuely: therefore his saying: the breade is the bodie, and the wine is his bloud, must be vnderstood figuratiuely,

& not litterally, which M. Heskins perceiuing, would help him out by foysting in a place of Cyrillus in Ioan. Annon conuenienter, &c May it not be conueniently sayde, that his humanitie is the vine & we the branches, because wee be all of the same nature? For the vine & the branches be of the same nature: So both spiritually & corporally wee are the braunches and Christ is the vine. In these wordes Cyrill reasoneth against an Arrian, as is more at large declared in ye sixth Chapter of this third booke, yt would interpret this place only of the diuinitie of Christe, to make him lesse then his father, as the vine is subiect to the husbandman. But Cyrill contendeth, yt it may well be vnderstoode also of his humanitie, because we are not onely ioyned to the diuinitie of Christ, but also to his flesh, which is testifyed vnto vs by the sacrament, wherin we are spiritually fedd with the verie bodie & bloud of Christe, and so Christe is the vine both spiritually & corporally, that is both after his godhead & after his manhod. But Cyrillus would neuer denie that this saying: I am the true vine, is a figuratiue speach, which is the matter in controuersie betweene M. Hesk. and vs.
                  Oecumenius is alledged to as litle purpose as Isidorus, in 1. Cor. 10. Poculum vocat, &c. He calleth the cupp of the bloud of Christ, the cupp of blessing which we blesse, which hauing in our hands, we blesse him which hath giuen vs his bloude. Here is neuer a worde, but I will willingly subscribe vnto it, & yet M. Hesk. sayth, it is a common manner of speache, that the vessel is named by the thing that it conteineth, hee dare not say, it is a figuratiue speach, lest while he would haue the bloud of Christ locally conteined in the cupp, he might be pressed with the figure in the worde bloud, which he cannot denye, though he dissemble in the word cupp. In the end he braggeth of an euident and stronger sentence of these writers, which when it commeth, wee shal examine it, in the meane time, they haue no voyce in the vpper house, and therefore we feare not greatly what they say.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The twelfth Chapter proceedeth vpon the same text by Haime & Theophylact.
                  It were losse of time, to quarrell about the testimonies of these two burgesses of the lower house.
                        Fulk.
                      Maister Heskins sayeth, that there wanteth nothing in Theophylact, that is necessarie for a credible witnesse. At least, he should haue excepted, that he defended an heresie of the proceeding of the holie Ghost, against the churche of Rome in 3. Ioan. As for his antiquitie, which hee maketh to be before the controuersie was moued by Berengarius, although it were so, yet it were none argument of his trueth. But it seemeth, hee was much about the time of Berengarius Anno. 1049. Neither doth Peter Martyr, whome Maister Heskins rayleth vppon, so much esteeme his authoritie, that he would wrest it to his side, more then the verie words of Theophylact would beare, as the learned that read his workes can testifie.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The one and twentieth Chapter, proceedeth yet vppon the same text by Anselmus & Bruno.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     Let M. Hesk. make the moste of those burgesses, the bill will passe neuer the sooner, though all the lower house allowed it, so long as it cannot be receiued into the higher house. The latter ende conteineth a vaine repetition of Cyprian and Prospers sayings so often aunswered before, with a foolishe insultation against the proclaimer, as though he sawe not these doctors, as well as M. Heskins, who (I beleeue) neuer opened halfe the bookes of them, whose sayings he hath alledged, he hath cited the most of them so corruptly, not onely falsifying them, to serue his turne, but also, when there was no aduantage for him, in his corruption.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The two and twentieth Chapter, endeth the exposition of this text, by Dionyse & Gagneius.
                  Two worshipfull burgesses, vnto whome hee addeth Bishop Fisher for the thirde,
                        Fulke.
                      after he hath made a shorte rehearsall of all those writers, whose authoritie he hath vsed, & abused, to mainteine this his exposition.
               
               
                  
                  The three and twentieth Chapter, beginneth the exposition of this text: Quoniam vnus panis, &c.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The text is this: Because there is one bread, and wee being many, are one bodie, for we are all partakers of the same bread,
                     
                        Fulk.
                      
                     & of the same cupp. First. M. Hesk. sayeth, that the Apostle speaking of our Communion with Christ, and with our selues, declareth, that bread and the cuppe bee not taken for bare figures of the bodie & bloud of Christ, in which argument he fighteth with his owne shadowe, for we detest bare figures, as much as grosse transubstantiation. Secondly, he sayeth, our communion with Christ, is both spirituall and corporall: spirituall in baptisme, and corporall in this sacrament, or else this sacrament was instituted in vaine, if we haue none other communion with Christ thereby, then spirituall, which is in baptisme. I answere his argument is nought, for the diuerse dispensations of the same grace, is testified and confirmed to vs by diuerse sacraments, our regeneration by baptisme, and our preseruation, as by spirituall foode, by ye Lordes supper. As for the superstitious bread that was giuen in Saint Augustines time to those that were Catechumeni in steede of the sacrament, hee doeth well to compare to their popish holie bread, sauing that there is greate difference: for that was giuen onely to them that were not baptised, this altogether to them that are baptized, & many that haue receiued the other sacrament at their hands. But where he hath tossed his corporall communion to & fro, at last he addeth a condition of receiuing worthily, so that he denyeth in effect, that he saide before, that by receipt of Christes bodie, men are incorporate to Christ, & forceth the wordes of the Apostle to be many, and not all, which is false, for he sayeth all yt eate of this bread, though we be many yet are made one bodie. Finally, in that the Apostle sayeth, we all eate of one bread & drink of one cupp, M. Hesk▪ saith, that he tooke it not for bare material bread, for then it were not true: as for his bare bread, let him keepe to crome his pottage. But howe prooueth he, that Saint Paule spake not of materiall

bread, as the earthly parte of the sacrament? Forsooth all do not eat one bread: for the Greekes eat leuened bread, & the Latines fine & vnleuened bread. In the Popish church is giuen to euery communicant a sundrie bread, in the scismaticall church, euery conuenticle hath a sundrie bread, and sometimes diuerse breades, therfore it is no materiall bread, that S. Paule speaketh of, but the heauenly bodie of Christ. If I were as froward a reasoner, as M. Hesk. I would aske him whether the body of Christ be not a materiall body, because he maketh materiall & heauenly, diuerse differences, as though he were an Eutychian. But admitt that by materiall bread hee meaneth bread properly so called, and the heauenly bodie figuratiuely called bread, which he is loth to come to: what mad man woulde vnderstand that one breade which S. Paul sayeth, to be distributed in euery communion to all that are present, and whereof euery one taketh parte in token of the communion or fellowship of many in one bodie, for all the kindes & fashions of bread that are vsed in all communions in the worlde? For the Apostles argument is grounded of ye similitude of bread, which of many graines is made one bread, so wee being many are made one bodie. And therefore in vaine doeth he racke these wordes of S. Paul, to the meaning of Barnarde, whose authoritie we receiue not, or to the words of Chrysostome, which he falsly alledgeth to be in 1. Cor. 10. Hom. 17. whereas they be in ad Hebraeos. 10. Hom. 7. which is nothing, but an obiection of his: the place is wholy cited in the first booke & 37. Chapter, where you shall see how much it maketh for M. Hesk.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The 24. Chapter proceedeth vpon the same text by Chrysostom and S. Augustine.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     Chrysostome vpon this place is cited thus: Quoniam vnus panis & vnum corpus, &c. For there is one bread & wee being many are one bodie. For what do I call (saith he) a commemoration? wee are the selfe same bodie. What is the breade? the bodie of CHRIST, and what are they made

which receiue it? the body of Christ, not many bodies but one body. For as the breade is made one of many cornes, so that the cornes do not appeare, and yet there are cornes, but ioyned together, so that they can not be discerned: so are we ioyned one with an other, and with Christ. For thou art not nourished of one body, and he of an other▪ but all of the same, therefore he added all we, which doe partake of the same bread. Of these wordes Maister Heskins wil haue vs to learne three things. First, that communication is to be all of one body, which is true, so wee vnderstand a spirituall kinde of coniunction, by which wee are not only ioyned to Christ, as Chrysostome saith, but also one to an other in one body. Secondly, that it is the body of Christ, by the eating whereof we are made one body, and this also is true, for we contend not for the eating of Christes body, but for the manner of eating.
                  The third note I thinke hee maketh, that by Chrysostomes iudgement Saint Paule meant not materiall breade, but the body of Christe, which is proued to bee false and absurde by these two reasons. First, if Saint Chrysostome by breade meant not the sacramentall breade, but the body of Christe, then his question is nothing else in effect, but what is the body of Christe? And then he answereth, the body of Christe, which is very absurde and ridiculous. Secondly, that he meaneth materiall breade vsed in the sacrament, it is manifest in that hee saith, it is made of many graines, but the body of Christe it not made of graines, therefore hee can not meane the body of Christe, but the sacramentall breade, which signifieth the body of Christe. But here Maister Heskins, as though hee were the first that espied the matter insulteth vpon him that translateth this part of Chrysostome, which was Franciscus Aretinus, whom either of ignorāce or of malice, he chargeth to haue falsified Chrysostome, and in steede of his wordes which according to the Greeke are, What is the bread? to haue turned it, What doth the bread signifie? For my part, although the Greeke copies cōmonly extant in print, are not as he hath translated it, yet I suppose, yt he followed either some other copy

that I haue not seene, peraduenture printed, peraduentur
                        •
                      written. For vndoutedly, although he were ignorantly or willfully deceiued, yet the sense of Chrysostomes words must needes be: what doth the bread signifie? which M. Heskins can not altogether dissemble, but then he will haue it not materiall bread, but the word, bread. But how friuolous that is, I haue shewed before, for this worde, Breade, is not made of cornes, but the materiall bread giuen in the sacrament. Neither doth the other worde hee citeth, any thing helpe him. Non enim simpliciter &c. For hee hath not simplie giuen his body, but when the former nature of the flesh formed out of the earth, by sinne being made mortall, was forsaken of life, he brought in an other (as I might so say) lumpe or leauen, that is, his flesh, in nature truely the same, but free from sinne and ful of life, which he giueth to all, that they might be made partakers of it, that being nourished with it, and the first that was dead being cast away, we might be ioyned together by this liuing & immortall table. Loe (saith M. Heskins) this is not a peece of dead breade, but a liuing and immortall meate, hee dare not say, table, as Chrysostome doth, for feare of a figure. But is he so blinde, that he seeth not the partaking and nourishing of the newe flesh to be such, as the casting away of the olde is? which no man doubteth to be spirituall. But seeing he braggeth so much of Chrysostome, and is such an enimie to signes and figures, let him heare what he writeth in Math. Hom. 83. Sed ficut in veteri, eodem h
                              •
                           c modo in beneficio reliquit memoriam mysteriorum colligendo & hinc haereticorum ora frenando. Nam quando dicunt vnde patet immolatum Christum fuisse, & alia multa mysteriae? Haec enim adferentes, eorum ora consuimus. Si enim mortuus Iesus non est, cuius symbolum ac signum hoc sacrificium est? Vides quancum ei studium fuerit, vt semper memoria tentamus pro nobis ipsum mortuum fuisse. But as in the olde Paschal▪ euen likewise here in this benefite hee hath left the memorie of the mysteries, by gathering, and hereof bridling the mouthes of heretikes. For when they say, howe is it knowne that Christ was sacrificed, and many other mysteries? For when we bring foorth those things, we soe vp their mouthes. For

if Iesus be not dead, of whom is this sacrifice a token and signe? Thou seest howe great care he had, that we might alwayes keepe in remembrance, that he dyed for vs.
                  
                  There can nothing be spoken more plainly, to declare either what the sacrament is, or for what end it was ordained, or finally, what manner of sacrifice it is accounted of Chrysostome, and the auncient Fathers. But nowe followeth S. Augustine Ser. 2. Pasc. Quia Christus passus est &c. Bicause Christ hath suffered for vs, he hath commended vnto vs his body and his bloud in this sacrament: which also he hath made our owne selues. For we also are made his body, and by his mercy we are that which we receiue. I like this saying very well, it maketh altogether for the truth on our side. Yet M. Heskins noteth, that he saith not, he hath commended a figure or memoriall, but his body and his bloud. I agree well, but hee saith, that hee hath commended his body and bloud in a sacrament, hee doth not say, the sacrament is his naturall body present vnder the formes of bread and wine corporally, that I may followe M. Heskins negatiue argument. But especially let vs note what he saith, and not what hee saith not. He saith, we are the same that we receiue, but we are not his naturall body after a corporall manner, therfore wee receiue not his naturall body after a corporall manner. The rest that followeth to moue vs to abide in this body of Christ, confirmeth the same. Dic mihi quid est &c. Tell me what is it whereof thou liuest? Doth thy spirite liue by thy body, or thy body by thy spirite? Euery one that liueth aunswereth: I liue by my spirite. And he that can not answere this, I knowe not whether he liueth. What answereth euery one that liueth? My body truely liueth by my spirite. Wilt thou therefore liue by the spirite of Christ? Be thou in the body of Christ. For whether doth my body liue of thy spirite? Mine liueth of my spirit, and thine liueth of thy spirit. The bodie of Christ can not liue but by the spirit of Christ. Hereof it is, that the Apostle Paul expounding this bread: One bread (saith he) we are one body. All men see, that this writer speaketh of our mysticall and spirituall coniunction with Christe, neither can M. Heskins him selfe make any other thing of it.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The fiue and twentieth Chapter proceedeth vpon the same text by Damascene and Haimo.
                  Maister Heskins store is farre spent, and therefore he maketh much of the remnants.
                        Fulke.
                      Damascene and Haimo we haue before diuers times excepted against, as vnlawful witnesses, and therefore we will spend no time in examining their sayings. But whereas Maister Heskins, maketh great ado in this Chapter of our coniunction with Christ, both in soule and body, we knowe it, and doe reioyce in it, but for any thing that he saith, or all the Papistes in the world, it is not necessarie, that Christs body should be eaten with our mouth after a corporall manner, that we may haue coniunction with his body. For then infants which eate not the sacrament, should want a necessarie manner of the coniunction of their bodies with the body of Christe, and so be out of hope of resurrection. The places of Cyrill that hee citeth in 6. Ioan. Cap. 14. be cited before, the one Lib. 2. Cap. 17. the other Lib. 2. Cap. 34. where they are answered. Then followeth a discourse to proue that communion or fellowship ought not to be had with heretiques, which is very true, and therefore not to bee had with Papistes, the greatest heretiques that are. After the saying of Haimo rehearsed, hee is angrie with vs, that we will reiect his authoritie, being as he saith, neare a thousand yeares of age, but surely in some Chronicles that I haue read he is an English man, generall or prouinciall of Friers preachers, and I am sure there was neuer a Dominike Frier in the world one thousand yeares after Christe, and they that make him oldest, make him to be 840. yeares since Christ. The parcell of Chrysostome in 1. Cor. 10. Hom. 24. wherevnto he would compare his Haimo, is rehearsed more at large Lib. 1. Cap. 18. and that of Cyrill Cap. 15. in 6. Ioan.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The sixe and twentieth Chapter proceedeth vpon the same text, by S. Cyrill and S. Thomas.
                  
                     Hesk.Cyrill, whom vnfitly he matcheth with Thomas of Aquine,

is cited in 17. Ioan. Cum trinitas vnum natura sit &c. For as much as the Trinitie in nature is one, let vs consider how we our selues also among our selues corporally and with God spiritually are one. The only begotten sonne comming out of the substance of God his father, and possessing in his nature the whole father, was made flesh according to the scriptures, and hath vnspeakably ioyned and vnited himselfe to our nature. For he that is God by nature, is made man in deede, not Theophorus, that is, hauing God in him by grace, as they that are ignorant of the mysterie do contend, but he is both very God and very man. So he hath ioyned together in him selfe that is one, those things which according to nature differ very much among them selues, and hath made vs partakers of the diuine nature. For the communication of the spirite, and as I may say, the dwelling, was first in Christ, and from him hath perced into vs, when being made man, he him selfe annoynted and sanctified his temple with his owne spirite. The beginning therefore, and the way by which we are made partakers of the holy spirite, and are vnited to God, is the mysterie of Christ. For we are all sanctified in him. Therfore that he might vnite euery one beetwene our selues & God, (although we be asunder both in body and soul) yet he hath found out ae meane agreeable to the counsel of his father & his own wisdom. For blessing the beleuers by the mystical communion, by his body he hath made vs one body both with himself and also among our selues. For who shall thinke them straunge from this naturall vnion, which by the vnion of one holy body are vnited in one Christe? For if we all eate one bread, we are all made one body. For Christe suffereth vs not to be diuided and disioyned. Therefore all the Church is made the body of Christ, and euery one of vs the members of Christe after S. Paule, for being conioyned to one Christ by his body, bicause wee haue receiued him in vs which is indiuisible, our members be rather appropriated to him, then to vs. Concerning the vnitie of God the father with the sonne, of the two natures of God and man in Christ, and of the vnitie of the members of Christ with their head, which M. Hesk. noteth out of this place of Cyril, it shall be no neede to speake, seeing there is no controuersie betweene vs, but that these three vnities be there. Only of the maner how we be vnited, is the difference. We are vnited to ye body of Christ, but whether by

eating the same with our mouthes, or by faith, through the vnspeakable working of Gods spirite, is all the question. All the holde, he catcheth of this place, is, that Cyrill calleth it a naturall vnion, as he doth also in the same place a corporall vnion, by which he meaneth, not that we are vnited after a naturall manner, or after a bodily manner, but that we are vnited vnto the very humane nature and body of Christ, but after an heauenly and diuine manner. For thus it followeth in the same place, I meane in Lib. 11. Cap. 26. of Cyrill vpon the 17. of Iohn, which M. Hesk. note booke belike, did not serue him to set downe: 
                        Quod autem corporalis haec vnio ad Christum, participatione carnis eius acquiritur, ipse rursus Paulus de mysterio pietatis differens testatur: quod alijs inquit generationibus non est agnitum filijs hominum, sicut nunc reuelatum est sanctis apostolis eius & prophetis in spiritu, esse gentes cohaeredes, & concorpores, & comparticipes promissionis in Christo. Si autem omnes inter nos in Christo vnum sumus corpus, nec inter nos solùm, verùum etiam cum eo, qui per carnem suam ad nos transiuit, quomodo vniuersi & inter nos, & in Christ, vnum non erimus? And that this corporall vnion vnto Christ, is obtained by participation of his flesh, Paule him selfe againe doth testifie, disputing of the mysterie of godlinesse: which in other ages (saith he) was not knowen to the sonnes of men, as it is nowe reuealed to his holy Apostles and Prophetes in the spirite, that the Gentiles should be coheires and of the same body and compartners of the promise in Christe. If then we be all one body among our selues in Christe, and not among our selues only, but also with him which by his flesh is come vnto vs, howe shall we not be all one, both among our selues and in Christe? This place of Paule by which the faithfull of the Gentiles are saide to be made one body with the faithfull of the Iewes, speaketh nothing of eating of the body of Christe in the sacrament, but of the spirituall incorporation by faith in the promises of the Gospell, nowe made common vnto the Gentiles with the Iewes, whereof the sacrament is not a bare signe, but a liuely and effectuall seale and confirmation.
                  
                     Moreouer, the same Cyrill in the same booke Cap. 22. in 17. Ioā, writeth thus: 
                        Nihil ergo mali accidere vobis potest, ai
                              •
                           , si carne alfue
                              •
                           o, cum deitatis incae potestas, quęe vos huc vs
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            seruauit, in posterum etiam seruatura fit. Hęc non ideo dicimus, quia Domini corpu
                              •
                            non magni aestimemus, sed quia mirabiles hos effectus gloriae deno
                              •
                           is attribuendos pat amus. Nam ipsum etiam Domini corpus coniu
                              •
                           cti virtue verbi sanctificatur, & ad benedictionem mystica
                              •
                            ade
                              •
                            actiuum fit, vt possit sanctificationem nobis fuam im
                              ••
                           ttere. Therefore (saith he) none euill can happen vnto you, though I shall be absent in flesh, seeing the power of my Godhead, which hath saued you hitherto, shall also preserue you hereafter. We speake not these thinges therefore, bicause we doe not greatly esteeme the Lordes bodie, but bicause wee thinke that these maruellous effectes are to be attributed to the glorie of his Godhead. For euen the same body of our Lorde is sanctified by the vertue of the Worde, that is ioyned with it, and made so effectuall vnto the mysticall blessing, that it can send in to vs the sanctification thereof.
                  
                  Note here gentle reader, that the flesh of Christ though it be absent, yet by the diuine power is able to make vs partakers of his sanctification. Absent I say, as concerning locall presence, after which it is in heauen, and not vpon earth, yet hath it these maruellous effectes by the glory of his Godhead, as Cyrill saith, that ioyning vs vnto it by faith, in the participation of the holy mysteries, it feedeth vs vnto eternall life. The place of Cyrill in 15. Ioan. Cap. is contained and aunswered in the 6. Chapter of this third booke, where you shall see that the proclamer denyeth nothing, that Cyrill in that place affirmeth. As for the saying of Thomas of Aquine, one of the scholasticall sophisters in Diuinitie, I passe ouer, hee is cocke sure of M. Heskins side.
               
               
                  The seuen and twentieth Chapter proceedeth vpon the same text, by Euthym. and Hugo.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Concerning the antiquitie of Euthymius,
                        Fulke.
                      I haue often

testified before, that he is no Lorde of the higher house. Notwithstanding, bicause he borroweth most of his matter of the elder writers, I will set downe his wordes which make nothing for M. Heskins purpose. In Math. 6. Quemadmod
                           •
                        m &c. As breade do
                           •
                        h comfort, so the body of Christ doth the same and more also: it sanctifieth both the body and the soule. And as wine doth make glad, so the bloud of Christe doth the same, and moreouer is made a defence. And if all we that are faithfull doe partake of one body and bloud, we are all one by the participation of these mysteries, both all in Christe, and Christe in us all. He that eateth (saith he) my flesh, and drinketh my bloud, abideth in me, and I in him. For the word
                           •
                         truely by assumption is vnited to the flesh: and this flesh again is vnited to vs by participation. This place seemeth to M. Heskins to be very plaine, and so thinke I: for there is nothing in it but I graunt to bee true, being rightly vnderstoode. M. Heskins saith, he expoundeth the breade and the cuppe, to be the body and bloud of Christ, or else the text were cleerer then the exposition, in which fantasie he pleaseth him selfe exceedingly. We graunt, that the breade and cup in S. Paule, signifie the body and bloud of Christe, which we receiue in the sacrament, after a spirituall and diuine manner. Thirdly he noteth, that we are vnited by participation into the flesh of Christe, which he saith we deny, but hee lieth impudently, for we constantly affirme, that except we be partakers of the flesh and bloud of Christe, we can not be partakers of eternall life. But that this partaking is after a corporall manner, or only in the sacrament, that we deny. And that also doth Euthymius deny in effect, where he teacheth, that whereas we are vnited to Christe, & Christe to vs, so are we vnited together. but this is after a spiritual & ineffable manner: so is the other. We graunt yt Cyril saith, we could not be partakers of eternal life except we were ioyned to ye body of natural or true life, that is, to the body of Christ, in Ioan. 6. li. 15. but we are ioyned otherwise then by ye Lords supper, or els no infants shuld be partakers of eternall life. Finally where M. Hes. affirmeth, yt the words of Euthymius by no engin▪ can be wrested

from his carnal maner of presēce, bicause he speaketh before of the transmutation of the bread & wine into the body & bloud of Christ, I answere, he speaketh of no such transmutation, but yt we do graunt the same, namely a sacramental change, such as is of the water in baptisme, of which also he taketh a similitude. 
                        Siquidem in baptismo sensibilis quidem est aqua: sed donum intelligibile, est regeneratio. Quoniā enim in nobis anima cōserta est corpori, in sensibilibus intelligibilia tradidit nobis Deus. For in baptisme also, ye water truely is a sensible thing, but regeneratiō is an intelligible gift. For bicause our soule is inclosed in our body, God hath deliuered vnto vs intelligible things in sensible things. The water in baptisme is not chaunged into regeneration, nor regeneration included in the water: and speaking of the same transmutation, hee saith, the breade and wine are transmuted into the body and bloud of Christe, and into the grace of them. But the substance of ye bread & wine is not turned into the grace of the body and bloud, therfore neither into the body and bloud. And this is the great helpe he hath out of Euthymius. As for Cardinall Hugh, I will not trouble ye reader with his saying, whose authoritie I vtterly refuse. In the latter end of this Chap. as he vseth to deale, when he hath such single witnesses in hand, he patcheth in a piece or two of his old stuffe, serued before, as that of Dionyse, falsly called the Areopagite, Eccle. Hierach. 1. part. cap. 3 answered before. Li. 1. Ca. 35. That of Ambrose de mysterijs initiandis Cap. 9. lib. 2. cap. 10. & ser. 2. and else where oftentimes. He nameth also Irenaeus Lib. 5. aduers. haer. but he setteth not downe his wordes.
               
               
                  The eight and twentieth Chapter proceedeth vpon the same text by Oecumenius and Anselmus.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  In the beginning of this Chapter, he glorieth vainly of the multitude of writers of his side,
                        Fulk.
                      but then they must be such as he nameth in ye title that is, late writers, although Oecumenius hath nothing yt maketh strongly for him, & the place yt is here alledged in 1. Cor. 10. is in a maner the very words of Chry. which we had euen now in ye cap. 24. Vnus panis &c. We are one bread & one body. For we are al partakers

of one breade. He addeth a reason howe we are made the body of Christe. For what is the bread (saith he)? forsooth the body of Christe. And what are they made which partake it? Surely the body of Christe. For that maketh vs also partakers of the body of Christe. For one breade, is Christe. For of many graines (as for example we may speake) one breade is made, and we being many partaking of that one, are made one body of Christe: For bicause our olde flesh is corrupted vnder sinne, we had neede of a newe flesh.
                  
                  I had not thought to haue noted Maister Heskins falsification in this place, translating Corpus nempe Christi, Verily the body of Christe, but that hee would delude the ignoraunt reader afterwarde, and say, if it bee verily the body of Christe, it is not figuratiuely his body, as though nempe were the same that verè or propriè. But herein I will leaue him to children in the Grammer schoole to be derided, and boyes that neuer read three leaues of Aristotles Logike in the Vniuersities. The like follie hee sheweth in preuenting our aunswere, that Oecumenius speaketh of the mysticall body of Christe, bycause hee speaketh first of the breade that wee receiue, and after of vs that receiue it. But doeth hee not say, wee are made the same body, that wee receiue? Wherefore I will thus inferre, wee are made the same body that wee receiue, but wee are not made the same naturall body corporally, therefore we receiue not the same natural body corporally.
                  Nowe let Maister Heskins make as much as hee can of Oecumenius authoritie, and ray
                        •
                     e as long as hee list against the disagreement of Luther, Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius, they shall bee found to agree better where they most disagree, then the Pope and al his cleargie agree with Christ and the trueth, when they all agree to persecute and oppresse. And as concerning these properties of a true Prieste, that hee gathereth out of Malachie, the lawe of trueth in their mouth, peace and equitie in their wayes, and conuersion of men from iniquitie, notwithstanding Maister Heskins slanderous pen, shal be

found in them and in al the true preachers of our church in the iudgment of Christ, when the Pope and his Popish shauelings shal be condemned of false doctrine, crueltie, & abhominable life in them selues, and teaching the doctrine of licentiousnesse vnto others, I meane the doctrine of merites, satisfactions, purgatorie, pardoning, and such like. The authoritie of Anselme a professed enimie of Berengarius I resigne to M. Hes. with ten thousand such as he is, not comparable in credite with one of the higher house, who only are me
                        •
                     te to determine this controuersie of the manner of Christes presence in the sacrament.
               
               
                  The nine and twentieth Chapter treateth of the same text by Theophylact and Dionyse, and endeth with Remigius.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  The last couple, saith M. Heskins, make vp a ful Iewrie,
                        Fulke.
                      to passe for life and death, but we may lawfully chalenge the aray, being enpanelled by M. Heskins a partial shirif, and also we haue excepted against many of the Iewrors, and now do except against both these, namely Theophylact of Bulgarie, as a late writer and an heretique, and Dionyse of the Charterhouse, as one of the feeid and fed seruants of ye Pope. Although Theophylact being reasonably expounded, according to his owne sayings in other places, saith nothing directly against vs. But in default of these, here is a third man taken, belike de circunstantibus, & that is Remigius, whome M. Heskins to make him a lawfull Iewrie man, affirmeth to haue liued Anno Dom. 511. and so within the compasse of ye challenge. But if he deale so, wee must haue a writ against him de identitate nominis. For as we finde that there was in deede one Remigius bishop of Remes about that time, so likewise we finde that the authour of this commentarie in 1. Cor. 10. was bishop Antisiodocensis almost 400. yeres after, namely about the yere of Christ. 894. Notwithstanding, bicause his words are almost the same which are before ascribed to Hierom Cap. 17. I will not spare to set them downe. Calix benedictionis &c. The cup of blessing which we blesse, is it not the communication

of the bloud of Christe? Therefore he named the cup first, because he would afterward treate more at large of the bread. It is called the cup of blessing which is blessed of the priestes in the altar, & the cuppe it selfe is called a communication as it were a participation, because all do communicate of it, and receiue parte of the Lordes bloud which it conteineth in it. And the bread whiche we breake in the altar, is it not the participation of the Lordes body? Surely it is first consecrated and blessed of the priests, and of the holie Ghost, and afterward is broken, when as now although bread be seene, in trueth it is the bodie of Christ▪ Of which bread whosoeuer do communicate they doe eate the bodie of Christ. Because we being many, which eate that bread, are one bread, (vnderstand of Christ,) and one bodie of Christ. Maister Heskins noteth that the cup conteyneth the bloud of Christ, which speech may be allowed, because the cup conteineth the wine, which is the bloud of Christ after a certeine manner, as S. Augustine saith. Secondly that though it seem bread, yet indeed is ye body of Christ, he saith Lices panis videatur, Though bread be seene, yet Christ his bodie is present, after a spirituall and incomprehensible manner. But M. Heskins wil note, that all men did drinke the bloud of Christe out of the cup. And that he saith, the bread is broken, when it is the bodie of Christe, by which wordes he denyeth transubstantiation, as in the former, the communion vnder one kinde. Finally in affirming vs that eate that bread, to be the same bodie of Christ which we do eate: he doth clearly ouerthrowe the carnall manner of eating Christes body in the sacrament, as he doeth establish the spirituall manner of coniunction, that we haue with the bodie and bloud of Christ.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The thirtieth Chapter, beginneth the exposition of this text, Ye cannot drinke of the cup of our Lorde and of the cup of diuels, by S. Cyprian, and Chrysostome.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     This text saith M. Heskins is a conclusion, therefore it must include sacrifice, that was in the premisses. But I denie that sacrifice was any of the termes in the premisses,

of that argument wherof this is the conclusion, although it were named in the sacrifices of the Iewes, and of the Gentiles, euen as Israel, Gentiles, altar, temple, were likewise named, and yet not to be found in this conclusion, because that although they were spoken of in the discourse, yet they were not in the premisses of this argument, for this it is: Who so euer is made one bodie with CHRISTE can not drinke of the Lordes cuppe and of the cuppe of Diuels: but you are made one bodie with Christe: therefore you cannot drinke the Lordes cuppe, and the cuppe of diuels. Now therefore to Saint Cyprian Ser. 5. de Lapsis. Contra Euangelij vigorem, &c. Against the force of the Gospel, against the law of our Lord and of God, by the rashnesse of some, communication is set as libertie to them that are vnprouided. Which is a vaine and a false peace, perillous to the giuers, and nothing profitable to the receiuers. They seeke not the patience of health, nor the true medicine by satisfaction. Repentance is shut vp from sinners. The remembrance of a moste greeuous and extreeme offence is taken away. The woundes of them that are in dying are couered, and the deadly strype in the deepe and inward bowels is hidde with dissembled sorrowe.
                  
                  
                     Retourning from the altar of the diuell with handes filthye and defiled with the greasie sauour, they come to the holie of the LORDE. Almoste yet belching out the deadly meates of Idols, with their lawes yet breathing out their wickednesse, and sauouring of their deadly infections, they set vpon the Lords body: whereas the Scripture commeth againste them and cryeth, and sayeth: Euerie cleane person shall eate the fleshe: But if any eate of the fleshe of the wholesome sacrifice whiche is the Lordes, hauing his vncleanenesse vpon him, the same soule shall perishe from among his people. The Apostle also witnesseth and sayeth: ye can not drinke the cuppe of the Lorde, and the cuppe of Diuels: Ye can not communicate of the table of the Lorde, and the table of diuels. In this sermon Cyprian reproued those men whiche had admitted to the communion, such persons as had sacrificed to idols, before they were throughly penitent, and had made satisfaction to the Church which was offended by them, contrarie to the

order of good discipline. Now saith Maister Heskins he would not so sharply haue reproued them, if the thing they receiued, had beene but a peece of bread. A wise reason. What if a man at that time had come vnreuerently to baptisme, had it not ben an horrible offence, although the outward element of baptisme be nothing but a litle water? Although when we say▪ that bread is a parte of the sacrament, we neuer teache, that it is but a peece of bread, neither doe we say that baptisme is nothing but water. They that vnreuerently rush vnto the Lords sacraments are punished for their presūption, not in respect of that they receiue, whether it be bread, wine, or water, but for that they receiue it vnworthily. Another thing he noteth out of Cyprian, is, that Christes bodie is a sacrifice, because he alledgeth the scripture of Leuiticus, which is spoken of a sacrifice, as though the scripture could not be rightly applyed, that spake of holie meate vnreuerenely receiued, vnto the vnreuerent receiuing of the sacrament, except the sacrament were a sacrifice: this is out of all compasse of reason. He might as well say, the sacrament is a burnt offring, because it is compared to a sacrifice which is a burnt offring, and an hundreth other absurdities may likewise be inferred, which for reuerence of the blessed mysteries, I spare to name. But it followeth in Cyprian immediately, where Maister Heskins leaueth: 
                        Idem conu
                              ••
                           nacibus & pertinacibus comminatur & detr
                              ••
                           iciat dicens: quicun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           , ederis panem aut biberit calicem Domini indignè, reus eri
                              •
                            corporis & sanguinis Domini. Spretis his omnibus atque contemp
                              •
                           is, vis infertur corpori cius & sanguini eiut. Plus modò in Dominum manibus atque ore delinquunt, quàm cum Dominum neg
                              •
                           uerunt. The same Paule threateneth and denounceth to ye obstinate and froward, saying: whosoeuer shal eate of ye bread & drink of the cup of the Lord vnworthily, shalbe guiltie of the bodie and bloud of the Lord. All these sayings being despised and contemned, violence is done vnto his bodie & his bloud. They do more offend against the Lord now with their hands & their mouth, then when they denied the Lord. These wordes declare that Cyprian

calleth not the bread & cup the bodie & bloud of Christ▪ as M. Hesk. would haue it, properly, but figuratiuely: for no force or violence can be done to the bodie and bloud of Christe, but to the sacrament thereof there may, and Christ is iniured in the contempt of his mysteries: as the Prince in contumelious breaking & abusing of the broad seale by rebellious subiectes, though he suffer no violence in his owne person. Chrysostome is cited Ho. 11. ad Populum Antiochen. Quomodo sacrū videbimus pascha? &c. How shal we see the holie passeouer? How shall we receiue the holy sacrifice? How shall we cōmunicate in these maruelous mysteries with that tongue, with which we haue contemned the lawe of God? With that 
                           •
                        ong, with which we haue defiled our soule? For if no man durst take the Kings purple robe with foule hands: how shall we receiue the Lordes body with a defiled tonge? For swearing is of the wicked, sacrifice is of the Lord. Therefore what communication is there betweene light and darknesse, what agreement between Christ and Beliall? Here saith M. Hesk. by the excellent titles he giueth the sacrament, is proued the reall presence. The holie sacrifice, wonderful mysteries, the bodie of our Lord, light, & Christ himself. But one of these titles is manifestly vnproper and figuratiue, namely that of light, and why may not ye rest be so likewise? Baptisme hath honourable titles, yet is there no transubstantiatiō therin. The second note, to proue the reall presence is, that saying: how shall we wt defiled tong receiue the Lordes body? Here the body is receiued with the mouth and tong, therefore corporally. But if I should say, that Chrysostome by this interogation denyeth, that it can be receiued with a defiled tong, where were the strength of this place: but I will graunt, that he vseth so to speake, but vnproperly, that the hand & the tong receiue the bodie and bloud of Christ, and yet meaneth no carnall maner of presence, as Ho. 21. ad Pop. Antioch. Cogita quid manu capias, & ipsam ab omni auaritia & rapina liberam conserua. Consider what thou receiuest with thy hand, and keepe it free from all couetousnesse & extortion. This peraduenture pleaseth M. Heskins. But it followeth soone after. 
                     
                        Etenim perniciosum est tam tremendis

ministra
                              ••
                           em mysterijs linguam, & sanguine tal purpuratam, & factam aureum gladium, ad cornicia & contumelias & scurrilitates transferre. For it is a pernicious thing to transferre that tonge which ministreth vnto so reuerend mysteries, & is died purple with such bloud, and made a golden sworde, vnto rayling, reuiling, and scoffing. Here the tong doth not only receiue ye bloud of Christ, but also is made red or purple with it, & is made by it a golden sword. If these be not figuratiue speeches, they be monstruous absurdities. And yet againe in the same place: Sed rursum aduertens quod post manus & li
                              •
                           guam, cor suscipit horrendum illud mysteri
                           
                              •
                           en, ne vnquam in proximū sumas dolum sed mensē tuam ab omni malitia mund
                              •
                           m conserua: fic & oculos & aures munire poteris. But againe considering that after thy handes & thy tong, thy heart receiueth that fearefull mysterie, neuer deuise any craft against thy neighbour, but keepe thy minde cleane from all malice, so maist thou defende thine eyes and thine eares. And the like speeches he hath of the eyes and the eares. By which it is euident, that although he speak figuratiuely in the way of exhortation, yet he meaned not to teache any other, but a spirituall manner of receiuing the bodie of Christ with the hart, although the eyes, eares, handes, and tong. were occupied about the sacrament thereof After M. Heskins noteth, that Chrysostome in the place by him cited, calleth the sacrament a sacrifice: so doth he an hundreth times elsewhere, but yt proueth not a propitiatorie sacrifice, but rather a memory of Christes only sacrifice as he teacheth himself In Ep. ad Heb. Ca. 10. Hom. 17. And here he taketh vpon him to refute the rule of Cranmer, or of him that set forth ye book in his name, as though that learned father, was not able to set forth his booke himselfe as wel, as this blind buzzard Heskins, who hath nothing in effect, but yt he hath stolne out of Gardiners M. Constantius. But let vs heare this wise refutation. A sacrifice of thanksgiuing, saith he, is not receiued of vs, but giuen from vs to God. No more is any sacrifice in yt it is a sacrifice, O ye vnlearned confuter of so learned a fathers rule, yet yt which is receiued is called a sacrifice

in respect yt it hath bene offered. So was ye sacrament of the old writers called a sacrifice vnproperly, because it was a memorial of ye only sacrifice of Christ once offered by him self, & in respect of yt action of ye administration, which is a sacrifice of thanksgiuing, & therefore of them was called Eucharistia, a thanksgiuing. Another reason to proue it no gratulatorie sacrifice, is, because he calleth it a wonderful sacrifice, but thanksgiuing is but an ordinarie duetie. Shore vp your drousie eyes M. Hesk. & you shal see, he calleth it a holie sacrifice, & so the sacrifice of thanksgiuing. He calleth it not a wonderfull sacrifice, but a wonderful mysterie, except mysterie & sacrifice be al one wt you, but if he had called it a wonderful sacrifice, as else where he calleth it a fearfull or terrible sacrifice, doth yt proue it to be no sacrifice of thankesgiuing? Hee calleth it fearful, terrible, reuerende, wonderful, in respect of ye diuine working of our sauiour Christ, to make vs partakers of his bodi & bloud, by receiuing these outward creatures worthily, according to his appointment, as for the names I haue answered before, they proue no sacrifice propitiatorie. But now at lēgth M. Hes. (hauing builded on this place of Paule & Chrysost. which deny ye partaking of ye bodie & bloud of Christ to them that are made partakers of ye table of diuels, or otherwise be wicked men) giueth S. Paul & Chryso. a new interpretation. S. Paul (saith he) doth not absolutely deny, but conditionally, saying, yt men cannot be partakers of ye Lords table, & of ye table of diuels: that is, yt thei ought not, so yt ye cannot, & ye ought not, is al one with M. Hesk. for ye cannot (sayth he) if you do wel. But thinketh this grosse expositor, to escape with this glose? I aske him whether light & darknes can agree, whether Christ & Belial can haue any felowship? Be these negatiues absolutly or cō
                     ditionally? Is it now otherwise to be taken but light and darknesse ought not to agree, or cannot agree, if they do well? & Christ & Belial ought not to agree, or cannot agree if they do well? O blinde interpreter, or rather shamefull peruerter of the streight wayes of the Lord.

You see in despite of the diuell, the Popishe doctrine of the wicked receiuing Christ, manifestly borne downe by the authoritie of Gods worde, and of the auncient fathers, and consequently transubstantiation layde in the dust. And yet this arrogant expounder, as though hee had found out a sworde to cutt in sunder this Gordian knot, with like madnesse runneth at Origens saying, which he will not vouchsafe to quote, least any man shoulde reade it to his shame, and ouerthrow of his popish transsubstantiation. But it is written in Math. cap. 15. Multa p
                           •
                        rro &c. Many things may be sayd also of the WORDE him selfe, that was made fleshe and verie meate, whome whosoeuer shall eate, shall loue for euer, which no euil man can eate. Firste, as he hath learned of brazen faced Gardiner, he will not certeinly admitt that worke to be Origens, which is an impudent shifte, when none of them can alledge anye reason, why they shoulde doubt of it: Secondly, he heweth at it with his leaden sworde, saying: an euil man can not eat of it to his profite, but yet hee may eate of it. But it followeth in Origen immediately: Etenim si fieri posset, vt qui malus adhuc perseuerat, edat verbum factum carnem, cum sit verbum & panis viuus, nequaquam scriptum fuisset: Quisquis ederic panem hunc viuet in aeternum. For, if it were possible, that hee which as yet continueth an euill man, shoulde eat the worde made fleshe: seing he is the worde and the breade of life, it had not beene written, whosoeuer shall eate of this breade shall liue for euer. Here Origen sayeth, that no man can eate him, but hee must take profit by him, so the knott is too harde for Master Heskins wodden dagger to cleaue a sunder. For as hee himselfe concludeth, betwixt God and Beliall is none agreement, neither can Dagon stand in the presence of the Arke, and much lesse wickednesse where Christ is receiued, for he is the bread of life reiected of the wicked, but cause of eternall life to all that receiue him.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The one and thirtieth Chapter, endeth the exposition of this text by Theophylact and Anselmus.
                  
                     I had thought to haue sayed nothing of these late writers,
                        Fulk.
                      but that Maister Heskins will make Theophylact so auncient, as to be three hundred yeres elder then Anselmus, which was Archbishop of Caunterburie almoste 500. yeres agoe, so that Theophylact shoulde be neere 800. yeres olde. But to confute his impudencie: Firste, you must vnderstande, that the Bulgars, of whom he was Bishop, were not conuerted to the faith before the yeare of Christe 865. and after their first conuersion, they agreed with the church of Rome, but in processe of time, they forsooke the church of Rome, and ioyned with the church of Constantinople. After this, Theophylact was there bishop, and although the histories bee not certeine what time he liued: yet it must needs be gathered, to be when the contention was hote betweene the Greekes & Romanes, about the proceeding of the holie Ghost, because that in his exposition vpon the thirde of Iohn, hee inueygheth against the church of Rome, defending the Greekes about the proceeding of the holie Ghoste, and this was about the yeare of Christ 1049 when Berengarius liued and reproued the church of Rome for the carnall presence that then or not long before was begon to be grossely defended. But the chiefe matter he gathereth out of Anselme is, that he expoundeth the table in Saint Paule, for an altare, whereupon Maister Heskins will make a discourse of Altares, and proue the vse of them, euen from the Apostles times: And firste he beginneth with Dionyse the disciple of S. Paule, Eccl. Hier. part. 3. Cap. 3. Sed & illud, &c. But beholde that more reuerently, that after the venerable signes are layde vppon the altare, by which Christ is signified and receiued, there is present by & by a description of saintes or holy ones. It is meete that a false matter should begin with a counterfet doctour. I haue shewed before, that neither Eusebius, nor Hierome, nor Gennadius knewe any such Dionyse, by the space of fiue or sixe hundreth yeares after Christ; therefore his testimonie must be so many hundred yeares short of the Apostles times. But M. Hesk. wil not see that his Dionyse

calleth the sacrament signes, by which Christ is signified and receiued. He can see nothing but the altar in yt saying. Next to Dionyse, he bringeth Ambrosius in orat. prępar
                           •
                        t. ad missa
                           •
                        t, a meere counterfeit, as Erasmus hath obserued, & therefore worthie of none answere. But before I proceede to the next author, that he citeth for the altar, which is Augustine, I will set downe a manifest disproofe of M. Hesk. proofe, that altars haue ben vsed since the Apostles times. Firste, it is certeine, that our sauiour Christ did institute this sacrament at a table, & at no altar, whereas if it had bene a sacrifice, he would haue caused an altar to be made, which had bene soone done. Secondly, the Apostle Paul calleth it the Lords table, & neuer calleth it an altar. M. Hesk. alledgeth for the sacrament out of the actes of the Apostles, that the disciples continued in breaking of bread in euery house, but I suppose he wil not dreame, that there was an altar in euerie house. In the primitiue church, when ye people mett in corners & secrete places, no man of reason wil imagin they had altars set vp in those places. Nay it is certein by Origen & Amobius, they had neither altars, nor tēples, nor images. Origen. 
                        Cont. Cel lib. 4. reporteth that ye heathen man Celsus obiecteth against vs, yt we haue no images nor altars, nor temples. The like is in Arnobius. lib. 2. against yt Gentiles, who declareth yt they acuse vs, that we haue neither temples, nor images, nor altars. By these auncient writers it appeareth, yt it was a common obiection of the heathen men, against the Christians, yt they had no altars. The like sheweth Tertullian ad Scapulam. 
                     
                        Ita
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            & sacrificamus pro salute imperatoris sed Deo nostro & ips
                              •
                           ut sed, quo modo pręcepit Deus, pura prece. Therfore we also do offer sacrifice for the health of the Emperour, but vnto our God & his only, but, as God hath commaunded, with pure prayer. These wordes of Tertullian declare, yt the Christians had neither altar nor sacrifice, other then prayer. In Cyprians time also it was a table de cana Dom. 
                     
                        Inter Dominicae mensae cormuines, animalis homo non recipitur: the naturall man is not receiued among the guestes of the

Lords table.
                  
                  And although of diuerse of the olde writers, it was called an altar, yet was it so called improperly, euen as the communion was called of them a sacrifice, for still it was a table and nothing like the popish altars, which are of stone & set against a wall, for they stoode in the midst of the church, so that ye people came rounde about them as appeareth by Eusebius. lib. 10. ca. 4. ad Paulin. Tyr. Episc. 
                     
                        Absoluto templo & sedibus excelsissimis ad honorem praesidentium, & subsellijs ordine collocatis, ornato, & post omnia sancto sanctorum, videlicet altari in medio constituto: The temple being finished, and garnished with high seates for ye honour of ye gouernours, & lower seates placed in order, & after all the holie of holies, that is to saye the altar placed in the middest. The like hath Augustine de verb. Dom. Ser. Ioan. Ser. 46. de eo quod scrip. qui manduc. Christus quotidie pascit: Mensa ipsiut est illa in medio constituta. Quid causae est ô audientes, vt mensam videatis & ad epulat non accedatis. Christ feedeth daily that is his table, which is placed in the middest. What is the cause O you hearers, that seeing the table ye came not to the feast. Hee speaketh to the nouices or Catechumeni.
                  
                  
                     Gregorius Nazianzenus calleth it a table ad imperator. Irasceus: shewing what intercessors he would bring to pacifie the Princes displeasure, as the death, passion, resurrection, & ascension of Christ. 
                        Aut etiam mensam hanc ad quā communiter accedimus, & meae sabutis rypos, quos eodem celebro ore quo nunc fungor legatione sacram dico & ad superna ducentem mystagogiam: or else euen this table, vnto which wee come all together, and the figures of my saluation, which I do celebrate with the same mouth, with which nowe I execute this Ambassage of intreatie, I meane yt holy mysterie, leading to high things. Beside the table in the saying of Greg marke what termes he vseth in describing the sacrament, he calleth it the types or figures of his saluation, and a holy and heauenly mystagogie. Chrysost. most commonly calleth it a table, for example, Hom, 45. in Ioan. 
                     
                        A mensa hac prodit fons qui fluuios spirituales diffundit.
                        
From this table commeth a spring, which powreth forth spirituall riuers. And in a great number of places, he calleth it the holie table. But nowe wee must heare Maister Hesk. citing Augustine. lib. 9. Conf. Ca. 13. Illa imminente, &c. Shee, the day of her death being as hand, was not carefull to haue her bodie sump
                           •
                        uously buried, or to be spiced with spices, or coueted to haue a solemne monument, or to be buryed in her own country. These things shee did not commaunde vs, but onely shee desired, that remembrance of her should be made as thine altare, which shee without any dayes intermission, had serued. From whence she knewe, the holie sacrifice to be dispensed, by which the hand writing was put out that was against vs. In these wordes S. Augustine calleth it an altar, reporting the superstitious request of his mother, according to the errour of that time. We make no question, but that they did call the table an altar, but we affirme, they called it so vnproperly, euen as they did call the sacrament a sacrifice, and the minister a priest, and the deacon a Leuite. And as they called it an altare, so there is fewe or none, but called it a table also, and so doth Augustine often times, as de cultur. agr. Dom. Mensa sponsi tui panem habet integrum & poculum sanctum. The table of thy spouse, hath whole bread and a holie cupp. And againe, Contra liter. Petilian. lib. 2. Chap. 47. Non dicunt ifta nisi qui de Mensa Domini vitai
                              •
                            su
                              •
                           ru
                              •
                           nt sicut Petrus, non iudicium sicut Iudas. None say these things, but such as receiue life at the Lordes table, as Peter, and not damnation, as Iudas. But Maister Heskins hath another place out of Saint Augustine, wherein hee calleth it the altare of God: Sermone ad infant. Hoc, quod videris in alcari Dei, &c. This that you see on the altare of God, you sawe the night last past. But what it was, what i
                           •
                         mean
                           •
                         of howe great a thing it conteined the sacrament, you haue not yet heard: therefore, that which you sawe is bread and a cuppe, which thing also your eyes doe tell you▪ But that your faith requireth to be instructed. The breade is the bodie of Christe, the cuppe is his bloud. Our Lorde Iesus Christe, wee knowe whence he receiued fleshe, 
                           〈◊〉
                         of the virgine Marie. Hee was suckled being an infant, he was norished, he grewe, he came to the age of a young

man, he suffered persecution of the Iewes, hee was hanged on the tree, he was killed on the tree, he was buryed, he rose againe the thirde day. That day he woulde ascende into heauen, thither he lifted vp his bodie, from whence he shall come to iudge both the quicke and the dead. There he is nowe sitting at the right hand of the father. Howe is the breade his bodie? and the cuppe, or that which the cupp containeth, how is it his bloud? Brethren, these things are therefore called sacraments, because one thing in them it seene, another thing is vnderstoode, that which is seene hath a corporall shewe, that which is vnderstoode, hath a spirituall fruite. I doubt not but euery Christian man that readeth this saying, vnderstandeth it, to be verie cleere, against both transubstantiation, and the carnall presence, as is shewed before lib. 2. Cap. 37. which that Maister Heskins might obscure, he maketh a smoke, to bleare mens eyes, that they might not see any thing therin, but the altar. Wherefore he rayleth like him selfe against the proclaimer, charging him bothe to haue falsified S. Augustine, and also truncately to haue alledged him, because (saith he) he citeth him thus: Quod videtis in mensa, panis est: that ye see in the table is bread: whereas Augustine sayeth in the altar, and not on the table, which he durst not name for shame. But with what shame Heskins can so reuile and slaunder that godly learned father, you shall see by that which followeth immediately, where he leaueth in Augustine, and iudge whether Master Heskins left out the wordes for shame, or else because his note booke serued him no further. 
                        Corpus ergo Christi si vis intelligere, audi Apostolum dicentem fidelibus: vos estis corpus Christi & membra. Si ergo vot estis corpus Christi & membra, mysterium vestrum in MENSA positum est: Mysteria Domini accipitis ad quod estis, Amen respondetis, & respondendo subscribitis. Audis ergo corpus Christi & respondes Amen. Esto membrum corporis Christi vt verum sit Amen tuum: quare ergo in pane? nihil hic de nostro affiramus: Ipsum Apostolum item audiamus. Cum ergo de isto sacramento loqueretur, ait, vnus panis, vnum corpus multi sumus. Intelligite & gaudete.
                     
                  
                  
                     Therefore, if thou wilt vnderstande the bodie of

Christ, heare the Apostle saying to the faithfull: you are the bodie of Christ and his members. If you therefore be the bodie of Christ and his members, your mysterie is set on the TABLE: you receiue the Lords mysterie, wherunto you are, you aunswere, Amen: and in aunswering, you subscribe. Thou hearest therfore the bodie of Christ and thou aunswerest, Amen: bee thou a member of the bodie of Christe, that thy Amen may bee true. Why then in bread? let vs here bring nothing of our owne. Let vs likewise heare the Apostle. Therefore, when hee spake of this sacrament, he sayeth: There is one bread, wee being many are one bodie: vnderstand ye & reioyce ye. I trust you see by this, that the altar he spake of, was a table, as you see also how the sacrament is the bodie of Christ.
                  But lest hee might replye, that the table was an altar, I must further alledge Saint Augustines authoritie, that it was a table, for it was made of boordes and was remouable. For speaking of the Deacons of Rome in Quaest. vet. & non. test. q. 101 he sayth: 
                        Vt antem non omnia ministeria obsequiorum per ordinem agant, multitudo fecit clericorum: nam vtique & altare portarem, & vasa euis & aquam in manus sunderent sacerdoti, ficut videmus per omnes ecclesias. But that they doe not perfourme all the ministeries of their seruice in order, the multitude of Clerkes hath caused: for surely they shoulde both carrie the altar and the vessels thereof, and powre water on the Priestes handes, as wee see it in all churches.
                  
                  
                     That they were of boordes and tymber, and not of stone, lest the Papistes should dreame of their Altare portatiue, that their hedge priestes carrie in their sleeues to say Masse in corners, the same Augustine writing to Bonifacius Ep. 50. sheweth in these wordes, speaking of the insurrection of the Donatistes against Maximianus a catholike bishop of Sagium: Stantem ad altare irruente
                              •
                            horrendo impetu & furore crudeli, fustibus & huiusmodi telis, lignis denique eiusdem altaris effractis immaniter ceciderunt. Rushing in with an horrible violence and cruell furie,

they stroke him moste outragiously standing at the altare, with staues and such like weapons: yea, euen with the boordes of the same altare, which they brake in peeces. The like complaint maketh Optatus in his booke against the Donatistes, sauing that he nameth not wood or bordes, yet it is plaine by the circumstance that hee spake of none other. The place, as Maister Heskins citeth it, is this: Quid est tam sacrilegum, &c. What is so great sacriledge, as to breake, scrape, or shaue, and remoue the altares of God? in which you also sometimes haue offered, on which the prayers of the people, and the members of Christ haue been borne, at which God almightie hath beene called vppon, where the holie Ghost being desired hath come downe, from which the pledge of aeternall life, and the sauegarde of faith, and the hope of resurrection hath beene receiued of many: the altares I say vpon which our Sauiour hath commaunded the giftes of the fraternitie, not to be layde, but such as are made of peace. Lay downe (saith hee) thy gifte before the altare, and returne and firste agree with thy brother, that the Priest may offer for thee. For what is the altar but the seat of the bodie and bloud of Christe? All these your furie hath either scraped, or broken, or remoued. What hath God done to you, which was wont to be called vpon there? What had Christe offended you, whose bodie and bloud dwelleth there at certeine momentes? And what doe you offende your selues to breake the altars, on which long time before vs (as you thinke) you haue offered holily? Thus haue you followed the Iewes. They layde handes vppon Christe on the crosse: of you he was striken in the altar: of whome the Prophet Helias complaineth to the Lorde, speaking in the same wordes, with which you among other haue deserued to bee accused. Lorde (sayeth he) they haue broken downe thine altares. While hee sayth thine, he sheweth that the thing is Gods, where any thing is offered of any man to God. Vppon pretence of this place, Maister Hesk. chargeth vs with great sacriledge, for pulling downe their popish altares, on which they committed idolatrie and moste horrible sacriledge. And therefore wee are commaunded to ouerthrowe such altares, to breake downe their pillers, & burne their images with fire,

                     Deut. 7. And whereas he compareth vs to one Iulianus an heathen man, that pissed against the altare, and therfore was horribly punished, hee sheweth his wisedome. For there an idolater did vilanously contemne ye Christians religion, & therfore was iustly plaged of God, but we as Christians haue obeyed the lawe of God, in ouerthrowing their antichristian & idolatrous altars. And yet I thinke the fact of Iulianus was not worse then the filthinesse of Pope Iohn, that lay with his whores vppon your altares. In the conclusion of this chapter he affirmeth that the altar, & sacrifice are correlatiues, & therefore there coulde be none altars, but there was also sacrifice. I haue shewed sufficiently howe the old writers called the communion table an altare, and the sacrament a sacrifice, namely a sacrifice of thanksgiuing, and not of propitiation, and yet more must I saye vpon M. Heskins discourses that followe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The two and thirtieth Chapter vpon occasion that it is proued, that the primitiue Church vsed the altare, and reputed the bodie and bloud of Christ to be a sacrifice, beginneth to treate of the same sacrifice which we commonly call the Masse.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     Because the names of altar & sacrifice haue beene vnproperly vsed by auncient writers (for wee haue shewed that their altar was a table, and their sacrifice a thankesgiuing) therefore M. Hesk. will treat of the sacrifice of the Masse. And first of the name of Masse, which he saith we abhorre, and iustly, because it hath been vsed of many yeres, to signifie a most blasphemous and idolatrous seruice. The name he will deriue in all the haste, out of the Hebrue tongue from a word that is called Mas, from whence the Latines haue deriued their worde Missa, being the same that the Greekes called Liturgia, and the Latines officium, which is in English a seruice. To this I aunswere: first, that if Missa or Masse be nothing but a seruice, then Euen song may be called Masse, because it is a seruice. Secondly it carryeth no shewe of trueth, that

the Latines would borrowe their name of the Hebrues, rather then of the Greekes. Thirdly, that there is no such Hebrue worde, as Maister Heskins affirmeth to bee, Mas, signifying a seruice, as I report mee to all that haue but meane knowledge in the tongue. Fourthly, that although the name of Missa bee of some antiquitie in the Romane church, yet is it neither so auncient as he maketh it, and that which is chiefely to be regarded, it is neuer founde in the holie scripture.
                  But nowe let vs consider his authoritie. First, Leo bishop of Rome Epist. 79. sayeth thus: Necesse est vt quaedam pars populi sua deuotione priuetur, si vniut tantùm Missae more seruato sacrificium offerre non possunt, nisi qui prima diei parte conuenerint. It must needes be that some parte of the people bee depriued of their deuotion, if the manner or custome of our onely masse being obserued, they cannot offer sacrifice, except such as came together the first part of the day. Vppon coulour of this place Maister Heskins will not onely prooue, that the name of Missa is auncient, but also that it is lawfull to saye more then one Masse in one church in one day, if two then three, if three then tenne, if tenne then fifteene, and so twentie, which the proclaimer sayed could not be proued. But you shall see howe lewdly hee abuseth his reader. The proclaimers challenge was of tenne or twentie priuate Masses sayed in one church and commonly at one time. Maister Heskins bringeth in authoritie of Leo, which proueth, that when one communion coulde no serue any more, then so manie as the church woulde holde at one time, it was meete it should be celebrated twise, or as often as the same was filled with people, vntill all had receiued, which as wee confesse to be true, so maketh it nothing in the worlde for the priuate Masse, but altogether against it, as is plaine by the whole treatie going before, which Maister Heskins according to his accustomed synceritie hath cleane left out.
                  
                     
                        Vt autem in omnibus obseruantia nostra Concordet, illud quo
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            volumus custodiri, vt quum solennior festiuitas conuentum

populi numerosioris indixerit, & ad eam tanta multitudo conuenerit, quam recipere Basilica simul vna non possit, sacrificij oblatio indubitanter iteretur, ne his tantùm admissis, ad hanc deuotionem, qui primi aduenerint, videantur hi qui posimodum confluxerint, non recepti, cum plenum pietatis at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            rationis fit, vt quoties Basilicā pręsentia nonae plebis impleuerit, toties sacrificiū subsequēs offeratur. And that our obseruation may agree in al things, this also we will haue to be kept, that when a more solemne festiuitie shall call together a greater assembly of people, and so great a multitude is gathered vnto it, that one great Church can not receiue them altogether, the oblation of the sacrifice without doubt may be done againe, least those only being admitted which came first, they which came together afterward, might seeme not to be receiued, whereas it is a matter full of godlinesse and reason, that how often so euer the presence of a newe people shall fill the Church, so often the sacrifice following should be offered. But M. Heskins vrgeth in the place by him cited, that the word missa is vsed, which is not denyed, but this was almost 500. yeres after Christ, about the yere 480. Secondly, that the Masse is a sacrifice. But he will not see that it is such a sacrifice, as all the people offer, which can not be a sacrifice propitiatorie, but of thankesgiuing. Howbeit, he saith, The Masse is a sacrifice, that is or ought by ioyne affection and deuotion of the people to the Priest, to be offered of them all. What affection or deuotion he would haue to the Priest, I do not well vnderstand, but let him shadowe him selfe, in what fond phrase of word he will, yet can he not auoyde, but that the people by the wordes of Leo, did offer sacrifice in as ample manner as the Priestes, and then they were all Priestes. Besides this, in the words of Leo he obserueth not, yt it was a custome of ye Church before his time to haue but one Masse or Communion in a day, so straightly kept, that vpon necessitie they would not relent therein, vntill he tooke this order with them. But Maister Heskins asketh what scripture the proclamer hath to the contrarie for twentie Masses in one Church in one day? I aunswere: Saint Paule willeth the Corinthians to tarie

one for an other 1. Cor. 11. for the Communion. By which it is euident, that it is not lawfull for euery man to haue his priuate Masse, as M. Heskins would most absurdly proue. As for ye sacrifice propitiatorie of their Masse, hath all those scriptures against it, that set foorth the only propitiatorie sacrifice of Christ, and namely Heb. 9. & 10.
                  Furthermore, M. Heskins findeth the name of Masse vsed of Saint Ambrose, Ep. 33. Ego mansi in munere, missam facere coepi, orare in oblatione Deum vt subueniret. I did abide in mine office, I beganne to say masse, to pray to God in the sacrifice, that he would helpe. Howe faithfull a reporter of antiquitie Maister Heskins is to be coūted, this place among a great number doth sufficiently declare, and that he receiued not this text out of Ambrose him selfe, but out of some other mans collection or relation. Ambrose in that Epistle writing to his sister Marcellina about deliuering of a church to the heretiques, which he refused to do at the Emperour Valentinianes request, writeth thus: Sequenti die (erat autem Dominica) post lectiones atque tractatum dimissis Catechumenis, Symbolum aliquibus competentibus in baptisterijs tradebam Basilicae. Illic nunciatum est mihi, comperto quòd ad Portianam Basilicam de palatio decanos misissent, & vela suspenderēt, populi partem eò pergere. Ego tamen mansi in munere, missam facere coepi. Dum offero raptum cognoui a populo Castulum quendam, quem Presbyterum dicerent Arriani. Hunc autem in platea ostenderant transeuntes. Amarissimè flere & orare in ipsa oblatione Deum coepi, vt subueniret, ne cuius sanguis in causa Ecclesiae fieret, certè vt meus sanguis pro salute non solùm populi, sed etiam pro ipsis impijs effunderetur. Quid multa? Missis Presbyteris & Diaconis eripui iniuria virum.
                     
                  
                  
                     The day following, which was Sunday, when the learners of Catechisme were dismissed after the Lessons that were read, and the treatise made vpon them, I was instructing in the Creede certaine that desired Baptisme, in the baptizing place of the Church. There it was tolde me, after it was knowne, yt they had sent officers from the Palace vnto the church called Portiana & hanged vp clothes (for ye Emperor) yt part of the people were going thither.

I for all that abid in mine office, I beganne to let it goe. While I offered, I vnderstoode by the people, that one Castulus was taken by force, whome the Arrians saide to be a Priest. Him had they found as they passed by in the streate. I beganne to weepe most bitterly, and to pray to God in the very oblation, that hee would helpe that no mans bloud might bee shed in the cause of the Church, and truely that my bloud might be shed, not onely for the sauegard of the people, but also for the vngodly them selues. What neede many wordes, I sent Priestes and Deacons, and deliuered the man from iniurie. I knowe M. Heskins will not allowe me to translate, missam facere, to let goe the Church, seeing they had entered vpon it, the rather bicause offero and oblatione doth followe. But notwithstanding, seing Masse is neuer named in S. Augustin, Hierome, nor any other place of Ambrose in his or their authenticall writings, I can not of the onely colour and coniecture of oblation folowing be resolued, that S. Ambrose vseth missam facere, to say Masse. For although I confesse, that the name of Missa for the Communion, began neare about that time to be in vse, yet did they neuer vse that phrase missam facere, but missum or missarum solennia celibrare, to celebrate the Masse or the solemnities of Masses, for so they called the administration of the Communion. Whereas missam facere can not be translated to say Masse, but rather to make Masse. Againe, if the only cō
                     iecture of offero and oblatione following, were sufficient to proue missa to signifie Masse, M. Heskins might by ye like colour of Priestes and Deacons following, translate Missis, Presbyterie, & Diaconibus &c. with Masses, Priests and Deacons, I deliuered the man from iniurie. But to take it at the worst that the name of missa is here vsed for Masse, yet was this within the time of the Bishops limitation, & no Popish Masse, but a Christian communion, although some abuses perhaps were in it.
                  And for the decrees of Thelesphorus, Sixtus, Alexander, and such like Bishoppes of Rome, bycause they bee meere mockeries, and counterfeted long after

their times, to get credite by the antiquitie of their names, I will loose no time in confuting them. And whereas M. Heskins saith, the proclamer reiecteth them without proofe, although it be not to be required, that in a sermon such matters should be debated at large, as in publique writings are throughly knowne to be debated and determined among the best learned: yet will I adde this one disproofe or two, of those Epistles to be forged. First Eusebius which was a most diligēt gatherer of such writings found none such in his time. Secondly, if there were nothing else, the very barbarous phrase of them all, and the false Latine that is in many, is sufficient to conuince them for counterfets: seing there was no vnlearned womā in Rome in those times, but spake better Latin thē these men feigne those learned Bishops to haue writen in those decretall Epistles. But M. Hesk. will proue Alexander to be the Authour of that Epistle which is ascribed to him, and therein will vse neither bare wordes, nor faint likelyhoods. In deed, for likelihoods he vseth none, either faint or strong, but in steede of authoritie whereof he bosteth, he vseth none at all but very bare wordes. He onely quoteth in the margent, The 6. Counsel of Constantinople, not naming so much as in what part or action thereof this matter is intreated of, the actes of that counsel, being contained in a great booke as large as M. Hesk. third book at the least. And surely, although I haue vsed some diligence in search, yet I can finde no such matter, nor this Alexander once named in that Counsell. In deede I found long since, Dionysius authoritie cited by the name of Dionyscus Areopagisa Bishop of Athens, which is the matter yt perhaps deceiued M. Hes. or him yt ministred notes of authorities vnto him. But to be short, the assurance remaineth still vnshaken, which the proclamer made in his sermon, that the name of Masse is not found in ancient writers, vntil 400. yeres after Christ. As for the Masse it selfe, if hee meane that forme of seruice vsed in the Church of Rome, and of them commonly called Masse, he knoweth it was not throughly peeced together, 600. yeares after

Christ. For Gregorie had no small share in it, and he confesseth in this Chapter, that Telesphorus, Sixtus, Alexander, Felix, added somewhat vnto it. As for the preparatorie prayers of Ambrose, hee doth well not to auouch them to be his, bicause no man of learning will acknowledge them to be his. And seeing the Greeke Liturgies are very vnlike the Latine Masse, hee doth but mocke the ignorant readers, to say they be all one. Finally, hee doth most absurdly conclude, that his Masse should be within the compasse of Saint Augustines rule. ad Ian. Ep. 118. That those thinges, which the vniuersall Church obserueth throughout the worlde, we may vnderstand that they are retayned, as ordained either of the Apostles them selues, or of the generall Counsels, whose authoritie in the Church is most profitable. Illa que per orbem vniuersa obseruat Ecclesia, datur intelligi vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel a plenarijs concilijs, quorum est in Ecclesia saluberrim a authoritas statuta, retineri. Thus hath M. Hes. cited Augustine, to haue a starting hole vnder the name of the church, but Saint Augustines wordes are somewhat otherwise. Illae autem quae non scripta, sed tradita custodimus, quę quidem toto terrarum orbe obseruantur, datur intelligi, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel plenarijs concilijs, quorum est in Ecclesia saluberrima authoritas, commendata atque statuta retineri, sicuti quod Domini passio, & resurrectio, & ascensio in Coelum, & aduentus de Coelo Spiritus sancti, anniuersaria solennitate celebrantur: & si quid eliud 
                              •
                           ale occurrerit, quod seruatur ab vniuersis quacunque se diffundat Ecclesia. Those things which we obserue being not written, but deliuered, which truely are obserued throughout all the world, it is giuen to be vnderstoode, that they are retained as commended and decreed, either by the Apostles, or by generall Counsels, whose authoritie in the Church is most wholsome, as yt the Passion & resurrectiō of our Lord, and his Ascention into heauen, and the comming of the holy Ghost from heauen are celebrated with yerely solēnitie, or if there be any such like matter, which is obserued of all men wheresoeuer the Church spreadeth her self. But seing the Popish Masse was vnknowne to the world in Augustines time, & neuer vsed throughout the

worlde of all men: (for the orientall Churches neuer receiued it to this day) if it haue no better holde then it getteth by this place of Augustine, it must needes fall to the ground. And thus much concerning the name & fourme of the Masse. In the next Chapter we shall heare of the matter or substance of the Masse it selfe.
               
               
                  The three and thirtieth Chapter treateth of the Masse it selfe.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Maister Heskins first with rayling tearmes,
                        Fulke.
                      taketh exception to the proclaymers diuision of the Masse, into foure partes, Prayers, consecration, receiuing, doctrine, except he adde oblation as the fifte, or comprehend it vnder the name of consecration. Moreouer he saith, this is but a description of Masse in the large signification. But the Masse it selfe properly is the holie consecration of the bodie and bloud of Christ, the holy oblation and offring of the same, in the memoriall and remembrance of his passion and death, with humble and lowly thankes, lawdes and prayses for the same, and holy receiuing of that body and bloud so consecrated. Here is the Lions skinne couering the asse, but yet not so closely but the long eares may be seene hanging out. For as the forme of these wordes for the most parte may be applyed to the holy communion, so almost by euerie word, he vnderstandeth another thing then either the scriptures or the auncient fathers do teache, as we shall best see in the examination of the partes which followe. First where he sayeth, the proclaymer cannot abide consecration, he sayeth falsely, for both he graunteth consecration and the presence of Christes bodie and bloud, but not the Popish charming, nor their carnall manner of presence, whiche how they be proued by M. Heskins let the readers iudge. Oblation the second part, he sayeth is proued in the first book, and declaration of the prophesies of Melchisedech, Damascen, Malachie, and in the 37. Chapter. In the same places let the reader consider the answere.
                  In receiuing, which is the thirde part, two things (saith Maister Heskins) offend the proclaymer, that is; receiuing

vnder one kinde, and receiuing of the Priest alone. The former is defended by him Lib. 2. from the 64. Chap. to the end of 67. Chap. & there it is in this booke confuted. The priuate receiuing (he saith) shall be defended afterward. In doctrine the 4. part, he knoweth not what faulte the proclaymer can finde, wherein is greatest fault of all, but M. Heskins will haue nothing to be the doctrine of the Masse, but the Gospell and Pistle and other scriptures that are read in it.
                  In prayer the fift and last parte, he findeth two faultes, namely prayer to Saintes, and for the dead, for triall of these, he will haue recourse to the primitiue Church. It is well he can haue no recourse to the holie scriptures, nor to the most ancient Church, which is properly called the primitiue Church, although these two errors be of great antiquitie. But before M. Heskins vndertake these trials, he girdeth at the communion ministred in copes, and the proclaymer wearing Aarons garment for a bishoprick. If the Popish priestes had no more pleasure to say masse in their vestments, then the proclaymer to minister in copes, I thinke the common sort of Papistes would haue lesse deuotion to the Masses, then Gods people haue to ye communion, when it is ministred without any ceremoniall attyre. But Maister Heskins will proue (that neuer yet was heard off) that Christ himselfe saide Masse. For he instituted the Masse in his last supper, and that he will proue by Cyprian, but why doth he not rather proue it by ye Euangelistes? Forsooth, because the scriptures haue no such vnproper speech to make any shewe of the Masse, as Cyprian and the rest of the fathers haue. Well let vs heare how Cyprian affirmeth that Christ saide Masse. Maister Heskins saith: First for the consecration, Lib. 2. Ep. 3. He writeth thus: Vt in Genesi, &c. That the blessing in Genesis by Melchisedech the priest might be duely celebrated about Abraham, the image of the sacrifice appointed in bread and wine goeth before, which thing our Lord perfecting and fulfilling offered bread & the cup mixed with wine, and he that is that fulnesse hath fulfilled the veriti
                           •
                         of the prefigured image: In these wordes M. Heskins

forgetting that Christ offred bread & wine, gloseth vpon the veritie of the image fulfilled by Christ, and expressed by Cyprian in other wordes. Obtulit, &c. He offred the same thing which Melchisedech had offered, that is bread and wine, euen his bodie and bloud. Here againe is bread and wine offered by Christe, which is his bodie and bloud after a spiritual manner, as it was offered by Melchisedech. Hitherto no worde of consecration, nor of the carnall manner of presence, but directly against it. Nowe let vs heare howe he proueth oblation. Quaerendum est, &c. It must be asked whom they haue folowed. For if in the sacrifice which is Christ none but Christ is to be followed, we must then obey and doe that whiche Christ did, and which he commanded to be done. Here Maister Heskins noteth yt Christ is the sacrifice. I answere euen as the bread is his bodie & the wine his bloud. But yt Christ commaunded the Church to offer this sacrifice in remembrance of him, he teacheth plainely (saith M. Heskins.) Yea sir, but where doth he teach, either plainely or obscurely, that the Masse is a sacrifice propitiatorie for the quicke and the dead, which is the matter in question? And not the name of sacrifice vsed by Cyprian vnproperly & figuratiuely, meaning a remembrance and thankesgiuing for the onely once offered sacrifice of Christe. But let vs heare his words. Quod si nec minimia, &c. If it be not lawful to breake the least of the Lordes commaundements, how much more is it not lawful to infringe or breake things so greate, so weightie, so apperteining to the very sacrament of the Lords passion, and our redemption, or by mans tradition to chaunge it into any other thing then is ordeined of God? For if Iesus Christ our Lord and God be himselfe the high Priest of God the father, and he himselfe first did offer sacrifice, and commanded this to be done in his remembrance, that Priest supplyeth the roome of Christ truly, which followeth that which Christ did. And then he offereth a true & full sacrifice in the Church to God the father if he so begin to offer, as he hath seene Christ him selfe to haue offered. Here M. Hesk. reproueth our ministration in two points: First, for that we minister with wine alone contrarie to Christes institution. But when he can proue that Christ added water to

his cup of wine, we will grant it to be a breach of his institution, and not before. Secondly he reasoneth, if it be so greate a matter to take away wine or water from the ministratiō, it is much greater to take away. Christes body there fro: but it is as false that we take away his bodie, as it is true, that they take away his bloud. Now concerning the tearme sacrifice, vsed by S. Cyprian, his wordes in the same Epistle declare plainely, that he vsed it (as I said before) vnproperly: Et quia passionis eius mentionem insacrificijs omnibus facimus (passio est enim Domini, sacrificium
                              •
                            quod offerimus) nihil aliud quàm quod ille fecit facere debemus. And because we make mention of his passion in all our sacrifices (for the sacrifice which we offer is the passion of our Lord) we ought to do nothing, but that he hath done. By this you see, that the sacrifice is Christe, euen as it is the passion of Christe, that is to say, a sacramentall memoriall of Christes body, and of his passion, & not otherwise. But Maister Heskins taking occasion of the former saying of Cyprian by him cited, rayleth at his pleasure vpon the author of the apologie, for saying, the contention betweene Luther and Zwinglius, was about a small matter. And so it was in deede, in comparison of these cheefe and necessarie pointes of religion, in whiche they did agree. And if you make the moste of it, yet was it no greater, then the matter of rebaptising, wherein Cyprian his authour, dissented from Cornelius Bishop of Rome. Neuerthelesse Maister Heskins returning to vrge the image of the sacrifice, set foorth in Melchisedeches feast of bread and wine, bringeth in Tertullian Contra Marcion. Ita nunc sanguinem suum in vino consecrauit, qui sunc vi
                           ••
                        um in sanguine figurauit. So now he hath consecrated his bloud in wine, which then figured wine in bloud. He quoteth not the place, least his falsification might appeare. For first he applyeth this figure to Melchisedech, which Tertullian doth to Iuda, and translateth Vinum in sanguine figurauit. He figured wine in his bloud, whereas Tertullian speaking of the blessing yt Iacob gaue to Iuda, that he should wash his garment in the bloud of the grape, sayeth, he figured

wine by bloud, that is, by the name of bloud of the grape, he meant figuratiuely wine. As for the name of consecration in the true sense thereof, we neither abhorre nor refuse to vse. But he hath neuer done with Melchisedeches bread & wine, & when all commeth to all, Christ offred neither bread nor wine, as they say. Yet M. Heskins affirmeth, (if he wold abide by it) that Christ offred bread & wine in verity. But if you aske him whether he mean bread and wine in truth and veritie, he will say no verily, so M. Hesk. veritie is contradictorie to truth. To draw to an end he citeth Ambrose In praefatione Missae in coena Do. Christus formam sacrificij perennis instituens, hostiam se primus obtulit & primus docuit offerri, &c. Christ instituting a fourme of perpetuall sacrifice, first offered himselfe for a sacrifice, and first taught it to be offered.
                  
                  But where Maister Heskins founde this authority, I leaue to all learned men to consider, when there is not such a title in all the workes of Saint Ambrose that are printed, new or olde. Therefore whether he fayned it him selfe, or followed some other forger, he sheweth his honest and faithfull dealing. But if we should admitte this testimonie as lawfull, whereas it is but a counterfete: yet vnderstanding howe the auncient wryters abused the name of sacrifice for a memoriall of a sacrifice; and not for a propitiatorie sacrifice, it helpeth Maister Heskins nothing at all. Saint Ambrose himselfe very improperly vseth the name of Hostia, or sacrifice as De Virgine Lib. 1. 
                        Virgo matris hostia est cuius quotidiano sacrificio vis diuina placatur. A Virgine is the hoste or sacrifice of her mother, by whose daily sacrifice the wrath of God is pacified. If Maister Heskins coulde finde thus muche in Saint Ambrose for the sacrifice of the Masse, he would triumph out of measure, that he had found it a propitiatorie sacrifice, euen for the quicke and the dead: and that those wordes of Christe: doe this in rememembraunce of me, were expounded of the Fathers for, offer a sacrifice propitiatorie. But who so listeth to heare the trueth, neede not to bee deceiued

in the word of sacrifice and phrase of offring vsed by the olde writers, which was not properly, but figuratiuely &c sometimes abusiuely. For further instruction of consecration, and oblation he sendeth his Reader backe to the 2. book, 41. Chapter, to the end of the book. For the rest vnto the 1. booke, 33. Chapter, to the end of that booke. And euen in the same places shall the Reader finde mine answere.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The foure and thirtieth Chapter sheweth the vse of the Masse vsed and practised by the Apostles.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     It is maruell the Apostles were such great sayers of Masse, and yet neuer make one worde mention of it in all their writinges. But we must see what Maister Heskins can picke out of them. And first he maketh another diuision of his Masse into inward substantiall partes, whiche are consecration, oblation, and receiuing, instituted by Christ, and into outward ceremonies, prayers, gestures, & manners Instituted by the ministerie of the holie Ghost, but not of Christe. In these later he graunteth, that the Masses of S. Peter, of S. Andrew, of S. Iames, of S. Clement, of S. Dionyse, S. Basil, Chrysostome, S. Ambrose do differ one from another, but not in the former substantiall partes: & specially in consecration, and oblation, wherein the controuersie standeth: which M. Heskins wil proue adding two handmaides vnto them, that is, to consecration intention, and to oblation, prayer for acceptation. So by his Diuinitie, the intention of the priest, hath more force then the wordes of consecration to make the bodie of Christ present, and when it is present and sacrificed, it hath neede of the priestes prayers for acceptation. But he will begin with S. Peters Masse, and that he proueth by this reason, the proclaymer confesseth (though in scorne) that some say S. Peter saide Masse at Rome, but no auncient writer saith, he did not say Masse, therefore it is true, that he did say Masse. This argument is of like force with this that I will bring: some say that Maister Heskins in King Edwards

time married a Nunne, whiche no auncient writer denieth, therefore it is true yt he married a Nunne, and so peraduenture it is, although it followe not vpon the assumption that no auncient writer denieth it. And as for S. Peters Massing, as there is no auncient writer that writte within 600. yeares of Christe that denieth it, so is there none that affirmeth it. But you shall heare another reason. S. Peter that sate 2
                        •
                     . yeares at Rome and had saide Masse at Antioche, is not like to haue neglected his duetie at Rome. Admit it were true, that he was at Rome, which is not all out of doubt, and that he sate as Bishop there 25. yeares, which is proued false by the scriptures, all though Hierome and Eusebius doe affirme it: yet howe proueth M. Hesk. that it was any part of his dutie to say Masse, either there or else where, or that he did say Masse at Antioche? His first witnesse is Hugo de S. Lib. 2. de Sacra. par. 8. Cap. 14. Who although he be a late writer, vnworthie of credite in this cause, yet I wil set downe his words, that you may see howe much they make for M. Heskins cause. Celebratio Misse &c. The celebration of the Masse is done in commemoration of the Passion of Christ, as he commaunded the Apostles, deliuering to them his bodie and his bloud saying: This do ye in remembrance of me. This Masse S. Peter the Apostle is saide first of all men to haue saide at Antioch. In the which in the beginning of the faith, there were only three prayers saide. If this be true, none of the Apostles saide Masse at Hierusalem many yeare after Christ, but it is manifest, that they ministred the Lordes Supper, therefore the Masse is not the Lordes supper. But if he will restraine the words of Hugo to meane, that Peter was the first that saide Masse at Antioch, the consequence will be the same, for it is certeine, that the Gospell beeing first preached at Antiochia by those Cyprians, and Cyrenians that fled vpon the persecution of Stephan, Barnabas, and Paul, sent thither by the Apostles, brought the Antiochians to be perfect Christians, in so much that the name of Christians began there, before Peter came thither to say Masse, but they could not be Christians, without the celebration of the Lordes supper, therefore the Lordes supper is not the Masse. Againe

where he saith, there were but three praiers in S. Peters Masse, & some Popish writers affirme, that he vsed no praiers but ye lords praier: if this were true, what liklyhod hath S. Peters Masse wt ye Popish Masse, but only yt it pleaseth them to cal the celebratiō of ye Lords supper, (which Peter no dout ministred purely a
                        •
                     ter Christs institutiō,) by ye name of their impure Masse? After the testimonie of Remigius, he bringeth in Isidorus, whom he confesseth to haue ben before Remigius, & yet he was wtout yt compasse of 600 yeres after Christ, whereas in other places before, he maketh Remigius almost 200. yeres elder thē Isidorus. But Isidorus affirmeth Li. 1. de Off. Ecc. Cap. 15. That the order of the Masse, or prayers with which the sacrifices offered to God are cōsecrated, was first instituted by S. Peter. Although he liued in an erronious, & superstitious time, yet he meaneth yt S. Peter did appoint an order and forme of prayers, for ye celebration of ye Lords supper. But certeine it is, yt the same order was not extant in his time, much lesse now. For Gregorie is made ye institutor of the Popish Masse, whiche was not long before Isidorus. Next he will proue, that S. Paule said Masse, though no olde writer faith it: for (saith he) S. Paul did yt he taught: but he taught the Masse: Therfore he said Masse. He ministred the cōmunion, according to the doctrine he taught in those Chapters,1. Cor. 10. & 11. in which in deede is mention of consecration, and receiuing, but no syllable of oblation of Christ in the sacrament. As for ye order & forme of ministration, it was agreable to that doctrine: & when he said, Other things I wil set in order when I come, although it be not necessarily to be referred to matters cōcerning ye sacrament, sauing ye authority of Hugo, Hierom, & Augustine: yet it is out of question, yt he did dispose nothing contrary to the doctrine of yt Epistle, as all the Popish filthines is, which M. Hesk. would thrust vpō vs, vnder ye name of those things, which S. Paul ordeined. But it is wonderful to see, his blockish frowardnes, yt he would proue out of Aug. yt the order of the Masse now vsed, is ye order of the Masse yt S. Paul speaketh of: Ep. 118. Vnde datur, &c. Wherby it is giuē to be vnderstanded, because it was much, that in an epistle he shuld set forth all that order of doing,

which the vniuersall Church through out the world obserueth, that it is ordeined of him, which by no diuersity of maners is altred. He speketh of receiuing of ye cōmunion fasting, which M H. willfully hath corrupted, by a false translation, and by wrong pointing, & falsifying ye relatiue Quod to make it a Coniunction, yt he might apply it to ye whole order of his Popish Masse, which Aug. speaketh but of yt one ceremonie of receiuing fasting, and not after supper. Augustines wordes are these: Vnde datur intelligi quia mulium erat, vt in Epistola totum agendi ordinem insinuaret, quem vniuersa per orbem obseruat Ecclesia, ab ipso ordinatū esse quod nulla morū diuersitate variatur. Which M. Hes. hath corrupted thus: whereby it is giuē to be vnderstanded, that it was too much that in an epistle he should declare al that order of ministration, which the vniuersal Church throughout the worlde taketh to be ordeined of him, for as much as it is not, by any diuersitie of maners varied, or altered. But if it were as he fableth, yt S. Paul ordeined the ceremonial part of the Masse yt was vsed in Augustines time, ye Popish Masse being not ye same in ceremoniall partes, (as he will confesse,) that it was in Augustines time: it foloweth, that the Popish Masse is not yt, which was ordeined of S. Paule: for it is well known, it was patched & peeced together by many peeces long since August. time. And as certein it is, yt almost euerie Church in his time, had a seuerall forme of liturgie, and therefore by his owne words they cannot be that, which S. Paule set in order at the Church of yt Corinthians. The like impudēcie he sheweth in ye next saying of Aug. which he citeth Et ideo non proecipit, &c. And therfore he cōmanded not in what order it should be receiued afterward, that he might reserue this place to the Apostles by whō he would set the Churches in order. It followeth which M. Hesk. hath omitted, Etiamsi hoc ille monuisset, vt post cibos alios semper acciperetur, credo quòd eum morē nemo variasset. For if he had charged this, yt it should always be receiued after other meats, I beleeue yt no man would haue varied frō yt maner. When August. speketh so expresly of that one order of receiuing ye communiō before meat, what boldness is it to say, yt crouching, kneeling, & other dumb ceremonies, although they were not instituted by Christ, yet were ordeined by S. Paul, vpō
                     
colour of Aug. authority, who in ye same epistle, wished al such idle ceremonies vtterly to be abolished. The next Massemonger he maketh, is S. Andrew, out of whose legend, written by I knowe not what priestes & deacons of Achaia, he wil proue, yt S. Andrew did both say Masse, and also therin offer in sacrifice the bodie & bloud of Christ. But he is too much deceiued, if he thinke any man of reasonable vnderstanding will in these dayes giue credite to such fabulous legends: after S. Andrew cōmeth in S. Iames with his Masse, said at Ierusalē, which is in print: but not heard of in ye Church 600. yeres after Christ, yet M. Hesk. saith it is allowed & praysed by the proclaymer, which is vtterly false: for he proueth by a manifest argumēt, that ye liturgie, which is in print vnder the name of S. Iames, is a coun
                        •
                     erfet, because therein is a special prayer conteyned, for such as liue in Monasteries, whereas there was neuer a monasterie in the world, many hundreth yeres after the death of S. Iames. And for a further proofe of the false inscription of that liturgie to S. Iames, I will adde this argument, that he vseth the worde 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      or consubstantial which, as the learned knowe, was neuer heard of in the Church, before the heresie of Arrius was condemned in the Nicene counsell, although ye Catholike Church did alwayes confesse, yt Christ was God of the same substance, equal with the father and the holy Ghost. In deede the B. of Sarum, confesseth, that there is more in those liturgies against the Papistes, then for them, as by examining these parcels which M. Heskins citeth, we shall easily perceiue. First the liturgie of Iames, hath these wordes. Dominus, &c. Our Lord Iesus the same right, in which he was betrayed, or rather in which night he deliuered himselfe for the life of saluation of the world taking bread into his holie, vndefiled, innocent & immortall hands, looking vp into heauen, & shewing it to the God & father, giuing thankes, sanctifying, breaking, he gaue it to vs his disciples saying Take ye, eate ye, this is my bodie, which is broken for you, and giuen vnto remission of sinnes. Likewise after he had supped, he tooke the cup, and mingling it with wine and water, & looking vp into heauen and shewing it to the God and father, giuing thankes sanctifying, blessing, filling it with the holy Ghost, he gaue

it to vs his disciples, saying, Drinke ye all of this: this is my bloud of the new Testament, which is shed for you and many, and giuen for remission of sinnes. This saith Maister Heskins was his maner of consecration, vnlike the manner of the newe ministers in their communion, which only rehearse the words of Christ historically, not directing thē to God as a prayer, wherein he lyeth most impudently, as euerie man that heareth or readeth the praier immediately before ye receiuing of the sacrament can testifie. Concerning the tearme of consecration. I haue often shewed, that in the true sense thereof, we both allow & vse it, although he wold make ignorant & obstinat papists, yt wil neither heare our preachings, nor read our writings, to beleeue ye contrarie, only because he saith it. Another ridiculous cauil, he hath, that we take not ye bread into our handes before we consecrate it, But let it lie on the table, as though we had nothing to do with it. Surely we do not acknowledge such holines in our hands, yt it can consecrate the bread, but we pray to God to blesse those his creatures of bread & wine yt they may be vnto vs the bodie and bloud of Christ his sonne our Lord. If the Papists haue such holy, vndefiled, and immortal hands, as this Iames speaketh of, it is more then we knowe, or will confesse, before they can proue it. In the consecration of ye wine, he chargeth vs. yt we mingle no water with the wine. But when he can proue, by the word of God, yt our sauiour Christ did so, we will confesse our errour, otherwise we see no necessitie of the water, & so their own schoolemen do confesse. We acknowledge yt in the primitiue Church, it was an ancient custome, to mingle water with the wine, but not as a ceremonie at the first, but as the cōmon vsage of al men yt drank ye hotte wines of the East countries: but afterward it grewe to be counted a ceremonie, including some mysterie, and at length with some it excluded the wine altogether, as with those that were called Aquarij, so daungerous a matter it is to vse any thing in Gods seruice, more then is prescribed by himselfe. But M. Heskins cānot be persuaded, that after al this sanctifying, blessing, and filling of the cup with the holy Ghost, there should bee nothing else but a bare hungrie figure. As though

there were no choyce, but either transubstantiation, or a bare hungrie figure. In baptisme there is sanctification, blessing, and filling with the holie Ghost, as much as in the communion, is there therefore transubstantiation in baptisme, because there is not a bare hungrie figure? But if I might be so bold, as to examine him in his own fained Masse of S. Iames, I would aske him, how the cuppe is filled with the holie Ghost? essentially, so that ye holie Ghost, or any parte of him is conteined in the cupp? I dare say he will say no. And why then may not the bodie of Christ be present, and yet not corporally nor locally conteyned in pixe, corporax, cupp, hand, or mouth, but after a spirituall manner, as the holy Ghost is in the cuppe, by his owne Iames his saying. The last quarrell he picketh, is to our ministers, who (sayeth he) haue none authoritie to consecrate, because they receiue it not from the catholike succession. As for that authoritie which we haue receiued of God by the outwarde calling of the church, wee minde not to exchange with the Popes triple crowne, and much lesse with Maister Hesk. shauen crowne. But to shape him an answere according to his lewde obiection: seeing many are suffered to minister in our church, which were made priestes after the Popish order of antichrist, why should he denye any of them, them at the least, to haue power to consecrate, according to the Popish diuinitie, though the wordes be spoken in English, so long as he hath intentionē consecrandi, before he be of them disgraded, and hath his indebeble character scraped out of his handes and fingers endes? I aunswere he is not able to defend his opinion, that thei cannot consecrate, neither in Sorbona of Paris, nor in the schoole of Louain. To shutt vp this Chapter, he flappeth vs in the mouth, with S. Mathewes Masse, testified by Abdias in the diuels name, a disciple of the Apostles (as hee saith) but one that sawe Christ him selfe, (as M. Harding sayeth) in verie deed a lewd lying counterfeter of more then Caunterburie tales. And thinketh he that such fables, will nowe bee credited? except it bee of such as wilfully will be deceiued.
               
               
                  
                  The fiue and thirtieth Chapter, sheweth the manner of consecration vsed and practised by the disciples of the Apostles, and the fathers of the primitiue and auncient church.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  His first author is Nicolaus Methonensis a Grecian,
                        Fulk.
                      but a late writer, who affirmeth that Clemens did write a Liturgie, which Peter, Paule, and the Apostles vsed. Although that, which he rehearseth of Clemens his Liturgie, be to small purpose, & litle or nothing differing from that hee had before of Iames, yet Nicolaus Methon, is too yong a witnesse to bee credited in this case. For he was not of yeres of discretion to discerne that for the authenticall writing of Clemens, which the more auncient church, by a thousand yeres could not haue perfect knowledge to be his. Neither doth the testimonie of Proclus help him any whit. For, as it is not to be doubted, but S. Iames & the other Apostles, & Clemens also appointed some forme of Liturgie for ye churches by them planted & instructed, which is all that Proclus saith: yet how proueth M. Hesk. that those which we haue, were ye same which were written by Iames, Clemens, or any other of lawful antiquitie, when wee bring manifest demonstrations for the contrarie? Againe, where he saith that Peter vsed the Liturgie of Clemens, he is contrary to Hugo cited in the last Chap. which sayth that Peter vsed a Liturgie of his own, cōsisting of three praiers only. The next witnesse should be Dionysius falsly surnamed Areopagita, but yt he is clean contrary to M. Hes. transubstantiation, carnal presēce, priuate Masse, or sole cōmunion, & therefore vnder pretence of his obscuritie he dare cite neuer a sentence out of him. Then follow the Liturgies vnder the names of Basil & Chrysost. verie litle in words & nothing at al in matter, differing from yt former Liturgie ascribed to S. Iames, which because M. Hesk. knoweth, we cannot receiue as ye lawful writings of Basil & Chrysost. he would vnderprop them by ye authoritie of Proclus B. of Constantinople, as he did S. Clem. & S. Iames masse euen now. The reason alledged by Proclus, will cleane ouerturne his ground worke, & proue that none of these Liturgies, were writen by thē to whom they be ascribed.

For Proclus sayeth, that Basil and Chrysostom made the auncient Liturgies receiued from the Apostles shorter, cutting many things away frō them, because they were too long for the peoples colde deuotion to abide. First, this is a colde reason to alter the tradition of the Apostles, so many yeres continued in the church, for want of the peoples deuotion. But be it, that they followed this reason, then doth it followe moste manifestly, that this Liturgie which is ascribed to S. Iames is none of his, because it is as short as either that of Chrysost. or the other of Basil. But, if M. Hesk. will defende that of S. Iames, then hee must needes refuse these of Basil and Chrysost. for these are as long as it, & therfore none abridgements of it. After these Liturgies, hee addeth the testimonie of the sixt counsell of Constantinople, which condemned Pope Honorius for an heretike, wherein it is reported, ye S. Iames, Basil & Chrysostome ministred, & in their Liturgies prescribed wine to be mixed with water. But this proueth not, that these Liturgies which we haue are the same, that were set forth by those fathers, & as for ye water, they striue not for it, but for wine to be vsed, & not water onely. Finally, where the fathers of that counsell call the celebration of the communion, an oblation and an vnbloudie sacrifice, they speake in the same sence, that the elder fathers vse the same termes, otherwise that counsell, being an hundreth yeres without the compasse of the challenge, hath no place but in the lower house among the Burgesses, whose speaches may be hearde, but they haue none authoritie to determine in this cause by M. Heskins order, according to the challenge.
                  Now at length M. Hesk. thinketh it time to see the manner of consecration in the Latine church: as though Clemens, if he were bishop of Rome, and wrote a Liturgie, as he affirmeth before, that of his making might not serue the Latine church. But Ambrose is cited, lib. 4. de Sacr. Ca. 5. Vis scire, &c. Wouldest thou knowe, that the sacrament is consecrated with heauenly wordes? Marke what the wordes be. The Priest sayth: Make vnto vs (faith he) this oblation

ascribed, reasonable & acceptable, which is the figure of the bodie & bloud of our Lord Iesus Christ, which the day before he suffred, tooke bread in his holie hands, looked vp to heauen to the holie father, almightie, eternall God, giuing thanks blessed it, brake it, & being broken gaue it to his Apostles and disciples saying: Take ye, & eat ye all of this: for this is my bodie, which shalbe broken for many. Likewise also he tooke the cupp, after he had supped, the day before he suffered, looked vp to heauen to the holie father, almightie, eternall God, giuing thankes, he blessed it, deliuered it to his Apostles & disciples, saying: Take ye, and drinke ye all of this for this is my bloud. M. Hesk. passeth ouer that the oblation of the church, is the figure of the body & bloud of Christ, & for feare he should be espied & taken with such an assertion, he flyeth in all the haste to other words of Ambrose following. Vide, &c. See all those be the Euangelists words, vnto these words: Take either the bodie or the bloud, from thence they be the wordes of Christ. Note euery thing. Who (saith he) the day before he suffered, tooke breade in his holie hands. Before it be consecrated it is bread, but after the wordes of Christe be come vnto it, it is the bodie of Christ. Finally, heare him saying: Take ye & eat ye all of it, this is my bodie. And before the wordes of Christ the cuppe is full of wine & water, after the wordes of Christ haue wrought, there is made the bloud which redeemed the people. To the like effect be the words taken out of his treatise, de oration. Dom. Memini, &c. I remember my saying, when I entreated of the sacraments▪ I told you that before the wordes of Christ, that which is offered is called bread, when the wordes of Christ are brought forth, nowe it is not called bread, but it is called his bodie. Here M. Hesk. triumpheth in his consecration, & of the vertue therof. But he must remember what Ambrose saith, De ijs qui myster, initiant. Ipse clamat Dominus Iesus, &c. Our Lord Iesus him selfe doth speake alowde. This is my bodie, before the blessing of the heauenly wordes, it is named another kinde, but after the consecration, the bodie of Christ is signified. And lib. de Sac. 4. Cap. 2. Ergo didicisti, &c. Then hast thou learned, that of the bread, is made the bodie of Christ, & that ye wine & water is put into the cup, but by consecration of ye heauenly

word, it is made his bloud. But peraduenture thou sayest, I see not the shew of bloud. But it hath a similitude. For as thou hast receiued the similitude of his death, so also thou drinkest ye similitude of his precious bloud, yt there may bee no horror of bloud, & yet it may worke the price of redemption. Here M. Hesk. for all his swelling brags hath not gained one patch of his popish Masse, out of the auncient writers: for none of them vnderstoode consecration, to cause a transsubstantiation of the elements into the naturall bodie of Christe, but only a separation of them, from the common vse, to become the sacraments of the bodie & bloud of Christ. As for ye foolish cauil he vseth against protestants refusing to follow the primitiue church, for loue & liking of innouation, is not worthie of any reputation, for in al things which thei followed Christ, most willingly we folow thē, but where ye steps of Christs doctrin are not seene, there dare we not follow them, although otherwise we like neuer so well of them.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The sixe & thirtieth Chapter declareth what was the intention of the Apostles & fathers in & about the consecratiō in the Mass.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     M. Hesk. will proue that their intention was to transsubstantiate the bread & wine into the bodie & bloud of Christ. And first ye idol of S. Iames is brought forth on procession in his Liturgie, which M. Hesk. had rather call his Masse: Miserere, &c. Haue mercie vpon vs God almightie: haue mercie vpō vs God our Sauiour: haue mercie vpon vs ô God, according to thy great mercie, & send down vpon vs, & vpō these gifts set forth, thy most holy spirit the Lord of life, which sitteth together with thee god the father, & the only begottē sonne, raigning together, being consubstantiall & coeternall, which spake in the law & the prophets, & in thy newe testament, which discended in the likenesse of a doue vpon our lord Iesus Christ, in the riuer of Iordan & abode vpon him, which descended vpon thy Apostles in the likenesse of fierie tongue in the parler of the holy & glorious Sion, in the day of Pentecost send down that thy most holy spirite now also ô lord vpon vs, & vpon these holie giftes set forth, that comming vpō thē with his holie, good, & glorious presence, he may sāctifie &

make this bread, the holy body of thy Christe, and this cup the precious bloud of thy Christ, that it may be to all that receiue of it, vnto forgiuenesse of sinnes, and life euerlasting. M. Heskins saith, he would not haue prayed so earnestly, that the holy Ghost might haue sanctified the bread and wine, to be onely figures and tokens, which they might be without the speciall sanctification of Gods spirite, as many things were in the lawe. As for only figures and tokens, it is a slaunder confuted, and denyed a hundreth times alreadie. But what a shamelesse beast is he, to affirme, that the sacraments of the olde lawe which were figures of Christe, had no speciall sanctification of ye holy Ghost, or that baptisme which is a figure of the bloud of Christ, washing our souls, may be a sacrament without the speciall sanctification of Gods spirite? you see, howe impudently he wresteth and wringeth the wordes of this Liturgie, which if it were graunted vnto them to be authenticall, yet hitherto maketh it nothing in the world for him.
                  But let vs heare how S. Clement came to the altar: Rogamus vt mittere digneris &c. We pray thee that thou wouldest vouchsafe to send thy holy spirite vpon this sacrifice, a witnesse of the passions of our Lord Iesus Christ, that he may make this breade the body of thy Christ, and this cup the bloud of thy Christ. Here saith M. Heskins his intent was, that the bread and wine should be made ye body & bloude of Christ. And so they be, to them yt receiue worthily. But M. Heskins will not see, yt he calleth the bread and wine a sacrifice, before it is made the body and bloud of Christ, by which it is plaine, that this Clemens, intended not to offer Christes body in sacrifice, as the Papistes pretend to do. S. Basil in his Liturgie, hath the same intention in consecration. Te postulamus &c. We pray and besech thee ô most holy of al holies, that by thy wel pleasing goodness, thy holy spirit may come vpon vs, and vpon these proposed gifts, & to blesse and sanctifie them, & to shew this bread to be the very honourable body of our Lorde God & Sauiour Iesus Christ, and that which is in the cup, to be the very bloud of our Lord god & sauiour Iesus Christ, which was shed for the life of the world. Of this praier M. Hes. inferreth, yt Basil by ye sanctification

of ye holy ghost beleeued the bread and wine to be made Christes body & bloud, he meaneth corporally & trāsubstantially. But yt is most false, for this praier is vsed in yt liturgie, after the words of consecration, when by ye Popish doctrine, the body and bloud of Christe must needes be present, imediatly after the last sillable vm, in hoc est corpu
                           •
                         me
                           •
                        um, pronounced. Wherefore, seeing the Author of this Liturgie, after the words of cōsecration pronounced, praieth that God will sanctifie the breade and wine by his spirite, and make it the body and bloud of Christ, it is euident, that he neither beleeued transubstantiation, nor the carnall presence, nor consecration, nor intention after the manner of the Papistes, as also by this that hee calleth the bread and wine after consecration, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , exemplaries or figures. You see therefore, howe with patches and peeces, rent off here and there, he goeth about to deceiue the simple readers, which either haue no leasure, or no boookes, or no skill, to trie out his falsifications and malicious corruptions.
                  The like sinceritie hee vseth in citing Chrysostomes Masse, for so he calleth his Liturgie, in which is a prayer for Pope Nicholas, and the Emperour Alexius, which was seuen hundreth yeres after Chrysostomes death, and therfore could not possibly be written by him. Besides this, there be diuers copies in the Greeke tong, one that Erasmus translated, which is very vnlike that copie which is printed in Greeke since that time, as the learned sort doe knowe. The wordes he citeth, be in a manner the same that were in Basils Liturgie, sauing that in the end he addeth, Permutans ea sancto spiritu tuo, changing them by the spirt. This change may well be without transubstantiation, as hath bene often shewed before. The saying of Ambrose is more at large in the Chapter next before. As for the praier of the Popish Masse, that the oblation may be made the body and bloud of Christ, as it is vnderstoode of them, is nothing like the prayers of the elder Liturgies, although in sound of some words it seeme to agree. And as foolishly as vniustly, he findeth fault with our praier in the communion,

that wee receiuing the creatures of breade and wine in remembrance of Christes death according to his institution, may be made partakers of his most blessed body & bloud. S. Iames, S. Clement, and the rest (saith he) prayed not that they might receiue bread and wine. No more doe we, thou foolish sophister. But that receiuing bread and wine, we might be partakers of Christes body and bloud, and this did all the Apostolike and Primitiue Church pray, as we pray in baptisme, not that we may receiue water, but that receiuing water we may be borne a newe. Neither did they euer pray, that the breade and wine might be transubstantiated into the body & bloud of Christ, but that they might be made the body & bloud of Christ to thē, after a spirtual & sacramētal maner. But I am much to blame, to vouchsafe these childish sophismes of any answere. Next to this, he would knowe what authoritie the Protestants can shewe, that the eating and drinking of bread & wine, is of Christes institution. That it is a part of his institution, the Euangelists & S. Paul do shewe most euidently. But though he tooke breade and wine in his hands (saith M. Heskins) he changed it before he gaue them, so that it was no more bread and wine, but his body and bloud, and therefore we charge Christ with an vntrueth: to say, that receiuing of bread and wine is of Christes institution. O Maister of impietie and follie! Christ made no such change in his handes, but that which was in the cup was still the fruit of the vine, as he himself testified, saying: I wil no more drinke of this fruit of the vine, vntill the day come when I shall drinke it a newe with you in the kingdome of my father. Math. 26. As for the praier of those Liturgies of Iames and Basil, That God would make them worthie to receiue the body and bloud of Christe, without condemnation, proueth not, that they meant to receiue the body of Christ after a corporall maner, nor that the very body of Christe may be receiued to damnation. The thirde Liturgie of Chrysostome, which Erasmus expoundeth, hath it otherwise. Dignos nos redde potenti manu 
                           •
                        ua, vt participes simu
                           •
                         immaculati tui corporis, & preciosi tui

sanguinis, & per nos, omnis populus. Make vs worthy by thy mightie hand, that we may be partakers of thy vndefiled body, and of thy precious bloud, and so may al the people by vs. This prayer is godly & sound, and so are the other, being rightly vnderstoode, namely, that they which eate of that bread, & drinke of that cup of the Lord vnworthily (as S. Paule saith) do eat and drinke their owne damnation, not considering the Lords body. But M. Heskins vrgeth, that the spiritual body of Christ, or Christ spiritually, cannot be deliuered by the Priestes to the people, but ye real body may. Yes verily, much rather then the body of Christ corporally, euen as the holy Ghost may be deliuered, in baptisme, and as eternal life and forgiuesse of sinnes may be giuen in preaching the Gospell, and none of these feinedly, but truly, yet otherwise are they giuen by God, otherwise by this Ministers. But in this distinction of M. Hes▪ it is good to note, yt he maketh Christ to haue a reall body, which is not spirituall, & a spirituall body which is not reall. Christ hath in deede a mysticall body, which is his Church, and yt is not his natural body, but by spiritual coniunction vnited to his only true & naturall body. But of this mystical body, M. Hes. speaketh not. Further, he taketh exceptions to our prayer, & affirmeth, that It is not the institution of Christe to receiue the creatures of breade and wine in the remembrance of his death. But notwtstanding all his childish & blockish quarels, our prayer is waranted by the Apostles words 1. Cor. 11. As often as ye eat of this bread, & drinke of this cup, ye shewe the Lords death till he come. In the last part of this Chap. he will determine of the intention of the ministers of the new Church. And yt is, that Desiring to receiue the creatures of bread & wine, they exclude the body and bloud of Christ. Who euer heard a more shamelesse lye, or a more inconsequent argument? But seing there be two sorts of ministers in this new founded Church, he wil speake of them both: one sort were made Popish Priestes, & so haue authoritie to consecrate, but they lacke intention, now they be fallen to heresie: there is a second sort; which thought they could not haue intention to consecrate,

yet being none of the greasie and blasphemous order, they lack authoritie. But I wold there were not a third sort, of whom I spake in the last chap. yt wer made popish Priestes, and so continue, but in outward dissimulation ioyne with vs, if these intend to consecrate when they minister the cōmunion, how can M. Hes. dissuade the Papists from receiuing of them, or count their sacramēt nothing but bare bread? And wheras M. He. seemeth in the end to inueigh against such, I will willingly confesse, that they are worse then he is, or such as professe what they are, but not worse then hee hath beene in King Henries & King Edwards dayes, when he dissembled and swa
                        •
                     e as deepely as any of them all. As for our intention, seeing it is to doe that which Christ commanded to be done, and to receiue that which he deliuered vs to be receiued, if the particular explication of our faith will not satisfie M. Hes. at least, let him after his owne Popish Diuinitie, holde vs excused for our implicite faith: or if his own principles can hold him no longer then he listeth, let him giue vs leaue to esteeme none otherwise of them, then he giueth vs example to do.
               
               
                  The seuen and thirtieth Chapter treateth of the oblation and sacrifice of the Masse, as it was vsed of the Apostles and Fathers.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  When not one of the Apostles or Euangelistes make one word mention, either of Masse or sacrifice therein,
                        Fulke.
                      M. Heskins taketh vpon him much more then al the Papistes in the world can proue. Concerning the Fathers, as they vse the terme of sacrifice, so I haue often shewed, that they meane a sacrifice of thankesgiuing, and not of propitiation, or else they vse the name of sacrifice vnproperly for a memorial of the onely sacrifice of Christ, which he once offered neuer to be repeated. Neither do any of these Liturgies, which M. Heskins calleth Masses, though they be falsly ascribed to Saint Iames, Saint Clement, Saint Basil, Saint Chrysostome, &c. shewe any other thing, but manifestly the same that I haue saide. First that which is falsly ascribed to Saint Iames, in these wordes: Memores &c. Therefore we sinners being mindfull of his quickening

passions, of his healthfull crosse and death, his buriall and resurrection from death the third day, of his ascension into heauen, and sitting at the right hand of thee ô God the father, and of his second glorious and fearefull comming, when he shall come with glory to iudge the quicke and the dead, when he shall render to euery one according to his workes, we offer vnto thee ô Lord, this reuerend & vnbloudie sacrifice, praying that thou wilt not deale with vs according to our sinnes. No reasonable man can vnderstand here any other but a sacrifice of thankesgiuing, or prayer, or a memoriall of the sacrifice of Christ. For he saith not, we offer the body and bloud of Christe, but being mindfull of his sufferings &c. we offer this reuerend and vnbloudy sacrifice, for such is the sacrifice of prayer and thankesgiuing.
                  The like and more plaine is that which is ascribed to Clemens by Nicholas Methon. Memores igitur: Therefore being mindfull of his passion, death, and resurrection, returning into heauen, and his second comming, in which he shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead, and to render to euery man according to his workes, we offer vnto thee our king and God, according to his institution, this bread and this cup, giuing thankes vnto thee by him, that thou hast vouchsafed vs to stand before thee, and to sacrifice vnto thee. This is so plaine against M. Heskins, for the oblation of Christes body and bloud &c. that he is enforced to flee to shamefull petitions of principles, the end of which is, that this bread is no bread, & this cup is no cup, but as Christe called bread in the 6. of Iohn, and S. Paule in the 1. Cor. 10. & 11. in exposition whereof lyeth all the controuersie. That Liturgie which is intituled to S. Basil, is yet more plaine for a spirituall oblation of thankesgiuing. Memores ergo &c. Therefore being mindfull ô Lord of his healthsome passions, of his quickening crosse, three dayes buriall, resurrection from death, ascension into heauen, sitting at thy right hand ô God the father, and of his glorious and terrible second presence, we offer vnto thee, tua ex tuis, thy giftes of thy creatures. M. Heskins saith, he abhorreth not from the name of sacrifice, as we do, but he falsly, belyeth vs, for if he will looke in our Liturgie or communion booke, he shall finde, that

we also offer a sacrifice of thankesgiuing, euen our selues, our soules and bodies, (as the Apostle exhorteth vs) to be a holy, liuely, and acceptable sacrifice to God. But he will not remember, that the sacrifice he speaketh of, is not the body and bloud of Christe, but tua ex tuis, thy creatures of thy giftes, or thy gifts of thy creatures, namely the bread and wine which also after consecration, he prayeth to be sanctified by Gods holy spirite, but the body of Christe hath no neede of such sanctification. Secondly, he noteth not, that his Basil maketh but two presences of Christe in the worlde, the first, when hee liued in humilitie in the the world, the second which shall be terrible and glorious, by which he doth manifestly exclude ye third imagined presence of Christ in the sacrament. To the same effect prayeth the Priest in the other Liturgie, ascribed to Chrysostome: Memores &c. Therefore being mindfull of this wholesome commaundement, and of all those things which are done for vs, of his crosse, buriall, resurrection, ascension into heauen, sitting at the right hand, of his second and glorious comming againe, we offer vnto thee, tua ex tuis, thy giftes of thy creatures. Maister Heskins saith, he will not seeke the deapth of this matter, but only declare, that al these fathers did offer sacrifice. In which words he mocketh his readers egregiously, whereas he should proue, that they offered the body and bloud of Christe to be a propitiatorie sacrifice, and that he proueth neuer a whit. Nowe that the meaning of yt Liturgie was not, to offer Christ in sacrifice, this prayer therein vsed before ye words of cōsecration (as they terme it) doth sufficiētly declare: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . O Lord, receiue this sacrifice vnto thine heauenly altar. So that it is manifest, they called the bread & wine a sacrifice, not the body & bloud of Christ. The like is that of Ambrose, The Priest saith: Therefore being mindfull of his most glorious passion, resurrection from death, and ascension into heauen, we offer vnto thee this vndefiled sacrifice, this reasonable sacrifice, this vnbloudy sacrifice, this holy bread and cup of eternall life. This vndefiled sacrifice (saith M. Heskins) must needes be the body and bloud of Christe, for else there is

nothing vndefiled, that a man can offer. But why may it not be as Ambrose calleth it here, the holy bread and cup of the communion, or as he calleth it a little before in the same place, the figure of the body & bloud of Christ? For the bread and the wine, which vnproperly he calleth a sacrifice, in steede of a memoriall of a sacrifice, in that they be the holy sacraments of Christes body and bloud, are holy, vndefiled, and the foode of eternal life. The same Ambrose, called the soule of his brother, an innocent sacrifice, and offered the same to God in his prayer: De obi
                        
                           ••
                         fratris &c.
                  
                  To conclude, not one of all these Liturgies, no, not the Canon of the Masse it selfe saith, that the body of Christe is the sacrifice that they do offer, or that they offer a propitiatorie sacrifice, or that they offer any other, but a sacrifice of thankesgiuing, or a memoriall of the sacrifice of Christ, by which it is easie to iudge howe the doctrine that the Papistes do nowe holde of the propitiatorie sacrifice of the Masse, doth agree with the auncient Liturgies, ascribed to the Fathers of the Primitiue Church.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The eight and twentieth Chapter treateth of the prayer for acceptation of the oblation or sacrifice made in the Masse and vsed as well by the Apostles, as the Fathers.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     That the Apostles and Fathers commended to God by prayers the sacrifice which thei offered, it is a manifest argument, that they offered not a propitiatorie sacrifice of the body and bloud of Christe, for that needeth no commendation of our prayers. They prayed therefore, that their sacrifice of thankes giuing, and duetifull seruice, celebrated in the memorie of Christes death, might be acceptable to God, as you shal see by al their prayers. First ye Liturgie vntruly ascribed to Iames praieth thus: Pro oblatis. &c. For these offred and sanctified, precious, heauenly, vnspeakable, immaculate, glorious, feareful, horrible, diuine gifts, let vs pray to our Lord God, that our Lord God accepting them into his holy & heauenly, mentall and spirituall altar for a sauour of spiritual sweet smell, may giue vs againe, and send vnto vs the diuine grace and

gift of the most holy spirite. These sanctified giftes can not be the body and bloud of Christe, which are holy of them selue, but the bread and wine sanctified, to be a memoriall of the death of Christe in a spirituall sacrifice of thankesgiuing. Saint Clement, if wee beleeue Nicholas Methon, prayed thus: Rogamus &c. We pray thee, that with mercifull and cheerefull countenaunce thou wilt looke vpon these giftes set before thee, thou God which hast no neede of any thing, and that thou mayest be pleased with them to the honour of thy Christ. These wordes are plaine that he offered not Christe, but the breade and wine to bee sanctified to the honour of Christe, namely that they might be made the body and bloud of Christe, to as many as receiue them worthily. In the Liturgie imputed to Basil, the Priest prayeth thus: Dominum postulemus &c. Let vs desire the Lorde for these offered and sanctified the most honourable giftes of our Lorde God, and for the profite of the goods of our soules, that the most mercifull God, which hath receiued them in his holy, heauenly, intelligible altar, for a sauour of sweete smelling, would send vnto vs, the grace and communion of his holy spirite. The same wordes in a manner be in the Liturgie fathered vppon Saint Chrysostome, though it be manifest that it was written seuen hundreth yeares after his death, as is shewed before. Pro oblatis &c. For the offered and sanctified precious giftes, let vs pray the Lorde, that our mercifull God, who hath receiued thē in his holy, heauenly, intelligible altar, may send vs therfore grace, & the gift of the holy Ghost. Maister Heskins would haue vs note, that these Fathers seeme to pray for their sacrifice, which we note very willingly, for thereby is proued, that their sacrifice was not the very body of Christ, for that nedeth no commendation of our prayers. Wel, S. Ambrose followeth. Lib. de Sacr. 4. Cap. 6. Petimus &c. We pray and desire, that thou wilt receiue this oblation in thy high altar by the handes of the Angels, as thou hast vouchsafed to receiue the gifts of thy seruant righteous Abel, and the sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, and that which thy high Priest Melchisedech offered to thee. The very name of gods heauenly, mental, intelligible, holy, & high altar, do argue a spirituall sacrifice, and not a reall oblation of the

naturall body and bloud of Christ. Next to these Liturgies, Maister Heskins adioyneth the wordes of the Canon of the Popish Masse, agreeing in effect with these of Ambrose, but nothing at all in vnderstanding. For that the Papistes esteeme their sacrifice to be very Christ, God, and Man, which none of the auncient fathers did. For which cause the Bishop of Sarum iustly reproued those three blasphemies in their Canon, not in respect of the words, but in respect of their vnderstanding of them. The first, that they seeme to make Christ in his fathers displeasure, that he needeth a mortall man to be his spokesman. The second, that the body of Christe should in no better wise bee receiued of his father, then a Lambe at the handes of Abel. The third, that they desire an Angel may come and carie away Christes body into heauen. These three blasphemies M. Heskins taketh vpon him to auoyde or excuse. To the first, after many lowd outcries and beastly raylings against that godly learned father of blessed m
                        •
                     
                     mory, he answereth, defending it first by example of these auncient Liturgies: that they prayed for their sacrifice: but this helpeth him not, for they neither thought nor saide, that their sacrifice was very Christe, God, and Man, but a sacrament and memoriall of him. Afterward hee saith, the meaning of their Church, is not to pray for Christe, but by Christ, to obtaine fauour bicause they say in the end of euery prayer, per Christum Dominum nostrum, by our Lord Christ. But this hole is too narrowe for him to creepe out at. For he confesseth, that he prayeth for his sacrifice, and he affirmeth, that his sacrifice is Christ, therfore he praieth for Christ.
                  To auoyde the second blasphemie, hee saith, that the meaning of their Church is not, to pray that God will accept the sacrifice, which is acceptable of it selfe, but their deuotion and seruice, and them selues the offerers, as hee did accept Abell and his sacrifice &c. and so flyeth to the example of the olde Liturgies: but that will not serue him. For their sacrifice was not a propitiatorie sacrifice of the body and bloud of Christ, but a seruice and duetie of

thankesgiuing in remembrance of Christe. And therefore they might well pray that their sacrifice might be accepted, as Abell and his sacrifice, as Noe and his burnt offering, and so of the rest, but this meaning will not stande with the wordes of their Canon, which are that God will accept the sacrifices, that is, the body and bloud of Christ, as hee accepted the giftes of his iust seruaunt Abell &c. Therefore they must either chaunge the wordes of the Canon: or his aunswere to the second accusation, by the meaning of their Church, can not stande, howe so euer Hugo & Heskins would seeme to salue or rather to daub vp the matter. To the third and last hee aunswereth, denying that the meaning of their Church is, that the body of Christe should be caried by an Angel, but that their prayers should bee offered by an Angel or Angels in the sight of GOD, making a long and needlesse discourse, of the ministerie of Angels, and howe they offer our prayers to GOD, which is nothing to the purpose. For the Maister of the sentences: affirmeth, that an Angel must be sent to consecrate the quickening body, or else it can not be called a Masse, which is nothing like to Maister Heskins seruice? Lib. 4. dist. 13. In the end, he will ioyne issue with the proclamer that no Catholique euer thought, that Christes body was caried into heauen by an Angell. And it seemeth plainly, that they are all ashamed of the grosse absurdities and blasphemies of their Masse, and therefore are forced to feigne meanings and interpretations, which are cleane contrarie to the wordes thereof. The trueth is, that these and some other prayers of their Canon, were vsed in the Romane Church, before the opinion of transubstantiation, carnall presence, or propitiatorie sacrifice of the Masse were receiued, and this is the cause, that being nowe applyed to these monstruous errours, they imploy such detestable blashemies, as all the Papistes in the world are ashamed to heare of, and not able to defend, whereas before these errours receiued, some of them were good prayers, some were tolerable.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The nine & thirtieth Chapter treateth of the value of the Mas
                        ••
                      to the quicke and the dead.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     Prayer for the dead beeing an auncient errour, Maister Heskins triumpheth out of measure, that he findeth some spottes thereof, in the auncient writers bookes. But there is great difference betweene praying for the dead, which is an errour rising of superstition and infidelitie, and offring the bodie of Christe in sacrifice for the dead which is a most horrible blaspheming. Therefore he doeth maliciously wrest such thinges, as are spoken of prayer for the dead, or the sacrifice of prayer for the dead, yea and sometimes the sacrifice of thanksgiuing for the dead, to the oblation of CHRISTE for the dead.
                  Thus he abuseth first all the liturgies, falsely ascribed to Saint Iame, Basil, Chrysostome. Which as we haue proued before, pretended not to offer Christes body in sacrifice, and therfore offred it not for the dead, although they offer prayers for the dead. And here it is to be noted that Clementes liturgie forsaketh him for prayer for the dead, or else we should surely haue heard of him as we did before. He would get credite to that whiche is vntruely ascribed to Saint Iames, by the proclaymers testimonie, because he saide it was full of knowledge, and full of errours also. When Dionysius can say nothing for him, concerning the sacrifice of the Masse to be auaileable for the dead, he bringeth him in, speaking of prayers made for the partie deceassed at his buriall. Concerning the antiquitie of this Dionysius we haue shewed before, that he cannot be so olde by sixe hundreth yeares, as the Papistes would make him. That the Apostles taught not prayer for the dead in their writinges, he saith the cause was, that they needed not, for that the Iewes vsed both, prayer & sacrifice for the dead before Christes comming▪ by testimonie of the Booke of Machabees which (he sayeth) S. Augustine alloweth canonicall, and by witnesse of one Antonie Margarita, a late conuerted Iewe to Papistrie. Touching the veritie of that historie of the Machabees,

though Augustine allowe it to be read, so it be soberly, yet doeth not he take it for Canonicall, and Hierome vtterly denieth it for Canonicall: Expre
                           •
                        at. in Prouerb.
                  
                  But for as much as this controuersie of praying for the dead, is vnpertinent to this cause, and requireth a larger discourse then the answere to this Chapter may conteine, & also that Maister Heskins in the end ioyneth issue and maketh a newe challenge, I thinke it best, to referre the Readers to mine answere against Maister Allens Booke of Purgatorie, where he shall finde all those and a number more of places alledged and answered both touching prayers for the dead, and the sacrifice of the Masse to be auaileable to the dead, in the same also is some treatie of prayer vnto dead Saintes. In the meane season, this is sufficient against all mans authoritie, that the worde of God prescribeth neither the one nor the other, but condemneth them both, for what so euer is not of faith is sin: and whatsoeuer is not of the word of God, is not of faith: therfore prayers for the dead and to the dead, beeing not of the worde of God are sinne. Neither were they vsed in ye Church more then an hundreth yeres after Christ. And the first that maketh mention of any praiers for the dead, which is the elder errour by two or three hundreth yeres, is Tertullian, whē he was an heretike, who had receiued it with other heresies of ye Montanistes, who were two hundreth yeares after Christ: notwithstanding yt Epiphanius & Augustine number it among ye errours of Arrius, that he denied prayers for ye dead, yet they both do also number it for one of the heresies of the Heracleonites, to redeeme their dead with inuocations, and other ceremonies vsed at their buriall. How M. Heskins falsifieth the councel of Carthage, which made a decree that such as denied to pay the oblations of the dead, should be excommunicated as murtherers of the poore: I shall not neede to rehearse, vnderstanding dead mens legacies for the vse of the poore, for Masses saide for the dead. The same doeth M. Allen with this and other councels.
                  
                     Likewise M. Heskins falsifieth Cyprian De Cerna Dom: In huius praesentia non superuacuè in endicant lachrymae veniam, nec vnquam patitur contriti cordis holocaustum repulsam. In presence of him teares do neuer begge pardon in vain, neither doeth the sacrifice of a contrite heart euer suffer repulse. Here doth he translate Huius of this sacrifice, and applyeth it to the sacrifice of the Masse for the dead, whereas there is not one worde in all that sermon, either of prayer or sacrifice for the dead. But leauing this argument of praying and offering for the dead, M. Heskins chargeth the ye proclaimer with three vntrueths in one sentence, where he saide, that Saint Iames in his Masse preached and set foorth the death of Christ, but the Papistes in their Masse haue onely a number of dumbe geastures, and ceremonies which they themselues vnderstande not and make no manner mention of Christes death. To the first he answereth, that they haue all thinges that S. Iames had in his Masse, by the proclaymers confessiō, who diuideth their Masse into holie prayer, holie doctrine, holy consecration, holy receiuing. See the impudent quarrelling of this froward sophister. The Bishop saith, ye Papistes diuide their Masse into these partes, therfore he acknowledgeth their Masse to consist of these partes: and yet all these are but dumbe gestures and ceremonies, because the people vnderstand none of them, were they neuer so good, as a great parte of them is starke naught.
                  To the second he saith, that they them selues vnderstand not their owne gestures and ceremonies: he sayeth that diuerse writers haue expounded euerie parcell of them, as Isidorus, Rabanus, Hugo, Hoffnester, Garetius and others, he leaueth out Bonauentur, and Durandus the cheefe, belike beeing ashamed of their ridiculous interpretations. But admitte these things to be set foorth in bookes, doth it therefore followe, that all or the moste priestes doe vnderstand them, whereof a great number, can neither conster the Latine of their masse, nor of those bookes? And generally it may be said, that they all vnderstand them not, because these writers themselues, doe not agree in the interpretation of them.
                  
                     The thirde he saith, is A plaine lie that in the Masse they make no mention of Christes death, whereas the Masse setteth forth the death of Christe more liuely then the new communion. For with great outcries he saith, that there is mention of his death, where it is saide, The day before he suffred, and The bloud of the new Testament that it shed for you, and beeing mindfull of his passion, resurrection, &c. and do this in remembrance of me. Here is all the preaching of Christes death, that he can finde in the Masse. But seeing he grateth vpon the wordes, No mention of his death, Which was not the Bishops meaning, but no profitable mention to the institution of the people, who vnderstand nothing although there were neuer so long a sermon of Christes death in Latine: yet I say, he hath not shewed the death of Christe once mentioned in the Masse, I say not by implication, but in fourme of wordes, whereof he taketh aduauntage, to charge the Bishop of a lie. But how open plaine, lowd, & impudent a lie it is, that The Masse setteth foorth the death of Christ more liuely then the new communion, as (he termeth it) I will not in one worde goe about to confute, least I should acknowledge any neuer so small shew of trueth to be in it.
               
               
                  The fortieth Chapter treateth of priuate Masses, as the proclaymer termeth them, and solueth his arguments.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Maister Heskins first rehearsing the Bishoppes Arguments, against the priuate Masse,
                        Fulke.
                      first maketh this generall aunswere to them al, that they proue it is lawfull for the people to receiue with the Priest, but not, that it is necessarie. And first he chargeth him with falsifying of Hierome In 1. Cor. 11. That the supper of the Lorde must be common to all the people, for Christ gaue his sacraments to all his disciples that were present. Where (saith Maister Heskins) he hath left out this worde equally, by whiche is meant, that poore men haue as good right to the sacrament, as riche men, but not that it is necessarie, that all men present at Masse, should receiue with the

Priest. In deed the words of Hierome are these: Conuenientibus &c. Iam non est Dominica sed humana, quando vn
                           •
                        s quis quae tanquam caenam propriam solus inuadis, & alij, qui non obtulerit, non impereit. Ita vt magis propter saturitatem, quàm propter mysterium videamini conuenire. Caeterùm coena Dominica omni
                           •
                        us debes esse communis, quia ille omnibus discipulis suis, qui aderant, ęqualiter tradidit sacramenta. Coena autē ideo dicitur quia Dominu
                           •
                         in coena tradidit sacramentum. Item hoc ideo dicit quia in ecclesia conuenientes, oblationes suas separatim offerabant: & post communionem quae cunque eis de sacrificijs supersuissent, illic in Ecclesia communem coenam cōmedentes pariter consumebant. Et alius quidem esurit, &c. Quicumque non obtulisset non communicabat, quira omnia soli qui obtulerunt, insumebant.
                  
                  
                     When you come together, &c. Nowe is it not the LORDES supper, but a mannes supper, when euerie one falleth to it alone, as it were his owne supper, and giueth no parte to another, which hath offered nothing: so that you seeme to come together, rather to fill your bellies, then for the mysteries sake. But the Lordes supper ought to be common to al men, because he deliuered his sacramentes to all his disciples that were present, equally. And it is therefore called a supper, because the Lorde at supper deliuered the sacramente. Also he saith this, therfore, for that when they came together in the Church they offered their oblations seuerally: and after the communion, whatsoeuer was left to them of ye sacrifice, euen there in the Church, eating a common supper, they consumed it together. And one truely is a hungred: whosoeuer had not offred did not communicate, because they that had offred, consumed all alone. By this let the Reader iudge, what falsifying the proclaymer vsed and whether Hierome that condemned seuerall communions of riche men, would allowe a singular partaking of ye priest alone.
                  
                  An other reason he hath of baptisme, whiche though it be common to all men, and that two speciall times in the yeare were appointed for the ministration thereof, yet it may be ministred alone. But the example is nothing

like, for it was alwayes lawfull and often vsed, to baptise singuler persons at all times, so was it neuer of the Lordes supper, because the mysterie that S. Paul speaketh of, 1. Cor. 10. Many partaking of one bread, cannot bee expressed, when one priest receiueth alone. The third reason he bringeth, is a counterfet decree, ascribed to Fabianus of Rome 242. yeres after Christe, that people should receiue thryse in the yere, which had beene needlesse, if they receiued so often as the priest saide Masse. In deede the impudent forgerie of this decree is manifest, when two hundred yeares after Fabianus the people of Rome, as both Saint Augustine, and Saint Hierome do write, and Maister Heskins cannot denye, receiued the communion euery day. As for the decree of once a yere receiuing, I knowe not when it was made, but wicked it was whensoeuer it was made. But Chrysostome, I wene doth make much for priuate Masses, for he writeth, but Maister Heskins dare not tell where for shame: Nonne per singulos dies offerimus? offerimus quidem, sed ad recordationem facientes mortis eius. Do wee not euery day (sayth hee) make oblation? we offer in deede, but doing it to the remembrance of his death. This question of Chrysos. is but an obiection of the vsual phrase of offering, which he expoundeth to be nothing else, but a celebration of the remembraunce of Christs death: and therfore in the end of that discourse for a full resolution he setteth down: 
                        Non aliud sacrificium sicut Pontifex, sed id ipsum semper facimus, magis autem recordationem sacrificij operamur. Wee offer not another sacrifice as the holie priest, but the same alwayes: but rather wee make the remembraunce of that sacrifice. This correction sheweth, what he meaneth by the name of sacrifice.
                  And whereas Maister Heskins vrgeth, that they ministred dayly, & none were bound but priests to communicate, aboue thrise in ye yere, he concludeth the priest receiued oftentimes alone. But he playeth the papist notably in taking, rather then begging two principles: one that the people were not bounde, which hee is not able

to proue; another, that there was but one Priest in a church, whereas at that time commonly there was but one church in a citie, in which were many priestes, which by his owne confession were bound to receiue as often as the sacrament was ministred, therefore one Priest did not eat vp all alone in Chrysostomes time.
                  To the saying of Ambrose which the Bishop alledgeth in 1 Cor. 11. Inuicem expecta
                           ••
                        , &c. Ad inuicem expectandum dicit, vt multorum oblatio simul celebratur: & vt omnibus ministretur. He sayeth, they ought to tarie one for another, that the oblation of many might bee celebrated together, and that it might be ministred vnto them all. M. Heskins aunswereth, that this doctour doth onely reproue their want of deuotion, which is false: for he doth also shewe, that all ought to communicate together, or else it is not to eat the Lordes supper, vppon which wordes of the Apostle, he sayeth also: Murius enim oblatum tosius populi sit, quia in vno paene omnes significantur: per id quod enim vnum sumus, de vno paene omnes n
                              •
                           c sumere oportet. For the gift which is offered belongeth to all the people, because they are all signified in one bread: for in that wee are one, we ought to receiue all of one bread. If al must, then one ought not alone. As for that balde shift hee flyeth vnto, that all priestes in seuerall places communicate together, is too bad for a begger to vse, for so might the Corinthians whome the Apostle reproueth for not tarying one for another, say they communicated with them whome they left out, and with al Christians in the worlde. But now M. Heskins with full sayle in rayling seas inueigheth against the proclaimer, for falsifying & wrong translating of Leo, when hee doth not translate him at all; but onely doth gather the summe of his saying in fewe wordes, and that truely: though hee name neither Masse nor sacrifice, which are in ye saying of Leo, which, how little it maketh either for the popish Masse, or for the sacrifice propitiatorie, or finally for ye priuate Masse, I desire the reader to returne to the 32. Chapter of this booke, where he shall finde the place at large set

downe and vrged, which therefore I thought it in vaine to repeat in this Chapter. After this hee defendeth, that by the Masse booke they are not bounde to haue a communion, but one priest may receiue alone. And whereas the Bishop rehearseth diuerse exhortations to prayer, vsed in the Masse, as: Oremus, let vs praye: Orate pro me fratres & sorores, pray for me brethren and sisters, &c. And after the Agnus Dei: haec sacro sancta, &c. This holie commixtion and consecration of the bodie and bloud of our Lorde Iesus Christ be vnto mee & to all that receiue it, health of mind & bodie: All which sayings import a number present, & the last a number receiuing, whereas in the priuate Masse, there is neuer a brother or sister present many times, but one sorie boy, that helpeth ye priest to Masse, & though they be present, yet vnderstād they not that they are bidden to pray for the priest, when he turneth about: Maister Hesk. trifleth vpon the former prayers, separating them from the last, and affirming that they may pray together, though they do not receiue together. For he saith: there be two communions in the Masse, beside the receiuing, (and therfore-belike that is not needefull) the one of prayer, the other of sacrifice, and as for the last prayer for them that receiue, is not ment onely of them that receiue in the church at that time, but for all receiuers of all places and times, when and wheresoeuer. But what reason hath he to persuade vs, that those brethren & sisterne whome the priest firste exhorteth to pray for him, that their sacrifice might be acceptable to God, are not the same, which ought to receiue with him? neuerthelesse in the ende, supposing the priestes prayeth with limitation of time and place, he sayth it is no reason, that if the people will not receiue, the priest should not: ye as verily, because Christe instituted a communion of many participantes in one time and place, and not one priests breakefast in a corner by him selfe. Againe, the wordes of the Masse: Omnibus sumentibus, to all which do receiue, and quae sumpsimus, which wee haue receiued, doe proue a number of receiuers, and which haue receiued at tha
                        •
                     
                     
time, and in that place, or else the Priest should saye, to mee which receiue it, and which I haue receiued. And whereas Maister Heskins chargeth the proclaimer, for adding the worde, Consecration, which is not in their Masse booke, I confesse I knowe not whether it be in all coppies omitted, but I am persuaded, the bishop had some ground of his saying, or else it might be the faulte of the Printer. But whereas the proclaimer alledgeth ye Canons of the Apostles, and decrees of the bishops of Rome, Maister Heskins sayth, as odious as the Popes be to him, faine he is to praye ayde of them. But he is altogether deceiued, God be thanked the holy scriptures are sufficient for vs, both to proue al trueth, and to disproue all errours. But if either counsels or Popes decrees, be alledged, it is to beat downe the Papistes with their owne weapons, and to cast their owne doung in their owne faces, as the Prophet sayeth. But let vs heare the Canon of the Apostles, Can. 9. Fideles, &c. The faithfull, which come to the Church and heare the Scriptures, and receiue not the holye communion, let them be excommunicated, as men that disquiet the church. Here he doth most impudently charge ye proclaimer with falsification, which he himself committeth, alledging it, not out of the booke of Canons, but out of the Popes dirtie decrees: Omnes fideles, &c. All Christian men that in the solemne seruice come together to the church, let them heare the scriptures of the Apostles & the Gospell. And such as continue not in prayer vntill masse be all done, nor do receiue the holie communion, it is meete they be excommunicated, as such as moue disquietnesse to the church: but that the learned reader, may see how syncerely ye bishop hath dealt, & how falsly Hesk. belyeth him, I wil set down the Canon in Greek, as it was firste written 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . All the faithfull or Christians which enter into the church, and heare ye Scriptures, but tarrie not out the prayer & the holie cō
                     munion or participation, ought to be separated, as causers of disorder in the Church. Here you see no mention

of Masse at all. And if any ignorant papist dare not trust my translation out of Greeke, let him vnderstand yt in ye book of councels, he shal find two translations of this & the rest of those Canons, called the Canons of the Apostles, of which ye bishop hath followed the one, but Hesk. neither of both: for as I said before, there is no mention of the Masse in any of them. Therfore, what is the falsification committed in the Popes lawe, out of which he citeth it, how honestly in so doing, & reprouing the bishop for following the trueth, let the readers iudge. But for al yt he foysteth in the name of his Masse, yet can he not exclude ye necessitie of receiuing the cōmunion, of all ye lay people, which is the matter in question. And therefore it is a verie shame to report, what an absurde interpretation of the Canon he would make, namely, that it was not decreede against good Catholike people, which ioyned in prayer and receiued when deuotion serued them, but against licentious & yet dissembling heretikes and schismatikes, which being present in the churche, would not communicate, either in prayer or in receipt of the sacrament. For confutatiō of which blind meaning: first, I woulde aske, whether omnes fideles, all the faithful (as the Canon sayeth) doth signifie all licentious and dissembling heretikes and scismatikes? Secondly, when the Canon is made expressely against them that after thei haue heard the scriptures, depart when ye prayer & celebration of ye communiō beginneth, whether those yt be present & ioyne not in prayer & participation can be vnderstood? Thirdly (if he knew what kind of Censure this was, yt is spoken of) whether 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      or separation were a sufficient punishment, for men knowne to be licentious, dissembling, heretikes, & scismatikes? But hee wil father his feyned vnderstanding, vpon the councel of Antioch, which (saith he) expoundeth it so almost, word for word: Omnes qui ingrediuntur, &c. All that come into the Church of God, & heare the holie scriptures, & communicate not in prayer with the people but of a certein wantonnesse turne them selues away from the receiuing of the holie communion, let them be remoued from the church, vntill by confession they shewe fruites of repentance, and by prayers obteine pardon.
                  
                  
                     
                     But with excommunicate persons it is not lawfull to communicate, neither may we pray with such, as go from house to house auoyding the prayers of the church. But who will graunt to M. Heskins, that this should be an interpretation of the former Canon, contrarie to the wordes thereof? Secondly, when this Canon consisteth of two partes, and in deede comprehendeth two of those Canons of the Apostles, the former parte concerning all men that come into ye churche, the later onel
                        •
                      excomunicate persons, and scismatikes: who is so deuoyde of reason, to graunt that this Canon was made onely against heretikes & scismatikes? But in the ende, as it were forsaking his holde, he claspeth another rotten post, that the Canon was made against the slacknesse of the people, and not against the deuotion of the priest: so that if none of the people would communicate, the priest might receiue alone. Surely yt priuate Masse is such a monster, as it is not credible, that it once entred into any of their heads, that decreede those Canons. But seeing they would not suffer any smal number of Christians to withdrawe them selues from ye communion, is it like they would suffer all not to receiue? And seeing the worde of God was the ground of their decree: Tarrie one for another, 1. Cor. 11. &c. who doubteth, but that if the peoples deuotion serued them not, the priest was as well bound to tarrie for the people, as one lay man for another? So that all the congregation ought to communicate together, and none to be left out, but such as either be vnworthie, or haue some necessarie impediment. Finally, if the Papistes were grieued at the seeldome receiuing & communicating with the priest, as they pretende, why do they not execute the censures of these Canons against all that be present at their Masses, and do not receiue with them?
                  But M. Heskins proceeding in confutation of the proclaimers arguments, first chargeth him to father a decree vpon Calixtus, which was decreede by Anacletus, as though one thing might not be decreed by two bishops, and as though in the Canon lawe and other like-recordes,

one lawe is not fathered vppon diuerse bishops. And Gratian ascribeth it to both, and namely to Calixtus dist. 2. Cap. Peracta. The words are these: Peracta consecratione, &c. When the consecration is done, let euery man receiue the communion, vnlesse he wilbe put from the vnitie of the church. For this thing the Apostles haue ordeined, and the holy churche of Rome continueth the same. Two great faultes M. Hesk. findeth in this allegation. First, he doth detort, abuse, and wrest the place: secondly he doth mutilate it, and cutt it off by the knees. Here be vehement accusations, but in the tryall you shall see the bishop clearely discharged, & all the slaunder verified vpon the accusers owne dealing. For first to reproue the bishops allegation, which was brought out of a decree of Calixtus, hee bringeth in an Epistle of Anacletus. Secondly, he will not alledge the wordes of the Epistle, but the report of Bartholomewe Garanza, a common falsifier of Canons & decrees, and thus he citeth it: Sacerdotes quando, &c. The priestes when they do offer sacrifice vnto our Lorde, they ought not to do it alone, but let them take witnesses with them, that they may be proued to sacrifice perfectly vnto the Lord in places dedicated to God, according to that of Deutron. 12. Take heede thou offer not sacrifice in all places that thou seest, but in the place that thy Lord God hath chosen. Let a bishop sacrificing to God haue witnesses with him, & more then another priest, with whome when the consecration is done, let all the ministers communicate, which will not bee forbidden the entrie of the church. Maister Heskins in his translation hath falsifyed the wordes, for where ye Latine is Non soli hoc agere debent, The Priestes ought not to do it alone, he hath turned it, they shall not do it alone: & where the Latine is, sed testes secum adhibeant, he turneth it, but they shall haue witnesses with them: wheras hee should saye, let them take witnesses with them. His pollicie is easie to espye. Hee would haue it seeme to the Englishe reader, that witnesses are appoynted, which if they faile to bee present, the Priest might notwithstanding saye his priuate Masse alone, whereas by the wordes of the decree, the Priestes are commaunded to get witnesses, and it is

tolde them, they ought not to do it alone. But M. Hesk. to iustifie the falsification of his spanish Garanza, which saith: omnes ministri communicent, let all the ministers communicate, as though the commaundement were to them, & not to the people, bringeth forth a patch or two, out of the Epistle of Anacletus. But that the trueth of the proclaimer, & the falshood of this exclaimer may be more manifest, I will set downe all the discourse of this matter, out of that Epistle set forth vnder ye name of Anacletus, by Peter Crabbe, as errant a Papist as Bartholomew Garanza for his heart: nothing therein by diuersitie of letter, yt which M. Hesk. hath rent out from the rest. Ipsi autem quando Domino sacrificant, non soli hoc agere debent, sed testes secum adhibeāt vt Domino perfectè in sacratis Deo sacrificare locis probentur. Ait nam
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            authoritas legis Diuinę: Vide ne offeras holocausta tua in omni loco quem videris, sed in loco quem elegeris Dominus Deus tuus. Episcopus Deo sacrificans testes, vt praefixum est, secum habeat, & plures quàm alius sacerdos. Sicut enim maioris honoris gradu fruitur, sic maioris testimonij incrementatione indiget. In solennioribus quippe diebus aut septem, aut quin
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            aut tres diaconos, qui eius oculi dicuntur, & subdiaconos at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            reliquos ministros secum habeat, qui sacris induti vestimentis in fronte & a tergo, & presbyteri è regione dextra laeuá
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            contrito corde & humiliato spiritu, ac prono stent vultu, custodientes eum à maleuolis hominibus, & consension eius praebeant sacrificio. Peracta auē consecratione omnes cōmunicent, qui noluerint ecclesiasticis carere liminibus. Sic enim Apostoli statueruns, & sancta Romana tenes ecclesia. And when the priestes do sacrifice, they ought not to do it alone, but let them take witnesses with them, yt they may be proued to do sacrifice to the Lord perfectly, in places dedicated to God. For the authoritie of Gods law sayeth: Take heede thou offer not thy burnt offerings in euerie place which thou shalt see, but in ye place which the Lord thy God shall choose. Let a bishop sacrificing to God haue witnesses with him, as is before sayed, & more then another priest. For as he enioyeth a degree of greater honor, so he hath need of the increase of greater testimonie. For in more solemne dayes, let him haue with him either seuen, or fiue, or three deacons, which are

called his eyes, & the subdeacons and the rest of the ministers, which being cloathed in the holie vestimentes, let them stand before and behind him, & the priests ouer against him on the right hand & on the left hande with contrite heart, & humbled spirite, & sober countenaunce, preseruing him from malicious men, & let them giue their consent to his sacrifice. And when the consecration is ended, let al communicate, which will not be depriued of entrie into the church. These be the wordes of that Epistle which M. Hesk. mangleth and falsifieth thus: 
                     Episcopus, &c. The bishop doing sacrifice vnto God, let him in the solemne dayes haue either seuen, or fiue, or three deacons which be called his eyes, & subdeacons & other ministers. First, he leaueth out, That, no priest ought to sacrifice alone, but must take witnesses wt him. Secondly, that a bishop ought to haue more then another priest at all times. Thirdly, hee citeth the words so, as though the bishop should haue no neede of witnesses, but only on solemne dayes. Fourthly, he leaueth out, how the deacons & other ministers should stand before and behind the bishop, which will not agree with his popish altar: for who can stande before the popish priest, except he stand in the windowe, or vppon the altar? Finally, wheras omnes may reasonably be vnderstood of al present, he restraineth it onely to ye ministers, which if it were so, yet it ouerthroweth the Popish priuat Masse. For, if there be twentie or fortie priests & clarkes, as there be often so many at Masse, & sometimes an hundreth & more, as at a Synode, yet not one of them wil receiue with ye priest, neither are they banished yt refuse to cōmunicate. But to proue yt this word, all, should be referred to all the clergie, he citeth the Can. 9 Apost. Si quis episcopus, &c. If any bishop, &c. when the oblation is made, do not communicate, either let him shew a cause, that if it be reasonable he may obteine pardon, or if he shew none, let him be excommunicated, as one that is cause of offence to the people, giuing suspition of him which did sacrifice, that he hath not wel offered it. This Canō must be no interpretatiō of ye Epistle, and though it were, yet is his priuate Masse in neuer the better case: for here are still a number necessarily bounde to communicate

with the Priest, vnder paine of excommunication. But M. Hesk. sayeth: possible it might be, that when the bishop had bene three attendant vpon him, or such small number, they might all haue cause to absteine. This is a possibilitie not to like to come in esse, or being, once in 20. yeares. For where findeth he yt the bishop might haue but three with him? The decree before cited, requireth three deacons at the least, beside subdeacons & other ministers: of which in the auncient church, there was great store & diuerse functions, as acolytes, exercistes, readers, dorekeepers, &c. But admitt it were possible, that all these should absteine (yet saith he) there is no prohibition for ye priest to receiue alone. The decree sayeth they ought not to sacrifice alone, and both it & the Canon, commaund all Christians, & especially the Clergie that be present to cōmunicate: yet M. Hesk. sayeth, they are not prohibited to saye Masse alone, or yt it is not sayd, yt the priuate Masse is naught. What reason is in these aunswers let the readers iudge. But for cleare proofe & ouerthrow of ye proclaimers challēge, M. Hesk. sayth, that in the Masse of Chrysost. there is a plain rule giuen, what was to be done, when the priest receiued alone, & that the Proclaimer had not learned so farre, as to know this. Indeed this is an high point of learning (M. Hesk.) that ye proclaimer could neuer attain vnto, to play with your readers noses so impudently, which cannot smell out your falshod, when you beare them in hande yt that was Chrysostomes Masse, which was written seuen hundreth yeres after Chrysostome was dead, as appeareth plainly by the prayer for Pope Nicolas, & the Emperour Alexius that is in it, which the proclaimer as vnlearned as you make him, yet had wit to finde out & laye abrode to your open shame, and to all their shames that vse the same Liturgie, as authenticall & rightly to be ascribed to Chrysostome. The issue that you ioyne, that priuate Masse is not naught, nor prohibited in scripture, councel, or catholike writer, is tryed alreadie by sufficient euidence, giuen by the B. of Sarum against Harding, & by answere to your counterfet and false euidence vttered

in this chapter & in the next. As for the receiuing of a sicke man alone, hath nothing to do with priuate Masse, which sole receiuing if it were admitted, yet a case of extreme necessitie, approoueth not an vsuall & dayly contempt of Christes holy institution.
               
               
                  The one and fortieth chapter prooueth that the masse may bee said and the Sacrament receiued▪ without a number of communicantes at one time in one place.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  When all is saide and done (saith M. Hesk.) the Masse shalbe holy and good, and this shalbe a trueth,
                        Fulke.
                      yt a priest saying Masse, or any other man godly disposed, sicke or whole, may receiue the holy sacrament alone: & for profe of this, he vseth this reason: All things forbidden vs to do (as the aduersarie sayth) be conteyned in the scripture, priuate Masse & sole receiuing are not forbidden in scripture, therefore they may be done. His Maior is grounded vpon the authoritie of his aduersaries. But which of his aduersaries sayeth that all things forbidden are forbidden by name? In deede we say that all things that are contrarie to Gods commaundment are forbidden, so are priuate Masse & sole receiuing, therefore they are forbiddē. That priuate Masse & sole receiuing are contrary to Gods commaundement, it is manifest by the institution of Christ, which is of a communion, & not of a priuate Masse or sole receiuing. Vnus panis, &c. One bread we being many are one bodie, &c. After this fond argument, which is returned vpon his own neck, he cauilleth at ye proclaimers words, because he saith, he knoweth they haue such replyes, yt as there be many things spoken in ye old doctors of yt communion, so as many things or mo, are spoken by them of ye priuate Masse: but this latter part saith M. Hesk. he passeth ouer & will not rehearse one. I cannot blame M. Hesk. if he would faine haue the Bishop find something for him in ye doctors, yt soundeth for the priuate Masse, because hee can finde nothing him self. But when the bishop sayeth, hee knoweth they haue such replyes, he doth not graunt, that their reply is true, but denyeth it, as false, and if it were so, that any thing

were in the old Doctours that might seeme to fauour the priuat Masse, yet what obligation hath M. Hes. of the bishop, wherein he is bound to shewe it forth in a sermon. I vse more words about this cauil, then the matter needeth▪ only to shew ye foolish frowardnes & peruerse foolishnes of this man, yt wil seek a knot in a rush, to take occasion to rayle and slander: But to the purpose, M. Hes. confessing, yt in the Primitiue Church the people did often cōmunicat, addresseth him self to proue, yt the sacrament may lawfully be receiued of one alone, and yt by Iustinus, whom both Cranmer & the proclamer (he saith) doth pitifully abuse, and truncatly alledge: but he him selfe doth falsifie and truncatly alledge, as we haue shewed before. But first I wish the reader to consider, yt he hath forsaken his priuat Masse, for which is no shew in the Doctours, and fleeth to sole receiuing in cases of necessitie, or in superstitious abuse, which proue not yt any priuat Masse was said. Iustinꝰ he citeth thus: Diaconi distribuunt &c. The Deacons deliuer of the consecrated bread and wine and water to euerie one that is present, and if there be any away, they carie it home to them. In this translation he leaueth out ad participandum, to be receiued, which is in his Latine text, and only maketh mention of ye deliuerie, omitting for what vse it was deliuered. In deede the Greek is otherwise, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . The distribution and participation of those thinges, for which thanks hath ben giuen, is made to euery one, & to them yt are not present, by the Deacons there is sent. First I say, as there is a communion confessed of them that are present, so it was not cleare yt that which was caried to thē yt were absent, was caried as ye sacrament, but as almes: but admit it were caried as the sacrament, yet it foloweth not, yt it was receiued of euery man alone, but of euery family, which vpon necessarie cause was absent from the whole congregation, or of diuers families meting in one, which could not meete in the common assembly, so that here is no priuat Masse said, but a communion ministred, neither is there so much as any sole receiuing proued, which if it were, yet proueth it not the priuat Masse. And therefore

all M. Heskins babbling of the sacrament to be one, that is ministred or receiued in diuers places, and at diuers times, is vaine, and to no purpose, and most fond it is, that he compareth it to the sacrament of baptisme, which is but one to all men. For of that I may thus reason: though euery mans baptisme is not a diuers baptisme, but all is one baptisme, as there is one faith and one God, yet as no man is baptized by other mens baptisme, but by his owne, so no man communicateth with other communions but onely in that action wherein he is a communicant him selfe. Therfore M. Heskins fantasie of one Priest communicating with all Priestes in all places, is ouerthrowne by his owne argument and similitude. But he wil proue sole receiuing by Tertullian, S. Cyprian, Basil, and Hierome, by whom (he saith) it may be gathered, that the godly brought with them, a fine linnen cloth, or a pretie boxe to carie it home. I finde the sacramentall breade in some old writers of credite, caried in a cloth or a wicker basket, but I remember not any pretie boxe. For they had not such pretie cakes sixe hundreth yeres after Christ, as M. Heskins imagineth the pretie boxe serued to carie them in. In the superstitious Dialogues of Pope Gregorie Lib. 4. Cap. 56. we reade of two cakes called Coronae, which should haue bene giuen to a poore man in almes, for his seruice done in the Bathe, but this supposed poore man being a ghost, desiered that the same might be offered in Masse to redeeme him out of that his purgatorie: Out of this fable which Gregorie rehearseth, this truth is proued, that the breade they saide Masse withall at that time, was so great, ye two of these cakes wold giue a poore man his dinner at the least: for two of the Popish singing cakes would haue done him small pleasure for his bodily reliefe, for which at the first it was meant to be bestowed. But let vs heare Tertullian, who writing to his wife, and dissuading her from marrying with an Infidel after his death, saith thus: Non sciet maritus quid secretò ante omnem cibum gustes? Et si sciuerit panem non illum credet esse, qui dicitur. Shall not thy husband knowe what thou doest secretely eate before all meate? And if he knowe it to bee breade, hee will

not beleeue it to bee that breade, which it is saide to bee. I passe ouer howe M. Heskins hath corrupted Tertullian by false pointing, howe be it he can gather nothing of this place, but ye superstitious receiuing of women in corners, and that in time of persecution. But their superstition proueth neither sole receiuing to be good, & much lesse priuate Masse to be lawfull. That this custome was superstitious and naught, M. Heskins can not deny, for it was abolished by ancient councels, and the Papistes them selues do not obserue it, nor suffer it to be vsed, else why send they not ouer their consecrated cakes to their frends, as they doe their Agnus Dei, their graines of the Trinitie, and such other gaudes and bables? But Saint Basil hee weeneth giueth a notable testimonie, who writing to a Gentlewoman called Caesaria Patritia, which feared to touch the sacrament with her owne hande, saith thus. Cōmunicare per singulos dies &c. To communicate euery day, & to participate of the holy body and bloud of Christ, it is a godly thing and very profitable, as hee saith manifestly. Hee that eateth my flesh and drinketh my bloud, hath life eternall. For who doubteth, but the often participation of life, is nothing else but many ways to liue? Wherefore we communicate foure times in euery weeke: On Sunday and Wednesday, on Friday and Saturday, and on other dayes, if there be the memorie of any Saint. But that it is no greeuous thing, that any man should be constrained by necessitie in times of persecution, when the Priest or the Minister is not present, to take the Communion with his owne hand, it is superfluous to declare, for so much as it is by the very vse of the thing confirmed by a long custome. For all they that lead a solitarie life in the wildernesse where there is no Priest, keeping the Communion at home, doe receiue it of them selues. But in Alexandria and in Aegypt, euery one of them which are of the people for the most part, hath the Communion in his owne house. For after the Priest hath consecrated the sacrifice and distributed it, we must beleeue worthily to participate and receiue it. For in the Church the Priest giueth part, & he which receiueth it, taketh it with all libertie, and putteth it to his mouth with his owne hand. Therfore it is the same in vertue whether any man take one part of the Priest, or many parts together.
                     
Here M. Heskins vrgeth, that euery man in his own house receiued the sacrament in time of persecution. But this proueth not a sole receiuing, if priuate men haue the Communion in their house, for they might receiue many together. But concerning the Hermites that dwelled in dens & caues alone, he saith they could haue no cōpanie, and therevpon insulteth against the proclamer, for saying the Indians, Arabians, Armenians, Grecians, &c. neuer receiued nor vsed the priuat Masse. And hath he proued the priuate Masse by the receiuing of the Hermites, which were Lay men, and no Priests? No forsooth. For he is feine to fasifie the wordes of this epistle in translating, to proue that they receiued alone. The wordes are in Greeke thus, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . in Latine a se ipsis cōmunicant. Which he turneth falsly. They communicate by them selues, as though they did receiue it alone, whereas he should say, they receiue the Communion of them selues, that is one of an other, for it is well knowne, they were not so solitarie, but they had meetings at sometimes, as appeareth by the histories. As for other things that M. Heskins noteth out of this place, bicause they are noted and aunswered in other partes, where some of these sentences are alledged, I will spend no time in repeating of them here. Only concerning ye authoritie of this fragment of an Epistle, which is not extant in al S. Basils workes, I giue the reader to vnderstand, that it may be doubted of what antiquitie it is, whether it were written by the ancient Basilius surnamed the great, or by some other of yt name of much later time. Next is brought in Hieronyme, to testifie that ye like hath ben vsed in Rome in his time, in time of persecutiō. I maruel why M. Hes. addeth in time of persecution, for in Hieromes time there was no such persecution at Rome, & he speaketh not of it as a shift in time of persecution, but as a custome in time of peace. Belike M. Hes. would haue the custome excused by necessitie of persecutiō, which otherwise he can not allow to be good of it self. But what saith Hier. ad Iouin. Apoll. Scio Romae hanc esse consuetudinem &c. I I know this custome is at Rome, that the faithfull do always receiue

the body of Christ, which thing I do neither reprehend nor allowe. For euery one aboundeth in his owne sense. But I appeale to their conscience, which the same day after carnall copulation do communicate, and as Persuis saith, purge the night with water: Why dare they not goe to the Martyrs? Why come they not into the Churches? Is Christe one in the publique place, an other in the priuate houses? That which is not lawful in the church, is not lawful at home. Nothing is hid from God, yea, the very darknesse is bright with him. Therefore let euery man examine him selfe, and so let him come to the body of Christ.
                  
                  Here hee vrgeth that the people did communicate in their houses sometimes, namely after companie with their wiues, when they durst not come to Church. But this custome doth Hierom seuerely reproue, & would not haue them communicate, but when they might come to the Church without scruple of conscience. So that Maister Hesk. bringeth in an vnlawfull custome, to proue his priuate Masse to be lawfull, which yet is neuer ye neerer, although this custome were good: for therby is not proued so much as sole receiuing, nor reseruation as we haue shewed before, bicause nothing appeareth to the contrarie, but that they might haue the Priest to consecrate and minister to them at home. As for the admonition he giueth to married persons, to abstaine from companie with their wiues &c. I passe it ouer, as not worthie ye rehearsal. Married men are to be exhorted to temperance and chastitie, and further to prescribe times &c. it may be Popish Diuinitie, but it hath no ground in the word of GOD. As for the married Priestes, he hath little to doe with them, let him take thought for his vnmaried Priestes.
                  But Chrysostome he thinketh saieth much for the priuate Masse in Cap. 1. ad Ephe. Hom. 3. Frustra habetur quotidiana oblatio, frustra stamus ad altare. Nemo est qui participet. The daily oblation or sacrifice is done in vaine, we stand at the altar in vaine. There is no man that will partake with vs. By this (hee saith) it is euident, that Masse was sayde in the Greeke Church, though there were no communicants with the Priest▪ But this euidence is false (Maister Heskins) for first

there was a number of ye Cleargie which always did communicate: although none of the people would receiue, as was proued before by the ancient canons cōmonly called of the Apostles. And where as you labour to proue, that ye Masse was not in vain, although no man did receiue with the Priest, because the Masse had two ends: the one of oblation, the other of receyuing, so that although it were in vain in respect of the receiuing, yet it was not in vaine in respect of oblation, I pray you look back again to Chrysostoms words, & see if he do not say, yt was done in vaine, whiche you labour moste to proue could not bee in vaine, namely Frustra habetur quotidiana oblatio, The daily offring or sacrifice (as you turne it) is done in vaine. For make what respectes you can, the oblation is in vaine to them that do not receiue it. And where you would proue that Chrysostome saide Masse, though no man receiue with him, because he saith: Nemo est qui participet: There is no man to participate: you may as well say that Chrysostome himselfe did not participate, because he saith generally no man, and then he sayde no Masse by your owne rule, for you holde it necessarie that the priest himselfe should receiue. But to shewe that Chrysostome meaneth not generally as the worde soundeth, that none of the people did communicate, it appeareth by the whole circumstance of his discourse in yt sermon. For immediately before the wordes cited by M. Heskins he sayeth Multam video huius rei inaequalitatem. In alijs quidem temporibus saepenumero, ne
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            cum mundi estis acceditis, in paschate verò etiamsi quid temerarium vobis sit commissum nihilominus acceditis: ô cōsuetudinem, ô praesumptionem. I see great inequalitie of this matter. At other times truely oftimes you come, not whē you are cleane, but at Easter although you haue committed any rash thing neuerthelesse ye come: O custome, O presumption. By these wordes it appeareth yt he rebuketh the neglecte of some in cōming to the cōmunion but seldom, & yet cōming rashly at Easter, to such therfore ye celebratiō of ye cōmunion was in vaine.
                     And therfore exhorting thē to prepare themselues he taketh

away their obiection Non es oblatione atque commu
                              •
                           on
                              •
                            dignus? Igitur neque precatione. Art thou not worthie o
                           •
                         the oblation and the communion? Then neither art thou worthie of the prayers. Yea, he is very earnest, that al they that do not communicate, should departe with the penitentes and Catechumeni, and compteth them impudent whiche tarry and doe not communicate with the rest. 
                        Quisquis enim mysteriorum consors non est, impudent & improbu
                              •
                            
                           
                              •
                           stat. For whosoeuer is not partaker of the mysteries, in standing by, he is impudent and wicked. Thus by Chrysostoms iudgement all they that heare Masse, and do not communicate wt the priest, are impudent and wicked persons. Againe to proue that many did alwayes communicate he saith: Ita tu quoque aduenisti, hymnum cecinisti cum omnibus reliquis, ex corum te numero esse, qui digni sunt, hoc ipso confessus es, quòd non abcessisti. Quomodo cum manseris, de mensaista non participas? Indignus sum, inquis: indignus es igitur & ea communione, quae in precibus est. Thou also art come, thou hast sung the hymne with all the rest, thou hast professed thy selfe to be of the number of them that are worthy euen by this, that thou hast not departed. Seeing thou hast tarried, how hast thou not participated of this table? Thou sayest, I am vnworthie: therefore thou art vnworthie of that communion, which is in prayers. By this place it is manifest, that a great number did alwayes receiue, although many did refraine. And that Chrysostomes communion was nothing like a priuate Masse, mumbled in a corner, (as M. Heskins most impudently affirmeth,) but such a one, as all the people sung hymnes together at it, and they were counted wicked and impudent, which stoode by and did not communicate. Finally that Chrysostome compted it not lawfull for any to be present, which did not communicate, he saith also: Post acta mysteria accedere licet ac videre: praesentibus verò mysterij
                              •
                            abito. Nihil hic tibi quàm Catechumeno plus licet. When the mysteries are ended, thou mayst come neere and see, but when the mysteries are present, depart. It is no more lawful for thee to be here, then for a learner, that is not baptised.
                     
Thus Chrysostome you see maketh nothing for the priuate Masse, but altogether against it. His next argument is of Serapion, who being sick at the point of death, for his comfort, (because he had beene excommunicated) desired to receiue, at which time the minister was also sicke, which should haue receiued with him, and therfore sent him the sacrament by his boy. So that here is a case of extreame and double necessitie, for sole receiuing, to proue what might lawfully be done where no necessitie vrgeth: Euseb. Lib. 6. Cap. 34.
                  Concerning S. Augustines priest, that saide Masse in a priuate house, to driue away spirits, we shal heare more in the next Chapter. After this followeth the counterfet decree of Soter, that no priest should say Masse except two were present to aunswere him, when he saith Dominus vobiscum, which yet the Popish priestes doe not obserue, for they say Masse, when they haue but one boy with them, or their Parish clearke, and sometimes perhaps none at al. Here saith M. Heskins some are commaunded to be present, but none are cōmanded to cōmunicate. An argument like the authoritie of the decree, howbeit if a man would stand to reason wt him, there is like cause, why they should communicate, as why they should be present, for as the priest saith: The Lorde be with you, therefore two must be present: so he saith of the sacrament, Quod sumpsimus, which we haue receiued, which is not true, when he onely hath receiued. To this decree, he ioyneth a Canon of the councell of Agatha. Wherein the people are commaunded to heare Masse euerie Sonday, and to tarrie to the end, but they are not commanded to communicate.
                  First I aunswere this Canon is not found in the auncient recordes, as Peter Crabbe honestly confesseth. Secondly, where it is found, it is Missas die Dominico secularibut tenere, which signifieth, that seculer men are commanded to frequent the assemblies, (for so Missae of olde time did signifie,) for which Maister Heskins turneth it, Missas tota
                           •
                         audire, &c. That they are commanded to heare the whole Masses, which is the corruption of Gratiane. The like decree

he bringeth out the councel of Orleans: That the people should not departe before the solemnitie of the Masse be ended.
                  
                  All which proue not a priuate Masse: for either they meant, that the people should communicate that were present, or else at the least the Cleargie receiued with the Bishop. For long after the time of these councels, it was decreed, that al persons both men and women should receiue euerie Sonday. As Matisconense. 2. Cap. 4. Decernimus vt omnibus diebus Dominicis, altaris oblatio ab omnibus viris & mulieribus offeratur tam panis, quam vini: vt per has immolationes & peccatorum suorum fascibus careant & cum Abel vel caeteris iustè offerentibus promereantur esse consortes. We decree that euerie sunday, the oblation of the altar be offered of all persons men and women, both of bread and wine: that by these offrings, they may be loosed of the bandes of their sinnes, and with Abel and the rest offering righteously, they may be worthie to be companions.
                  
                  The last authoritie he citeth, is out of the Popes lawe, intituled to S. Augustine, but not to be found in all his workes, not sauouring of his stile, or of any mans meanly learned, and therfore I will not vouchsafe such a grosse counterfet of any answere. The rest of the Chapter, beeing spent in rayling, I will answere with silence, concluding that as here is little for sole receiuing, conteined in this Chapter, so for priuate Masse, here is nothing at all.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The two and fortieth Chapter proueth the trueth of those matters of the sacrament, by that it hath pleased God to confirme the same with miracles.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     First M. Hesk. compareth himselfe with Helias, which challenged the Priests of Baal to shewe a miracle, so he challengeth the Lutherans and sacramentaries to bring forth first some miracle. But he could neuer heare of any sauing one, and that was of Luther, which he reporteth of himselfe (as he saith) in his Booke of the priuate Masse,

and as Prateolus sayeth, in his Booke De Missa Angulari, but where it is written I could neuer yet finde, though I haue made some searche for it. Luther reporteth that the Diuell awaked him out of his sleepe at midnight, and disputed with him that the priuate Masse is horrible idolatrie, &c. For any thing that I can perceiue, by the wordes cited by Maister Heskins, there is no miracle at al spoken of by Luther, but only he confesseth what inward temptations of Sathan he susteined, for saying priuate Masse, by the space of 15. yeares together. Which the Papistes after their accustomed synceritie doe interprete, as though he boasted of a miracle, as though he were persuaded by the diuell, to forsake the priuate Masse, as a thing abominable. But Luther in deede in this booke written against the priuate Masse, vtterly reiecteth all miracles, that are alledged to mainteine false doctrine contrarie to the worde of God, and namely those miracles that are reported to haue beene done, to confirme the credite of the priuate Masse, which either were feigned (as a great number were) or else wrought by the sleight of Sathan, to establish idolatrie, as in all Heathen nations, the diuell hath thus wrought miracles to confirme the people in their errours.
                  Thus therefore we are to iudge of miracles, that they are euen as the doctrine, for which they are alledged, so that if Maister Heskins can not proue his priuate Masse, and other heresies by scripture, they will be made neuerthelesse by miracles. But let vs heare in order, what worshipful miracles he alledgeth. First a feigned fable out of a counterfet writer called Amphilochius, that a Iewe sawe in Saint Basils hand a childe diuided. Then a tale out of Vituspatium of as good authoritie as Legenda Aurea, that the sacramente was turned into bloudie fleshe to a doubting olde man. Next out of Optatus Libro 2. Contra Donat. That dogges after they had eaten the sacrament, caste vnto them by the Donatistes, ranne madde and werried their Maisters.
                  Which last might be a true & iust punishment of God

against the Donatistes, for their heresie, yet proueth it not that the dogges did eate the body of Christe, which God forbid that any Christian man should thinke. Another miracle is reported by S. Augustine, Lib. 22. De ciuitate. Dei Cap. 8. That one of his priestes saying Masse in a house, that was molested with the power of the diuell, deliuered the house from such disquietnesse. This belike is alledged for the priuate Masse. But that proueth nothing. For Augustine in that place nameth no Masse: he saith, he offered there the sacrifice of the bodie of Christe, praying that the house might be deliuered from that molestatiō, and so it came to passe. Now it is nothing credible, that he offer
                        •
                     d that sacrifice alone, but that the owner of the house and all his familie did there communicate with him, and therefore here is nothing to helpe the priuate Masse in this miracle.
                  Next vnto this, interlacing certeine sentences of Bernarde of the vertue of the sacrament, he returneth to miracles, and then telleth a tale out of Paule the Deacon, of a noble woman of Rome for whom S. Gregorie by prayer, turned the sacramental bread into the fourme of A very bloudie fleshly litle finger. A faire miracle I promise you, but if it had beene true, Gregorie that was so light of credite, to beleeue and report so many miracles, would haue written it him selfe. But Gregorie, though otherwise full of superstition, was not yet come to the carnall manner of presence. Two miracles are rehearsed of his reporte, one of a prisoner that was deliuered out of his chaynes, when Masse was saide for him by his wiues procurement, supposing he had ben dead. Gregorie in deede speaketh of sacrifices, whiche perhaps were prayers, and not the Masse. But if he speake of that prophanation of the sacrament, that in his time tooke some strength, to offer it for the dead, yet he speaketh of another maner of offring, then the Papistes vse. For thereof he saith, in the same place as Maister Heskins confesseth: Hinc ergo, &c. Of this decree brethren gather you certeinely, how great a band of conscience in vs the holie sacrifice offered by our owne selues, is able to

loose, if beeing offered for another it could in another loose the bandes of the body. These wordes declare, the sacrifice was such as euerie one might offer for himselfe, which coulde not be the sacrifice of ye Masse, which only the priest offereth. The last miracle is of Agapetus, that by giuing the sacrament to a dumb man, restored him to his speech.
                  Admitting this to be true, it maketh nothing for the carnal manner of presence, which the Church of Rome at that time had not receiued. And although such miracles might now be wrought by Papistes, we would giue no more credite vnto them, then they could winne by Gods worde: for so we are taught by God him sefe. Irenaeus a moste auncient writer of great credite testifieth, Lib. Cap. 9. that Marcus the heretike by his sorcerie caused the wine in the cup at his ministration to appeare purple and redde like bloud, that the people might thinke, that Christ dropped his bloud into his cup through his prayer: likewise he wrought so cunningly, that he multiplied the wine, so that out of a litle cruse, he filled a great pot, so ful that it ranne ouer. But the Church of God was not moued by these lying miracles, to giue credite to his false doctrine, or to think that he had the bloud of Christ in his challice for all that counterfet shewe of bloud, which he made: no more wil we beleue the Papistes pretending miracles cōtrarie to the word of God. And as for diuers of these miracles, which he alledgeth to confirme the dignitie of the Masse, they were done, or at least said to be done, before the Masse was throughly shapen, and therfore if they be true, yet they confirme not the doctrin of ye Masse, which was afterward inuented. Finally wheras he vrgeth the proclaymer to bring one miracle, for the confirmation of his religiō, although it were an easie matter to bring foorth many signes of more certeintie, and better credite then the Papists can bring any, shewed by God since the restitution of the Gospell: yet because our doctrine is the same, that was confirmed by all the miracles of Christ and his Apostles, we seeke no confirmation thereof by later miracles, but onely by the scriptures.

                     And herein we followe the example of S. Augustine, who vrgeth ye Donatistes to proue themselues to be the Church of God, only by Canonicall scriptures & not by miracles, whereof they boasted more then the Catholikes: Lib de vnitate Ecclesiae Cap. 16. Et sic ostendat, vt non dicat verum est, quia ego hoc dico: aut quia hoc dixit ille collega meut, 
                              〈◊〉
                            illi collegae mei, aut illi Episcopi vel clerici vel laici nost
                              •
                           i aut ideo verum est, quia illa & illa mirabilia fecit Donatus, vel Pontius, vel quilibet alius: aut quia homines ad memorias mortuorum nostrorum orant & exaudiuntur, aut quia illa & illa ibi contingunt, aut quiae ille fraeter noster, aut illa soror nostra tale visum vigilans vidit, vel tale visum dormiens somnianis. Remoueantur ista vel figmenta mendacium hominum, vel portenta fallacium spirituun: ut eni
                              ••
                            non sunt vera quę dicuntur, aut sihęreticorū aliqua mira facta sunt magis canere debemus. And so let him shewe the Churche, that he do not say, this is true, because I say it, or because such a one my fellowe saide it, or those my fellowes, or those our bishops or clearkes, or laymen: or it is therfore true, because Donatus or Pontius, or any other hath done those and those miracles: or because men pray at the memories of our dead men, and are heard, or because those thinges & those things happen there, or because this our brother or that our sister sawe such a vision waking, or dreamed such a vision sleeping. Let these thinges be set aside, which are either the counterfetting of lying men, or els ye wonders of deceiuing spirits: for either those things are not true that are told, or else if any miracles are done of heretiques, we ought the more to beware of them. And after a litle he saith in the same Chapter. Sed verum ipsi Ecclesiam teneant, non nisi diuinarum scripturarum canonicis libria ostendant, quia nec nos propterea dicimus nobis credere oportere, quòd in Ecclesia sumus, quia ipsam quam tenemus commendauit Mileuitanus Optatus, vel Mediolanensis Ambrosius, vel alij innumerabiles nostre cōmunionis episcopi, aut quia nostrorum Collegarū concilijs ipsa praedicata est, aut quia per totum orbem in locis sanctis quae frequentat communio nostra, tanta mirabilia vel exauditionū vel sanitatum fiant, ita vt latentia per tot annos corpora Martyrum (quod possunt a mu
                              •
                           tis interrogātes audire.) Ambrosio fuerint

reuelata, & ad ipsa corpora caecus multorum annorum ciuitati Mediolanensi notissimus oculos lumén
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            reciperet, aut quia ille somnium vidit. & ille spiritu assumptus audiuit, siue ne iniret in partem Donati siue vt recederet à parte Donati. Quęcun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            talia in Catholica fiunt ideo sunt approbanda quia in Catholica fiunt, non ìdeo ipsa manifestatur Catholica, quia haec in ea fiunt. But whether they holde the Churche or no, let them shew none otherwise, but by the Canonicall Bookes of the holie scriptures: for neither do we say, that men ought therfore to beleeue vs that we are in the Church, because Optatus of Mileuitum, or Ambrose of Millain or innumerable other Bishops of our fellowship haue commended this Church whiche we holde, or because it is set foorth and praysed in the councels of our fellowships, or because yt in holy places thorough the world, which our fellowship doth frequent, so great miracles are done, either of hearing mens prayers, or of restoring to health, so yt the bodies of Martyrs which haue been hidden so many yeres (which thing if they wil ask they may heare of many) were reuealed to Ambrose, & at the same bodies one that had ben blind many yeres, very well knowen to the citie of Millain, receiued his eyes and sight, or because this man saw a dreame, or that man was taken vp in spirit and heard either that he shold not go into the faction of Donatus, or that he should depart from it. Whatsoeuer such things are done in the Catholike Church, they are therefore to be allowed, because they are done in the Catholike Church, but the Church it selfe is not therby proued Catholike because these things are done in it. And thus much concerning miracles. The issue that M. Hesk. ioyneth is tried by all Catholike & ancient Doctors, that the Masse is idolatrie, because it is a worshipping of creatures in steed of the creator, although none of the olde writers call the Masse Idolatrie, whiche had neither name nor being in their dayes.
               
               
                  The three and fortieth Chapter maketh recapitulation of the conference of the Masses of the Apostles, and Fathers of the primitiue Church, and of the Catholike Church that now is, with a breef
                        •
                     
                     
                        Hesk.
                     
                     
confutation of the conference made by the proclamer, betweene th
                        •
                      Masse of Saint Iames, and that is now vsed.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     The recapitulation conteining nothing but that, which is confuted in the discourse at large, I will omitte it, and come to the conference, that the Bishop made betweene the liturgie falsely ascribed to S. Iames, and the Popishe Masse, beeing content for the time to call it Saint Iames Masse, as Maister Heskins doth, although neither it is a Masse, nor such as it is, was it writtē by S. Iames the Apostle, but by some of much later time as appeareth by the prayer therein conteined, for such as liue in Monasteries, and other thinges fauouring of the errours of that time, in which it was written. The first point of the conference is, that S. Iames saide Masse in the common tong vnderstoode of the people, the Papistes say Masse in a straunge tonge. M. Heskins answereth, that this point toucheth not the substance: for the Masse may be good, though it be not vnderstood: but he himselfe maketh ye doctrine of the Masse, to be of the substance of it, wherefore seeing there lacketh doctrine in the Masse, there lacketh one of the foure substantiall partes. But he would make the reading of the epistle and Gospel in Latine Doctrine, and good doctrine. What doctrine that is, by which the people are not taught, let reasonable men iudge, for although all the Masse were nothing but scripture, yet it were not good to be read in the Church, in a straunge tong: 1. Cor. 14. because it were not profitable for edifying. His childish sophismes of Plato, his substance and his accidents, I disdaine to rehearse: the trueth is manifest.
                  The second comparison S. Iames spake out of the words of consecration. They in their Masse suppresse them and keepe them close. Maister Heskins aunswereth, this is a small fault, and from the Masse of S. Iames, flyeth to S. Basils Masse, Where it is said, the Bishop prayeth secretly, yet he spake the wordes (as they call them) of consecration openly. The thirde comparison S. Iames in his Masse ministred the communion to the people, The Papists in their Masse, receiue them

selues alone. To this he aunswereth, denying that S. Iames did always minister the communion to the people, which is an impudent shift, except he will denie the fourme of that liturgie, which prescribeth the ministration to the people after the consecration. His reason is, because in Chrysostomes liturgie, which was written more then a thousand yeares after S. Iames, and falsely beareth the name of Chrysostome, there is a rule what the priest shall doe when there are no communicants.
                  The fourth comparison: S. Iames ministred the communion to the people vnder both kindes: The Papists in their Masse in one kinde onely. Here hath he none other refuge, but to say, that S. Iames did not alwayes minister vnder both kindes. Then let him denie the credite of the liturgie, which prescribeth the cōmunion to be ministred in both kindes.
                  The fift comparison: Saint Iames preached and set foorth the death of Christ: They in their Masse haue onely a number of dumbe gestures and ceremonies, which they themselues vnderstand not, and make no manner of mention of Christes death. M. Hes. complayneth of the Bishops repetitions, imputing them to want of stuffe, when he himselfe moste absurdly repeateth his three vntruthes surmised to be in this assertion, which he set downe before in the 39. Chapter, whither I referre the Reader for the answere. Only this I wil note, that he can finde no other preaching to the people, but the Aulbe to signifie the white garment that Christe was sent in from Herode: the vestiment, the garment that he was mocked in, in the house of Pilate: the Crosse vpon the vestiment signifieth the crosse of Christe which he did beare, as the priest doth on his backe: the eleuation signifieth the lifting vp of Christe on the crosse: he might say by as good reason, the Priests hands signified the two theeues, & the Priest himselfe the tormentors, that did lift him vp to the crosse. Beholde this is the preaching of Christes death in the Masse, whether it be an impudent vntruth, (as Maister Heskins tearmeth it) to call these dumbe gestures and ceremonies, or M. Heskins an impudent beast to defend

these dombe signes for preaching of Christes death, let the reader in Gods name consider and iudge. The sixth comparison: S. Iames Masse was full of knowledge: their Masse is full of ignorance. M. Heskins aunswereth, that there is as much knowledge in their Masse, as in S. Iames Masse, because in substance it is all one: which if it were true, as it is most false, yet what knowledge can be, when al is done in a strange language, and no preaching, but by dombe signes, as we heard before? The seuenth: S. Iames Masse was full of consolation: their Masse is full of superstition. To this he aunswereth, they haue as much consolation, which cannot be when they haue no preaching of the Gospel: & how can he say that they haue no superstition, when they haue an hundred idle ceremonies and gestures, which Christ neuer instituted, and therfore are meere will worship and superstition. The eyghth comparison, he saith, is all one with the third: that the people resorted to receiue the communion, when S. Iames sayed Masse. Although it followe of the thirde, yet is it not all one with it, for as S. Iames was readie to minister, so the people ordinarily were readie to receiue, which is not looked for of the popish priestes, because they reach them that it is needelesse so to doe. The last comparison: Saint Iames in his Masse had Christes institution: they in their Masse haue well more nothing else but mans inuention. To this he aunswereth, that they haue Christes institution for their Masse, which is an impudent falshood, either for their carnall maner of presence, or for their sacrifice, or for their priuate receiuing, or for their depriuing the people of all doctrine, but such as is by dombe signes, which he is not afrayde to ascribe to the inuention of the holy Ghost, as though the spirite of God in ceremonies, would be contrary to him selfe in the scriptures.
                  After this he reporteth the substantiall differences, betweene the Masse, and the newe communion as he calleth it, which because they be all set foorth and aunswered before in the 34.35.36. Chapters of this booke, I will leefe no time about his vaine recapitulation, or repetition

of them, contayning nothing but rayling and slaundering.
               
               
                  The foure and fortieth Chapter returning to the exposition of S. Paul expoundeth this text: As often as ye shal eat of this bread, &c. by S. Hierom & Theophylact.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  M Heskins hauing wandred abroad to seek the Masse in auncient writers,
                        Fulke.
                      nowe is come home againe to his text, and that is this: As often as you shall eat of this bread & drinke of this cupp▪ you shall shewe forth the Lordes death vntill be come. Vpon this text (saith he) the ministers of Sathan (for so it pleaseth him to call vs) haue grounded two arguments against the reall presence: One that the sacrament is a memoriall of Christe, and therefore Christ is absent; because a memoriall is of a thing absent: the other, that it is bread, for so the Apostles called it, & not the bodie of Christ. The solution of the first argument is, that the receipt of the sacrament is not a memoriall of Christes bodie, but of his death and passion. This is a noble distinction, but when Christ sayeth: do this in remē
                     brance of mee, whether is the remembrance of Christe, the remembrance of his bodie, or onely of the temporall act of his dying and suffering, which is past? I think all Christian men will confesse, that the communion is a memoriall of Christ that was crucified, and not of his crucifying onely. But when Saint Paul sayeth: vntill he come, how can he say that he is present in bodie, which is yet to come in bodie? To the seconde argument he aunswereth, that Saint Paule calleth it breade, as Christ calleth bread his flesh, and therfore he calleth it, this bread, signifying a speciall bread. No man sayeth the contrarie, but that it is a speciall bread (and as Saint Augustine sayeth) after a certeine manner the bodie of Christe. But if Maister Heskins in this place may denye breade to bee taken in the proper sence for breade, why doth hee exclame against them, that in these wordes: This is my body, denye the worde body, to be taken in the proper signification thereof, for a naturall bodie?
                  
                     But let vs take Maister Heskins interpretation of bread, to signifie the bodie of Christe, then the sense of Saint Paules wordes shalbe this: As often as ye eat of the bodie of Christ, and drinke his bloud, you shall shewe the Lordes death vntil he come. How is he that is to come distinct from him that is present? for Saint Paule maketh an exposition of this breade & this cuppe which are present, to shewe the Lordes death, that is to come. But let vs heare what Saint Ieronyme sayeth, that may helpe him in 1. Cor. 11. Ideo hoc, &c. Therefore our Sauiour hath deliuered this sacrament, that by it we might alwayes remember, that he dyed for vs. For therefore also when we receiue it, wee are warned of the priestes, that it is the bodie and bloud of Christ, that we might not be thought vnthankefull for his benefites. I like this saying verie well, which teacheth that the sacramēt is therefore called the bodie & bloud of Christ, yt thereby we might be put in minde of the benefite of Christes death, to be thankfull for it. And yt his meaning is none otherwise, his owne wordes shal declare, going both before and after. Vpon these wordes: Gratias egit, &c. Hoc est benedicens etiam passurus vltimam nobis commemorationem sine memoriam dereliquit. Quemadmodum si quis peregre proficiscens, aliquod pignus ei quem diligit derelinquat, vt quotiescunque illud viderit, possit eius beneficia & amicitias memorare: quod ille si perfectè dilexit, sine ingenti desiderio non potest videre vel fletu. That is blessing or giuing thankes, euen when hee was to suffer, he left to vs his last commemoration or remembrance. Euen as a man going into a farre countrey, doth leaue some pledge to him whome he loueth, that so often as he seeth it, he may remember his benefites and frendship, which pledge he (if he loued perfectly) cannot beholde without great desire or weeping. In these words you see S. Hierom compareth the sacrament to a pledge, which is left in remembrance of loue & benefites receiued of him, that in person is absent. The same writer vpō the same words of our text donec venerit vntill he come, thus writeth: Tam diu memoria opus est, donec ipse venire dignetur: So long we haue neede of a remembraunce, vntill

he him selfe vouchesafe for to come. Nothing can bee more plaine to shewe his meaning, not to be of a carnall or bodilie presence: although as Christ hath giuen vs the president, he call the bread and cuppe by the name of the bodie and bloud of Christe. The testimonie of Theophylact being a Greeke Gentleman of the lower house, I haue hetherto refused to admitt, and therefore in this place also will not trouble the reader with him. The challenge was made of writers within sixe hundreth yeares after Christe, this man liued about a thousande yeres after Christ, yet if I would wrangle about his wordes, he hath nothing that may not bee reasonably construed on our side without any wresting.
               
               
                  The fiue and fortieth Chapter abideth in the exposition of the same text by S. Basil & Rupert.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  S. Basil is alledged, de baptismo: Oportet accedentem, &c.
                     
                        Fulk.
                      
                     It behoueth him that commeth to the bodie and bloud of our Lord, to the remembrance of him that was dead for vs, and rose againe, not onely to be pure from all vncleannesse of bodie and soule, lest he eate and drinke to his owne condemnation, but also to shewe euidently, and to expresse the memorie of him that hath dyed for vs and risen againe. And what sayeth Basil in these words, that we do not graunt, vnderstanding purenesse by faith, and repentance? Maister Hesk. sayeth, in steede of that S. Paule sayde: this bread and this cupp, he sayeth the bodie and bloud of Christe, although I might stande with him, that this is no interpretation of Sainct Paules wordes, but an exhortation, which Basil maketh to the worthie receiuing of the sacrament, what inconuenience is it to graunt that it is both bread and wine, and also after a spirituall manner his verie bodie and bloud which is receiued of the faithfull? But either Maister Heskins note booke serued him not, or els his malice against ye trueth would not suffer him to see what the same Basil writeth not many lines before these wordes, which he citeth vpō the rehearsall of the wordes of Christ, of the institution

of this blessed sacrament, and immediatly after the verie text of the Apostle now in hande. As often as you eate of this bread and drinke of this cuppe, you shewe the Lordes death vntill he come. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . What then do these words profit vs, yt eating & drinking we might always remember him which dyed for vs, and is risen againe, and so wee might bee instructed of necessitie to obserue before God and his Christe, that lesson, which is deliuered by the Apostle, where hee sayeth: for the loue of Christe doeth constreine vs iudging this, that if one hath dyed for all, then all are dead. M. Heskins denyeth the sacrament to be a remembrance of Christe, for feare he shoulde confesse Christ to be absent, affirming it is a remembrance only of the death of Christ. But Basil saith, that in eating and drinking we must remember Christe that is dead & risen againe for vs, and so be transformed into his image by mortification and newnesse of life. This is all the profite that Basil gathereth of the institution of the supper of the Lorde. Where is then the carnall presence, the sacrifice propitiatorie, the application of it according to the priestes intention, and such like monsters of the Masse? The testimonie of Rupertus a burgesse of ye lower house I will not stand vpon, notwithstanding it little helpeth Maister Heskins cause. For he doth not say, that the sacrament is so a remembrance of Christes death, that it is not a remembrance of Christ him selfe. But Maister Heskins sayeth, all the rable of sacramentaries cannot bring one couple of catholike authors, that saye Saint Paule spake here of materiall bread, neither can Maister Heskins bring one single auncient writer, within ye compasse of the challenge, which is 600. yeres after Christ, yt denyeth that S. Paule spake of materiall breade, as the earthly part of the sacrament. He hath named Hierome &

Basil, but neither of them denie it, as for Theophylact & Rupertus, although neyther of them also denye it, in the places by him cited, yet I knowe not why we might not as well produce Berengarius and Bertrame, as auncient as they, which affirme that Saint Paule spake here of bread. But that there is materiall bread in the sacrament, as the earthly part thereof, we haue already cited Irenaeus Lib. 4. Cap. 34. Origen in 15. Matthaei. Cyrill in Ioan. Lib. 4. Cap. 24. and many other.
                  Toward the end of this Chapter, Maister Heskins taketh vpon him to aunswere an obiection of Oecolampadius, who iustly chargeth the Papistes of wilfull ignorance, in that they make the body of Christ, both the exemplar, and the thing exemplified, the figure and the thing figured, the signe and the thing signified, whereas relation must be betwixt two thinges distincted, and not of one thing to it selfe, bycause euery relatiue must haue a correlatiue. For aunswere to this obiection, hee saith hee will not vse the quiddities of the schooles, but plaine examples: but hee pretendeth quiddities where the matter is plaine, & his examples be mere sophistications. The first is, That in the diuine presence be sundrie relations, grounded vpon the one nature of God. Therefore relation must not be of necessitie betwixt two things distinct. A wise example, as though the persons betweene which there is relation, be not two distinct thinges, though they be one vndiuided GOD: There is relation betweene the person of the Father and the person of the Sonne, therefore the Father is not the Sonne, nor the Sonne is the Father, yet are they both with the holy Ghost one God.
                  The second example, Christ being transfigured in the mount, & shewing him self in a glorious maner, was an exemplar or figure of him selfe nowe in glory, and of his glorious comming. It is well that he fleeth out of the schooles, before he vttereth these absurdities, for surely euery boy in Cambridge, that hath but once kept sophisme, would hisse at him for this assertion, wherein he confoundeth the substaunce with the accidents. But to leaue the schoole termes which M. Heskins

can not nowe abide, bicause they bewray his follie: I deny that Christes body then, was a figure or exemplar of his body now, but the glory of his body then, was a figure of his glory now, and wherewith he shall come: and I am sure hee will confesse, that they be two distinct thinges, for his glory nowe, is greater then the brightnesse of the Sunne, wherevnto it was then compared. Likewise to his third example I answere, denying That his immortall body which he shewed to Thomas, with the signes and tokens of his woundes, was an exemplare of the same body both mortall and passible. I say yt, his immortall body was no exemplar of his mortall body, but euen the very same, chaunged in qualitie, not in substance, and the signes of his woundes, were signes of his passion, and they were two distinct things.
                  It is all one that hee citeth out of Chrysostome, that Christe shall come to iudgement with the signes of his passion: wherevpon he gathereth, That Christes body shall then be a signe memoriall or exemplar of it selfe. The scripture saith, they shall see him whome they haue perced, but whether with signes of woundes, I dare not say, sauing Chrysostomes authoritie, but admit he shall come with the same print of woundes, yet I deny that his body shall be a figure, exemplar, or memoriall of it selfe, but those signes should be an argument of their crueltie and vngodlinesse that crucified him. You see the plainnesse of these examples, howe they are plainely against him, and that it still remaineth vnremouable, that a signe and the thing signified, be distinct things. Therefore the sacrament being a signe, figure, exemplar, and memoriall of the body and bloud of Christ is not the same after a corporall manner.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The sixe & fourtieth Chapter beginneth the exposition of this text. Whosoeuer therefore shall eate of this bread & drinke of the cupp, &c.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     The text is this: Whosoeuer shall eat of this bread & drink of this cupp of the Lord vnworthily, shalbe guiltie of the bodie and

bloud of the Lorde. M. Heskins requireth to the worthie receiuing two things, faith, and charitie, and therefore he concludeth, that neither heretikes nor scismatikes can receiue worthily, which we confesse to be true. Afterward he chargeth vs with abusing this text in two points: The one, that we affirme material bread to remaine after consecration, the other that we deny that wicked men can receiue the body and bloud of Christ, and both these errors he promiseth to confute, but in the end you shal see they be so assured truthes, that all the smoake and mist of his confutation can not darken the light of their veritie. The first witnesse he citeth for interpretation of the text, is S. Cyprian, Lib. 3. Ep. 15. Illi contra Euangelij legem &c. They against the lawe of the Gospell, and your honourable petition, before repentance shewed, before open confession made of a most grieuous and extreme offence, before hands laid on by the Bishop and the cleargie vnto repentance, are so bolde as to offer for them, and giue them the Eucharistie, that is, to prophane the holy body of our Lord, seeing it is written, Whosoeuer shall eate of the bread, and drinke of the cup of the Lord vnworthily, shall be guiltie of the body and bloud of the Lord. Of these wordes M. Heskins gathereth, that the body of Christe is deliuered, and not materiall bread, for if materiall bread, and not the body is deliuered, then the bread is prophaned, and not the body. A proper collection. If the Kings seale for a benefite be deliuered to the Kings enimie or a traitour, that receiueth it vnreuerently and vnthankfully, is not the King iniuried, and his fauour abused? I thinke al wise men wil graunt, and not say the waxe and parchment only is iniuried and abused, bicause the Kings body is not deliuered, but waxe and parchment. Moreouer, I maruell howe M. Heskins can auoyd blasphemie, when he saith in the literall sense, the body of Christe is prophaned or vnhallowed, for to speake properly, the body of Christe can not be prophaned or vnhallowed, but the sacrament of his body which beareth the name thereof may, and the abuse of the sacrament is iustly counted an iniurie vnto his body and bloud, whereof it is a sacrament, although his body in

deed can suffer no iniurie or hurt. But ye Cyprian acknowledged bread and wine to remain in the sacrament, many places of his writings do clearly shew, namely lib. 1. ep. 6. ad Magnum. 
                     
                        Deni
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            vnanimitatē Christianam firma sibi at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            insuperabili charitate connexam, etiā ipsa domini sacrificia declarant. Nam quando Dominus corpus suū panē vocat de multorū granorū adunatione congestū, populū nostrū, quem portabat, indicat adunatū. Et quando sanguinem suum vinum appelat, de botris at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            acinis plurimis expression atque in vnum coactum, gregem item nostrum significat commixtione adunatae multitudinis copulatum. Finally, euen our Lords sacrifices doe declare the Christian vnanimitie, which is knitted vnto him with an insuperable vnitie. For when the Lorde calleth bread, which is made one by the gathering together of many cornes, his body, hee declareth our people which he did beare to be vnited together. And when he calleth wine, which is pressed out of many clusters and grapes, and so gathered into one, his bloud, hee doth likewise signifie our flocke, coupled together by cōiunction of the multitude that is brought into one. Here you see ye bread which is now ye sacrament, and is called the body of Christe, to be made of many graines: likewise the wine to be pressed out of many grapes, by which nothing can be vnderstoode, but materiall bread and wine. 
                     The same Cyprian Lib. 2. Ep. 3. ad Caecilium thus writeth, Sic verò calix Domini non est aqua sola, aut vinum solum, nisi vtrumque sibi misceatur, quomodo nec corpus Domini potest esse farina sola aut aqua sola nisi vtrumque adunatum fueris & copulatum, & panis vnius compage sclidatum, quo & ips
                              •
                            sacramento populus noster ostenditur adunatus. So water onely, or wine onely, is not the Lordes cup, vnlesse both be mingled together, euen as onely meale, or onely water, can not be the body of Christe, except both be ioyned and coupled and compacted together in one breade, by which very sacrament our people is shewed to be vnited. Here bread made of meale and water, is called the body of Christ, therefore material bread. The next authoritie M. Hesk. citeth is Chrysostome Hom. 83. in 26. Matth. Non permittam &c. I will not suffer these things to be done, I will

first deliuer vp my life, before I wil deliuer the lords body to any person vnworthily, and I will suffer my bloud to be shed rather then I will giue that most holy bloud to any other then to a worthie receiuer. Out of this saying he gathereth, yt the body of Christ may be receiued of an vnworthie & wicked person. How be it, no such thing followeth of these words, for though Chrysostome deliuer the body of Christ, it followeth not that they receiue it which receiue the sacrament vnworthily, which is as much as to refuse it. Chrysostome in the same Homely, saith, this sacrament to be a symbole and signe of Christ crucified, and speaking of the cup, he saith: 
                        Sed cuius gratia non aquam sed vinum post resurrectionem bibit? Perniciosam quandam hęresim radicitus euellere voluit eorum, qui aqua in mysterijs vtuntur, ita vt ostenderet quia & quando hoc mysterium traderet, vinū tradidit, & iam post resurrectionem in nuda mysterij mensa, vino vsus est. Ex germine autem, ait, vitis, quae certè vinum non aquam producit. But wherefore did hee not drinke water but wine after his resurrection? Hee would plucke vppe by the rootes a certaine most pernicious heresie of them which vse water in the mysteries, so that he would shew, yt both when he deliuered this mysterie, he deliuered wine, & nowe after his resurrection in the bare table of the mysterie, he vsed wine. And he saith of ye fruit of ye vine, which truly bringeth foorth wine & not water. Now compare these two sayings of Chrysost. in one sermon: Christ deliuered wine, Chrysost. would not deliuer the body & bloud of Christ, & see whether the later proue any transubstantiation or carnall manner of presence. Besides this, it is good to note that Chrysostome saith, that Christ vsed wine in the sacrament after his resurrection, contrarie to all the Papistes, which holde that he ministred to the two disciples at Emaus in bread only. And bicause M. Heskins vrgeth the deliuerie of Christes body to the wicked, and thereby will gather, that the wic
                        •
                     ed receiue the very body of Christe, let him heare also what Chrysostome saith in the same place, speaking of the vnworthy comming to the sacrament: 
                        Illud enim pessimum est, ficus Paulus ait, Christum conculcare, & testamenti sanguinem ducere

communem, & spiritus gratian contemnere. For this is the worst thing that can be, as Paule saith, to tread Christe vnder feete, and to esteeme the bloud of the couenaunt as vncleane, and to contemne the grace of the spirite. Will he say that very body of Christe is troden vnder the feete of the vnworthie receiuer? And bicause he standeth so much of the word, body and bloud, Chrysostome saith further. Nullus communicet, nisi ex discipulis sit: nullus impuro animo sicut Iudas, panem assumat, ne similia patiatur. Corpus Christi etiam hęc multitudo est: quare cauendum tibi est qui hęc mysteria ministras, ne Dominum irrites, corpus hoc non purgando, ne acutum gladium pro cibo praebeas. Let none communicate except he be of the disciples: Let no man with an vnpure minde as Iudas, receiue the bread, least he suffer the like punishment. Euen this multitude also is the body of Christe: wherefore thou that doest minister these mysteries, must take heede, that thou prouoke not the Lorde, by not purging this body, least thou deliuer a sharpe sword in steed of meat. In this saying, let the indifferent reader obserue, that Iudas receiued bread, and wicked men receiue bread: that the multitude of Christians is the body of Christe, as the sacrament is: finally, that the minister to a wicked man deliuereth a sharpe sword in steede of spirituall meate: and let him iudge, howe honestly M. Heskins vrgeth the deliuerie of the body and bloud of Christ to the wicked, to exclude bread, and to proue that they receiue the very body of Christ.
                  His third witnesse is Origen Hom. 5. in diuorsos. Quando sanctum cibum, illud
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         incorruptum epulum accipis &c. When thou receiuest that holy meat, and the vncorrupt banquet, when thou inioyest the bread and cup of life, thou eatest and drinkest the body and bloud of the Lord, then the Lord entreth vnder thy roofe, and do thou then humbling thy selfe, followe this Centurion, and say: Lorde, I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter vnder my roofe. For where he entreth vnworthily, there he entereth to the condemnation of the receiuer. Here M. Heskins first noteth the presence of Christe: secondly that the sacrament it not bare bread, both which are graunted: thirdly that the body of

Christe may be receiued of euill men. But all men will confesse, that this is an Alegoricall and figuratiue maner of speaking, that Origen vseth, and may be wel vnderstoode according to the rule of sacraments: which beare the names of those things whereof they be sacramentes. And seeing Origen doth else where expresly affirme, that euill men do not, neither can eate the body of Christe, in Matth. Cap. 15. it is great vnshamefastnesse, to wrest his figuratiue saying in these wordes, contrarie to his plaine meaning vttered in plaine wordes. Maister Heskins him selfe confesseth this may be obiected, and referreth vs to the thirtieth Chapter of this booke for the answere, whither I also referre the reader both for the place it self, and for the replie to M. Heskins answere.
               
               
                  The seuen and fortieth Chapter proceedeth in the vnderstanding of the same, by S. Basil and S. Hierome.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Saint Basil is alledged de baptism. Li. 2. Quęst. 93.
                        Fulk.
                      
                     Quoniam Deus in lege &c. For so much as God in the lawe hath ordained so great a paine against him, that in his vncleannesse dare touch the holy things, (for it is written to them figuratiuely, but for our aduertisement:) And the Lord saide vnto Moses, say to Aaron and his sonnes, that they take heede to the holy things of the children of Israel, and they shall not defile my name what so euer they sanctifie to me, I am the Lorde. Say to them and to their families, Euery man that is of your seede, and commeth to the holy things, what so euer the children of Israel shall sanctifie vnto the Lord and his vncleannesse be vpon him, that soule shall be rooted out of my presence, I am the Lord. Such threatnings are set foorth against them, that only come to those thinges, that are sanctified by men. But what shall a man say against him, which dare be bolde against so greate and such a mysterie? For looke howe much greater a thing then the temple is here, according to the Lords saying, by so much the more greeuous and fearefull it is, in the filthinesse of his soule, to touch the body of Christ, then to touch Rammes or Bulles (for so the Apostle hath saide) wherefore he that eateth the bread, and drinketh the cup of the Lorde vnworthily, shall be guiltie of the body and bloud

of the Lorde. But more vehemently and also more horribly, he doth set foorth and declare the condemnation by repetition, when hee saith: Let euery man examine him selfe, and so let him eat of this bread, and drinke of this cup. For he that eateth and drinketh vnworthily, eateth and drinketh his condemnation, not discerning the Lordes body. If then he that is onely in vncleannesse, (and the propertie of vncleannesse we learne figured in the lawe) hath so horrible a iudgement, howe much more he that is in sinne, and presumeth against the body of Christ, shall draw vnto him selfe horrible iudgement?
                  First, I will note M. Heskins falsifications, which are two, the one as it seemeth, partly of ignoraunce of the Greeke tong, partly of greedinesse to drawe Basils wordes to his vnderstanding, for where the Greeke is, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Heere is a thing, or one greater then the temple, he turneth it, looke howe much greater this is then the temple, as though hic which is an Aduerbe, were a Pronoune. The other is altogether of malitious corruption, for he translateth his Latine, Contra corpus Christi audet: which is, He dareth presume against the body of Christe, hee translateth it, Hee dareth to presume vpon the body of Christ, as though he receiued the body of Christe. Nowe he noteth two differences in these wordes of Basil, the one of the sacrifices of the olde lawe which were Bulles and Rammes, the other of the newe lawe, which is the body of Christ. But in the wordes of Basil, there is no mention of any sacrifice of the newe lawe, onely he compareth the ceremonies of the olde lawe, with the heauenly part of the sacrament of the newe Testament, which we confesse to be the body and bloud of Christ.
                  The second difference is, the vncleannesse of the lawe made vnworthie partakers of the sacrifices, but deadly sin maketh men vnworthie receiuers of the body of Christe. Yet hath Basil no such wordes of receiuing the body of Christ by wicked men. Onely he denounceth their grieuous punishment, that presume against ye body of Christ, when with vnreuerence and vnrepentance, they presume against such and so high a mysterie, as the blessed sacrament

is, and this is the plaine sense of his wordes without any cauilling. If M. Heskins will vrge their touching of the body of Christ, it is a very nice point, and must either be referred to a figuratiue speach, or else it will breede infinite absurdities. Basils mind is plaine, the wicked ought not to presume to touch the blessed sacrament, which after a certaine manner of speaking, is the body of Christe. But he annexeth an other place of Basil: Dominꝰ dicens &c. The Lorde saying: Here is one greater then the temple, teacheth vs that he is so much more vngodly, that dare handle the body of our Lorde, which hath giuen him selfe for vs, to be an oblation and offering of sweete sauour, by howe much the body of the onely begotten sonne of God exceedeth Rammes and Bulles, not in reason of comparison, for the excellencie is incomparable.
                  
                  This place saith Maister Heskins proueth well, that the receiuer of the sacrament receiueth the body of the onely begotten sonne of God, and not a bare figure, for else howe should hee sinne incomparably, by receiuing vnworthily? I aunswere, hee sinneth incomparably, not bicause he receiueth the body of Christe vnworthily, but bicause the body of Christe being offered vnto him to be receiued, he doth contemne it, & refuse it most vnthankfully and iniuriously. Againe, Basil doth here compare the outward signes or elements of the old sacrifices, with the thing represented and offered by our sacrament, the like speaches he hath of Baptisme.
                  But that you may heare him (saith Maister Heskins) by most plaine wordes teach that the body of Christe is receiued of euill men, hearken what he saith, de baptism. lib 1. cap. 3. Si verò is qui &c. If he that for meate offendeth his brother, falleth from charitie, without the which both the workes of great giftes, and iustification do nothing auayle: What shall a man say of him, which idly and vnprofitably dare eate the body, and drinke the bloud of our Lord Iesus Christ?
                  But M. Heskins to make it seeme more plaine on his side, hath cut off those wordes which doe plainly declare, that Basil speaketh not of wicked men that are voyde of the spirite of God, but of such as be not zealous and

earnest ynough, to practise mortification, & reuocation, therefore it followeth immediatly: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : And thereby much more greeuing the holy spirite: which wordes being added to the former, doe plainely testifie, that Basill speaketh not of wicked and vngodly persons, but of the faithful in whom the spirite of God was, and yet they had not so great care of profiting in newnesse of life as they ought to haue. For against the wordes 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , idly and vnprofitably, he opposeth afterwarde 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , earnestly and effectually, so that those Aduerbes idly and vnprofitably, are spoken in comparison, and not simply, as if he saide, they take nothing such paines in mortification as they should, they profite nothing in comparison that they might by the Lordes body, which labour not to be renewed according to his spirite, and as he saith, they grieue the spirit of God, (whereby they are sealed to eternall life,) when they doe not with more earnestnesse and profite come to the Lordes table.
                  The second Authour Hierome, is cited in Psal. 77. Haec de his &c. These wordes are spoken of them which forsooke GOD after they had receiued Manna, For nowe in the Church, if any man be fed with the flesh and bloud of Christ, and doth decline to vices, let him knowe that the iudgement of God doth hang ouer him: as Paule the Apostle saith, He that shall take the body and bloud of our Lorde vnworthily, shall be guiltie of the body and bloud of our Lorde. 
                     I maruell what Maister Heskins meaneth, to alter the wordes of Hierome, for he citeth them thus: Qui acceperit corpus & sanguinem Domini indigne, reus erit corporis & sanguinis Domini. Wheras the words of Hierome be. Qui acceperit corpus & sanguinem Christi indignè iudicium sibi sumis & bibit. Hee that shall receiue the body and bloud of Christe vnworthily, receiueth and drinketh iudgement to him selfe. To aunswere to the iudgement of GOD, which hee saide did hang ouer him, that after hee is fed with the body and bloud of Christe, declineth to vices: not meaning wicked reprobates, but Gods elect children, whiche are sometimes ingratefull to GOD for

his mercies, and fall into grieuous sinnes, but yet by Gods grace rise againe: as the wordes immediatly following do most plainly declare: 
                        Et electos Israel impediuit. Impedumtur & nunc electo Ecclesiae, si ne ipsi quoque sacerdotes innocenter haec sacramenta percipiunt. And hee hindered the elect of Israel. The elect of the Church are nowe also hindered, if the Priestes them selues doe not receiue these sacraments innocently. In which wordes he sheweth the cause, that many of the elect do decline to vices, after the sacrament receiued, euen by the euill example of the Priestes, and therefore worthily are to be awaked out of the sleepe of sinne and securitie, by this sentence of Paul. Nowe whereas M. Hes. excuseth S. Hierome, for altering the words of Paule, and in steede of the bread and the cup, placing the body and bloud of Christe, it is nothing so needfull, as that he should render a reason why hee doth him selfe alter the words of Hierome: except hee thinke he may be as bold to chaunge the wordes of Hierome, as Hierome was to chaunge the words of Paule. Although M. Hes. is lesse to blame in this place, where he chaungeth the words without any great alteration of the sense, then in almost an hundreth places beside, where hee falsifieth the wordes, and peruerteth the meaning also.
               
               
                  The eight and fortieth Chapter abideth in the exposition of the same text, by Chrysostome and S. Augustine.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Chrysostome is cited Hom. 45. in Ioan.
                     
                        Fulk.
                      
                     Qui enim manducat &c. For he that eateth and drinketh the bloud of our Lord vnworthily, eateth and drinketh iudgement to him selfe. For if they which defile the kings purple are none otherwise punished, then they which rent it: what maruell if they which receiue the body of Christ in an vncleane conscience, suffer the same punishment that they did which fastened him with nailes to the crosse Two things M. Hes. noteth out of these words, one that the body of Christ is receiued in the sacrament, the other, that euill men receiue the sacrament. Concerning the first, there is no doubt, but that the bodie of Christ is receiued in the sacrament

after a spirituall manner of faith, and touching the latter, this place proueth not, that wicked men receiue the body of Christ with their mouthes wherin is the controuersie: for neither doth Chrysost. here speake of reprobates, but of the faithfull that were sinners, which receiued Christes bodie in an vncleane conscience, & not carnally with their mouthes. But admitte he did speake of reprobates and wicked persons, yet he speaketh of the sacramentes, that are called the bodie and bloud of Christ, and not of the natural bodie and bloud of Christ, and therefore he vseth the similitude of the Kinges purple, whereunto he compareth the sacrament. For euen as he that abuseth by rending or defyling the Kings purple robe, though he touch not his person, yet is he punished as a traitour: so he that abuseth the sacrament, either as an open contemner, or as a prophane receiuer, is guiltie of the bodie and bloud of Christ. And to put the matter out of question he faith, not three lines before, speaking of the bloud of Christ: 
                        Qui huius sanguinis sunt participes, cum Angelis, & Archangelis, & supernis virtutibus commorantur, ipsam regiam Christi stolam induti spiritualibus armis muniti (sed nihil dixi) immo ipsum induti sunt regem. They that are partakers of this bloud, do dwell with Angels, & Archangels, and the high powers, hauing put on the very royall robe of Christ, being armed with spiritual armour (but I haue said nothing) yea they haue put on the King himselfe. By these words it is plaine, that euerie one that is partaker of the sacrament, is not partaker of the bloud of Christ.
                  But Maister Heskins will bring forth other places of Chrysostome wherein he doeth plainely affirme, that Iudas the traitour did receiue the bodie of Christ with the other Apostles. But suspend thy iudgement gentle Reader, vntill thou haue read his places. The first is Hom. 
                     
                        •
                     0. de proditione Iuda. Cum manducarent & biberent, &c. When they did eate and drinke, Iesus tooke bread and brake it and saide: This is my bodie. They that be consecrated to the diuine mysteries, knowe what I speake. And againe he tooke the cup and saide, This is my bloud, and Iudas was present when Christ spake these wordes:

This is my bloud. Say Iudas, whom hast thou solde for thirty pence? Is this the bloud for which thou hast made a bargaine before with the Pharisees: O the mercie of Christ! O the madnesse of Iudas! He bargained that he might sell him for thirtie pence, and Christ offered him the bloud which he hath solde, that he might haue forgiuenesse of sinnes, if he would not haue bene vngodly. For Iudas was present, and was partaker of that sacrifice. Here we see plainely that Christ offered his bloud to Iudas, that he might haue remission of sinnes, but no worde that Iudas receiued the bloud of Christ. It is saide, that Iudas was partaker of yt sacrifice, that is of the outwarde sacrament (for so Chrysostome often calleth it) but not of the bodie and bloud of Christ. And whereas Maister Heskins noteth, that because Christ offred the same bloud that Iudas solde, therfore the sacrament is the naturall bloud of Christ, it is a most friuolous reason. For euerie childe vnderstandeth, ye selling of Christes bloud is a figure of betraying Christ, euen as the bloud whiche he offered is a figure of that, which was betrayed, and so the reason maketh altogether against him. But Chrysostome hath other wordes in the same sermon.
                  
                     Nullus igitur fictus accedat &c. Therefore let no feigned person come: Let none be so bolde with a counterfet mind to come neere so great mysteries least he be condemned, deserue sentence, and suffer that which Iudas suffered. For after the partaking of the table, the diuell entred into him, not because he despised the Lordes bodie, but because the impudencie of Iudas and the maliciousnesse of his minde, caused that the aduersarie dwelled in him. By these words M.H. would proue, yt ye Lords body had entred into Iudas, before the diuel, but ye contrarie may more probably be gathered: for Chrysost. answereth a secret obiection, that might be made vpon the appellation of ye sacrament, to be ye bodie of Christ. It might seeme ye diuel contemned the body of Christ, yt he entred immediatly after ye bodie of Christ receiued, but he saith, he contemned not ye body of Christ (for Iudas was so full of wickednes, that ye bodie of Christ entred not into him) but ye diuel before had possessed him. And yt this is more agreable to ye mind of Chryso.

his wordes in the Hom. 45. In Ioan. doe declare: Daemones cum Dominicum sanguinem in nobis vident, in fugam vertuntur. When the diuels doe see the bloud of our Lorde in vs, they are put to flight. This proueth, that Iudas receiued not the bloud of Christ, seeing immediately after the receipt of the sacrament (as he sayeth) the Diuel entred into him. Therefore the other place, which Maister Heskins alledgeth out of Chrysost. Ho. 83. In Mat. is likewise answered: Caenantibus, &c. When they were a
                           •
                         Supper: Iesus tooke bread, & blessed it, and brake it, and gaue it to his disciples: O the blindnesse of that traitor, which when he had bene partaker of the vnspeakable mysteries, he remained the same man, and being admitted to Gods table, would not be changed into better, which Luke signified saying: that after this, Satan entred into him, not because he despised the Lordes bodie, but because he laughed to scorne the folly of the traytor. These vnspeakeable mysteries M. Hesk. saith can not be a bare piece of bread, and a cup of wine, but must needes be the bodie and bloud of Christ. But sauing his authoritie, is not the baptisme, wherewith wicked men are baptised, an vnspekable mysterie? and yet no wicked man in baptisme, receiueth the spirite of regeneration. But Chrysostome proceedeth in the sentence before alledged: Maius enim peccatum vtra
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ratione fiebat: quia tali animo mysterijs susceptis, nec timore, nec beneficio, nec honore melior factus est. For his offence was made greater both wayes: because, that hauing receiued the mysteries with such a minde, neither with feare, nor with the benefite, nor with the honour, he was made better. Chrysostome saith, he receiued the mysteries, he doth not say he receiued the bodie of Christ. Now iudge whether Chrysostome doth plainely affirme, that Iudas receiued the bodie of Christ, with the other Apostles, or whether M. Heskins doth lye, that so affirmeth of Chrysostome and can no better proue it then you haue heard. Now followeth S. Aug. In Ep. contra Donatist. post Collat. Quisquis autem, &c. Who so euer shall liue wel in this church, other mens sinnes do nothing hinder him: for in it euerie one shall beare his owne burthen, as the Apostle saith: and whosoeuer shall eate the bodie of Christ vnworthily, eateth and

drinketh iudgement to himselfe: for the Apostle him selfe hath written this. In these wordes Augustine calleth the sacrament of the bodie of Christe, the bodie of Christ, as it followeth immediately after: 
                        Cum autem dicit, iudicium sibi manducat, satis oftendit, quia non alteri iudicium manducat sed sibi. Hoc nos egimus & ostendimus & obtinuimus, quia communio malorum non maculat aliquem participatione sacramentorum, sed consensione factorum. And when he saith, he eateth iudgement to himselfe, he sheweth sufficiently that he eateth not iudgement to another but to himselfe. This haue we treated, & shewed and proued, that the fellowship of euill men doth not defile any man by participation of the sacramentes with them, but by consent of their deedes. Likewise he tearmeth the sacrament by ye name of the bodie of Christ. Cont. Donat. Lib. 5. Cap. 8. Sicut enim &c. As Iudas to whom our Lord gaue the morsel, gaue place himselfe to the diuell, not by receiuing an euill thing, but by receiuing is amisse: so any man receiuing vnworthily the Lordes sacrament, causeth not, because he himselfe is euill, that it should be euil, or because he receiueth it not to saluation, that he receiueth nothing. For it was neuerthelesse the bodie and bloud of our Lord, euen to them whom the Apostle saide: He that eateth & drinketh vnworthily, eateth & drinketh iudgement to himselfe. In these wordes, he reasoneth against the Donatistes, that saide, that baptisme ministred by heretikes, was no sacrament, which he confuteth by example of the other sacrament of Christes bodie & bloud, which Iudas and other wicked men receiued. So that in these wordes the bodie and bloud of the Lorde, are to be taken for the sacrament of the bodie & bloud of Christ. Which sacrament as Augu. saith, Tract. 26. in Ioan. is receyued of some to destruction: 
                        Res verò ipsa, cuius sacramentum est, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium quicun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            eius particeps fuerit. But the thing it selfe whereof it is sacrament, is vnto life to euerie man & to destruction to no man, whosoeuer shall be partaker therof. But M. Heskins flyeth to his distinction of receiuing spiritually and corporally, as though Augustine euer saide, that the bodie of Christe was receiued corporally of any man. But let vs heare his

owne wordes, whiche M. Heskins hath cited in the same treatise. Quantum pertinet ad illam mortem &c. As touching that death, of which the Lorde saide that their fathers be dead: Moses also did eate Manna, & Aaron did eate Manna, & Phinees did eate Manna, & many did eate, which pleased the Lord, & died not. Wherfore? Because they vnderstoode the visible meate spiritually, they hūgred spiritually, they tasted spiritually, that they might be filled spiritually. For we also at this day haue receiued a visible meate. But the sacrament is one thing, the vertue of the sacrament another thing, which many do receiue of the altar & doe die, & in receiuing doe die. Wherefore the Apostle saith, he eateth & drinketh his owne iudgement. In these words Augustine teacheth, that the visible (meate which is the sacrament) may be eaten to condēnation, which is ye thing we affirme, & as for eating the body of Christe, otherwise then spiritually, he speaketh not one worde. But M. Heskins would learne of ye aduersarie, what Augustine meaneth by this word Vertue, which many do dye in receiuing it: and therefore it cannot be the vertue of his passion, so it must needs be his very bodie. So that by this conclusion, Christs bodie may be receiued wtout the vertue of his passion. But if it please him to learne what Aug. meaneth by this word Vertue in yt place, I answere he meaneth force or efficacie, which is either to life or to death, as the receiuer is affected that taketh the sacrament, for immediatly after, he saith: Nam bucella Dominica venenum suit Iudae, & tamen accepit. For the Lords morsel was poyson to Iudas, & yet he receiued it. You see therefore a double vertue in the sacramēt, one to saluation, another to condemnation, & no bodily presence necessarie for either of them. Another place he citeth In Ioan. Tr. 6. Recordamini vnde sit scriptū. Remember frō whence it is written, Whoso euer shal eat the bread and drinke the cup of our Lord vnworthily, shalbe guiltie of the bodie and bloud of our Lorde. For when the Apostle saide this, he spake it of them which receiued the bodie of our Lord vndiscreetly and negligently, as they wold do any other meat. Whersoeuer he borowed these words they are not to be found in yt treatise of Aug. which he citeth. But if they be August, in any place, they haue none

other sense then before is expressed, yt such men are said to eate the bodie of Christ, which eate the sacrament therof, whiche in some manner of speache is called the body of Christ. The words that I find in Augustine sounding any thing like, are these: 
                        Et sancta possunt obesse: in bonis enim sancta ad salutem insunt, in malis ad iudicium: Certè enim fratres nouimus quid accipiamus, & vtique sanctum est quod accipimus, & nemo dicit non esse sanctum. Et quid ait Apostolus? Qui autem manducat & bibit indignè, iudicium sibi manducat & bibit, Non ait quia illa res mala est, sed quod ille malus, malè accipiendo, ad iudicium accipit bonum, quod accipit. Non enim mala buccella erat quae tradita est Iudae à Domino. Absit: medicus non daret venenum: Salutem medicus dedit, sed indignè accipiendo ad perniciem accepit. Euen holy things may hurte. For in good men holy things are vnto saluation, in euill men vnto condemnation. For surely brethren, we know what we receiue, and no man sayeth that it is not holy. And what sayeth the Apostle? He that eateth and drinketh vnworthily, eateth and drinketh his owne condemnation. He sayeth it not because that thing is euill, but because that euill man by euill receiuing receiueth vnto condemnation that good thing, which he receiueth. For the morsell was not euill which was deliuered by our Lorde to Iudas. God forbidde: the Phisition woulde not giue poyson: the Phisition gaue health, but hee by receiuing vnwoorthily, receiued to his destruction. To this iudgement of Augustine wee doe subscribe, that wicked men receiue a holye thing, namely the sacrament, for prophaning whereof, they heape vp damnation to them selues, besides their other sinnes. But that the naturall bodie of Christe voyde of his quickening spirite, entreth into the mouth of any man, wee doe vtterly denye: and of the same iudgement is Augustine, as we haue shewed in this Chapter, & in many other places.
               
               
                  The nine and fourtieth Chapter continueth the same exposition by Isychius and Sedulius.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  In the beginning of this Chapter, by a saying of Augustine hee exhorteth vs to heare the doctoures of the
                        Fulke.
                     
                     
Catholike church, affirming yt he hath alreadie brought sixe plainely expounding this texte of the bodie of Christ, and more will bring hereafter, whereas the proclaimer required but onely one. But what trueth is in his affirmation, the reader I doubt not, will be able to discerne, that is not blinded with affection. Isichyus is cited in Leuit. Cap. 26. Propter quod, &c. Wherefore let vs feare his holie place, that we neither defile our bodie, nor rashly come to the bodie of Christe, in the which is all sanctification (For in him abydeth the fullnesse of the godhead) without diligent examination of our selues, but rather let vs examine our selues remembring him that sayde: Whosoeuer shall eate the breade or drinke the cuppe of the Lorde vnworthily, shalbe guiltie of the bodie and bloud of the Lorde. Because Maister Heskins knoweth not what to gather out of these wordes with any shewe of likelyhood to mainteine his cause, he runneth into another matter altogether impertinent and needelesse, to shewe out of Theophylact, how the fullnesse of the Godhead doth dwell in Christe. At length he commeth to ridiculous questions, why should he dehort wicked men from eating the bodie of Christ, if they cannot eat it at all? As though their presumption may not bee condemned, which cannot attaine their purpose. Why shoulde wicked men bee dehorted from seeking the ouerthrowe of Christe and his church, seeing it is impossible for them to preuayle either against the one or the other? yet Maister Heskins thinketh him selfe wittie, when he sayeth: It were strange to persuade a man not to pull downe heauen, or to eat the starres, because it is vaine to moue men not to doe that, which is impossible to be done. But because Maister Heskins is so angrie with a peece of breade in the sacrament, let him heare what the same Hesychius, or as he calleth him Isichius writeth in Leuitic. lib. 2. Cap. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                        Propterea carnes cum panibus comedi praecipient, vt nos intelligeremus illud ab eo mysterium dici, quod simul panis est & caro. Therefore commaunding the flesh to bee eaten with the breade, that wee might vnderstande, that he spake of that mysterie, which is both bread and fleshe together.
                     
You see that Hesychius acknowledged breade to bee in the mysterie naturallye, as the fleshe of Christe is spiritually.
                  Nowe let vs heare Sedulius: Accipite, &c. Take ye, this is my body. As though Paule had sayed: take heede ye eate not that bodie vnworthily, seeing it is the bodie of Christe. You shall eate this vnworthily, if you shame the poore, and if you eate any meate before the spirituall meate and the supper of the Lorde.
                  
                  Here againe he noteth, that the bodie of Christ may be receiued of vnworthie persons, hee meaneth wicked persons, for otherwise all men are vnworthie of it, but no such thing can followe of the wordes of Sedulius, both because hee speaketh of receiuing the sacrament, which after a certeine manner, is the bodie of Christe, & also because he speaketh not of wicked persons and reprobates, but of faithfull persones offenders, and that not in greate matters, namely, in shaming the poore with their plentifull feastes, and eating bodily meate before they receiue the Lordes supper. This place is cited before, lib. 2. Cap. 55. The argument that wee bring of the inseparable coniunction of Christe with his spirite, he sayeth is vaine, for though Christe bee neuer disioyned from his spirite, yet his spirite is not alwayes effectuall, which is as absurde, as the other, to saye that the quickening spirite of Christe, together with his bodye, is in the wicked and worketh not life. But hee weeneth Cyprian shall stande with him whose wordes he citeth In Sermone de Coena: Sacramenta quidem quantum in se est, &c. The sacraments truely, as concerning them selues, cannot be without their proper vertue. Neither doeth the Diuine maiestie by any meanes absent it selfe from the mysteries. But although the sacraments doe suffer them selues to bee taken or touched by vnworthie persons: yet cannot those be partakers of the spirite, whose infidelitie or vnworthinesse gaynsayeth so great holinesse. And therefore those giftes are to some the sauour of life vnto life, vnto some the sauour of death vnto death. For it is altogether meete, that the contemners of grace should be depriued of so great a benefite, and that the puritie of so greate grace shoulde not

make a dwelling for it selfe in vnworthie persons. I am verie wel content, yt this place shal determine the controuersie betweene vs. Cyprian sayeth, the maiestie of GOD doth neuer absent it selfe from the sacramentes, but either hee worketh saluation or damnation by them; as well in baptisme, as in the Lords supper, for hee speaketh of both in the plurall number. And seeing infidels and wicked persons cannot bee partakers of the spirite of Christe, it followeth they cannot bee partakers of the bodie of Christe, for Christ his bodie is neuer separate from his spirite.
                  But Augustine contra Crescen. is alledged, the place is not quoted, but it is lib. 1. Cap. 25. Quid de ipso corpore, &c. What shall wee saye euen of the bodie and bloude of our Lorde, the onely sacrifice for our health? Although the Lorde him selfe doeth saye: Except a man doe eate my fleshe and drinke my bloud he shall haue no life in him: doeth not the Apostle teache, that the same is made hurtfull to them, that vse it amisse? For he sayeth: whosoeuer shall eate the breade and drinke the cuppe of the Lorde vnworthily, shalbee guiltie of the bodie and bloud of the Lorde.
                  
                  
                     But it followeth imediately: Ecce quemadmodum obsint diuina & sancta malè vtentibus. Cur non eodem modo baptismus? Behold how diuine and holy things do hurte them that vse them amisse: why not baptisme after the same manner? By which woordes it appeareth, that Augustine speaketh of the sacrament, and not of the thing signifyed by the sacrament. For he compareth baptisme ministred by heretikes, with the Lordes supper vnworthily receiued, which comparison cannot stande, except you vnderstande the outwarde parte of the sacrament in bothe. Baptisme is ministred by heretikes, that is to say, the outwarde sacrament of baptisme, the bodie of Christe is receiued vnworthily to destruction, that is, the outwarde sacrament of the bodie of Christe: for as wee heard in the last Chapter, Res ipsa sacramenti, the thing it selfe of the sacrament is receiued of euery man to life, & of no man to destruction whosoeuer doth receiue it.
               
               
                  
                  The fiftieth Chapter sheweth the vnderstanding of the same 
                        •
                     ext by Effrem & Primasius.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Effrem is cited in tract. de die Iudicij: Si procul a nobis est Siloe, &c. If Siloe, whither the blinde man was sent,
                     
                        Fulk.
                      
                     be farre from vs, yet the precious cuppe of thy bloude full of light and life, is neere vs, beeing so much neerer as hee is purer that commeth vnto it. This then remayneth vnto vs, O mercifull Christ, that being full of grace, and the illumination of thy knowledge, with faith and holinesse wee come to thy cuppe, that it may profite vs vnto forgiuenesse of sinnes, not to confusion in the day of iudgement. For whosoeuer being vnworthie, shall come to thy mysteries, hee condemneth his owne soule, not cleansing himselfe, that hee might receiue the heauenly king and the immortall brydegrome into the moste pure chamber of his brest. For our soule is the spouse of the immortall bridegrome, and the heauenly sacramentes are the couple of the marriage. For when wee eate his bodie, and drinke his bloude, both hee is in vs, and wee in him. Therefore take heede to thy selfe brother, make speede to garnish continually the chamber of thine heart with vertues, that hee may make his dwelling with thee, with his blessed father: And then thou shalt haue praise, glorie, and boasting before the Angels and Archangels, & with great ioy and gladnesse thou shalt enter into Paradise.
                  
                  This saying being directly contrarie, both to the corporall manner of eating and drinking the body and bloud of Christe, and also to that absurde opinion that the wicked receiue the body of Christe: Maister Heskins is not ashamed, not onely to alledge it as making for him, but also tryfleth off the nearnesse of the bloud of Christe, which hee sayeth wee denye, when wee affirme Christe to bee alwayes in heauen. As though the bloude of Christe cannot purge and clense vs, except it come downe from heauen, and bee powred in at our mouthes. As though faith cannot make Christ him selfe to dwell in vs.
                  But where Effrem sayeth, his bloud is so much the

neerer, as hee is purer that commeth vnto it, why cannot M. Hesk. vnderstand, that the more vnpurer the receiuer of the cup is, the further off the bloud of Christ is, and so farthest of all from them that be most vnpure, that is, the wicked and the reprobate? But hee woulde haue the bloud of Christ to be as neere the wicked, as the godly. Againe when Ephrem saith: when wee eate and drinke his body and bloude, hee is in vs and wee in him: with what face can Maister Heskins or any papist in the worlde saye, that the wicked receiue the bodye and bloud of Christe, in whom Christe is not, nor they in him?
                  The like syncerity hee vseth, in racking the wordes of Primasius: Hee that eateth my fleshe and drinketh my bloud abideth in mee and I in him: As though he should saye: they that so ea
                        ••
                      as it is to bee eaten, and so drinke as my bloud is to be dronken. For many, when they seeme to receiue this thing, abide not in God nor God in them, because thei are affirmed to eate their own damnation: M. Hesk. hath so corrupted this place in translation, that you may see hee ment nothing but falshood & trechery. The latine text, he citeth thus. Qui edit meane carneus & bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet & ego in eo, pro eo ac si diceret: qui sic edent vs edenda est, & sic bibent vs bibendus est sanguis meus. Multi enim cùm hoc videantur acciper
                           •
                        , in Deo non manent, nec Deus in ipsis, quia sibi iudicium manducare perhibentur. He translateth in English thus. He that eateth my fleshe and drinketh my bloud, dwelleth in mee and I in him: As if he should say, they that so shal eate my flesh as it is to be eaten, and shall so drinke my bloud as it is to be dronken. For many when they are seene to receiue this sacrament, neither dwell they in God nor God in them, because they are witnessed to eate and drinke their owne damnation.
                  
                  Now let the reader, though hee bee but a meane Latinist, iudge whether he haue not corrupted Primasius in translation, especially where hee sayeth: Multi cùm hoc videantur accipere, whiche is, manye when they seeme to receiue this thing, namely the body and bloud

of Christe, of whiche hee spake, Maister Heskins turneth it into manye, when they are seene to receiue this sacrament. Many seeme to bee Christians, that are not: many seeme to bee baptized with the holy Ghoste, which are not: so many seeme to eate and drinke the bodie and bloud of Christe, which doe not, because God dwelleth not in them, nor they in God. Therefore, take awaye Maister Heskins false (translation, and this saying of Primasius is directly against him, that wicked men receiue not the bodie and bloude of Christe. And wheras hee noteth that the sixte of Iohn and Saint Paule in this texte speake of one thing, it is cleane contrarye: for Christe speaketh of that, which is testifyed and giuen in the sacrament to the faithfull, Paule of the sacrament receiued vnworthely. And Primasius ioyneth them to shewe the diuersitie of these textes, and not as though they signified one thing. For by Saint Paule hee prooueth, that not all eating and drinking, is the eating and drinking of the bodie and bloude of Christe, but the eating and drinking worthily.
               
               
                  The one and fiftieth Chapter, abydeth in the exposition of the same texte, by Cassiodorus, and Damascene.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  Cassiodorus is cited in Psalm. 110. vppon this verse:
                        Fulke.
                      
                     Tu es sacerdos, &c. Thou arte a priest after the order of Melchizedeche, in these wordes: Cui enim putest veracitet & euidenter aptari, nisi Domino & saluatori, qui corpus & sanguinem s
                           •
                        um in pani
                           •
                         & vini erogatione salutariter consecrauis. Sicut ipse in Euangelio dicit: nisi manducaueritis carnem filij hominis & hiberitis eius sanguinem, non habebitis vitam in vobis? Sed in ista carne & sanguine nil cruentum, nihil corruptibile mens humana concipiat (ne sicut dicit Apostolus: Qui enim corpus Domini indignè manducat, iudicium sibi mandueas) sed viuifica
                           •
                        ricem substantiam atque salutarem. & ipsius verbi propriam factam, per quam peccatorum remissio & aeterno vitae donapraestuntur. For vnto whome may it bee truely and euidently

applyed, but to our Lorde and Sauiour, which hath healthsontly consecrated his body and bloude, in the giuing foorth of breade and wine? as he him selfe sayeth in the Gospell: except ye shall eate the fleshe of the sonne of man and d
                           •
                        inke his bloud you shall haue no life in you, but in this fleshe and bloud, let the minde of man conceiue nothing bloudie, neither corruptible (left as the Apostle sayeth: For he that eateth the Lordes bodie vnworthily, eateth his owne damnation) but a substance giuing life and health, and made proper to the WORDE himselfe, by which remission of sinnes, and the giftes of eternall life are perfourmed. This saying being directly contrarie to all Maister Heskins three assertions, namely, transsubstantiation, carnall maner of eating, and the wicked receiuing Christes bodye, hee hath cloked the two firste with a false translation, the last with a needelesse excursion into ye heresies of Marcion, Manicheus, &c. For where it is firste manifest by Cassiodorus, that when Christe gaue the sacrament to his disciples, hee gaue foorth breade and wine, Maister Heskins translateth: Corpus & sanguinem suum in panis & vini erogatione salutariter consecrauit: In the giuing foorth of breade and wine to our health, hee consecrated his bodie and bloud: whereas euery litle boye, will teach him, that the Aduerbe must be ioyned with the Verbe in construing, to declare his signification. Therefore his meaning must needs be as I haue translated it: he did helthsomly or profitably consecrate his bodie and bloud in giuing forth of breade and wine, therfore he gaue forth breade and wine. Touching the seconde of the carnall manner of presence, whereas Cassiodorus sayeth: In ista carne & sanguine nil cruentum, nihil corruptibile mens humana contipia
                              •
                           , which is: In this fleshe and bloude, let the minde of man conceiue nothing bloudie, nothing corruptible, Maister Heskins translateth it: 
                     Let not the minde of man conceiue any thing grosse, any thing corruptible: whereas the mynde of the author is, seeing we must in this fleshe and bloud conceiue nothing bloudie, we must not conceiue the flesh of Christ to be present carnally, nor the bloud of Christ to be present bloudily, but spiritually,

and as he addeth a quickening and healthfull substance, giuing forgiuenesse of sinnes and eternall life, to all that receiue it. And therefore impertinent is al that discourse that Maister Heskins maketh afterwarde, against ye olde heretikes, of which some denyed the humanitie, some the diuinitie of Christe, and ridiculous is that rayling of his, by which hee woulde charge vs with their heresies, for mainteining the trueth against their carnall manner of presence, which in deede sauoureth of the heresie of the Marcionistes, Mannyches, and Eutychians. Finally, where Cassiodorus sayeth, he that eateth the bodye of our Lorde vnworthily, eateth his owne damnation, it is manifest, that hee calleth the sacrament by the name of that which it signifieth, as many of the fathers doe. But where he sayeth, that forgiuenesse of sinnes and eternall life are giuen by the fleshe and bloud of Christe, it followeth, that the wicked which are not partakers of the one are not partakers of the other.
                  Concerning Damascene a corrupt writer, farre out of the compasse of the challenge, who writeth so monstrously of this sacrament, that the Papistes them selues do not receiue him in all thinges, as I haue alwayes refused his authoritie, so nowe I will not trouble the reader with it.
               
               
                  The two and fiftieth Chapter endeth the exposition of this texte by Theodoret and Anselmus.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  In the beginning of this Chapter, he maketh much adoe that Damascenes authoritie might be receiued,
                        Fulke.
                      and so he shoulde haue twelue which make a quest, to giue verdict in this matter. But seeing Damascene cannot be taken, hee presumeth him selfe to bee the foreman of the quest, and to speake for all the rest. But because he was neuer impannelled, nor returned foreman of the quest, wee will not take the verdicte or rather the falsedict at his mouth, but as the manner of Lordes of the parleament is, to let euery man giue his verdict for him selfe, so I wish the reader to consider their seuerall sayinges, and hee shall finde, that not one of them,

being rightly vnderstoode, speaketh on Maister Heskins syde.
                  But Theodoret (hee sayeth) though Cranmer would deceiue the people by his authoritie, is altogether on their syde. Hee citeth him in. 1. Cor. 11. Hic eos quidem pungit, &c. Here truely he pricketh them that were sicke of ambition. Also he pricketh him, which had committed fornication, and with them, those that without any difference were partakers of those thinges that were offered to idols. Besides them, also vs, which with an euill conscience, dare receiue the diuine sacraments. As for that hee sayeth: He shalbe guiltie of the bodie and bloud, signifyeth this, that as Iudas betrayed him, and the Iewes mocked and reuyled him: euen so doe they dishonour and disworship him, which receiue his moste holie bodie with filthie handes, and put it into a filthie and defiled mouth.
                  
                  Here Maister Heskins noteth, that the bodie of our Lorde is receiued with hande and mouth, cleane or vncleane. In deede the sacramentes, which are called by the name of that whereof they bee sacramentes, are so receiued, and of them doeth Theodoret speake, by expresse wordes. Another sentence hee alledgeth out of the same Chapter: Sacram illam & ex omni parte beatam noctem, &c. Hee calleth againe to memorie that holye, and by all meanes blessed night, in which hee both made an ende of the figuratiue passeouer, and shewed the true paterne of the figure, and also opened the gates of the wholesome sacrament, and gaue not onely to the eleuen Apostles, but also to Iudas the traytour, his moste precious bodie and bloud. To this I aunswere, as before, that hee calleth the sacrament which hee gaue, the precious bodie and bloude of Christe, not that hee meant that ye bread and wine in the sacrament are turned into the bodie and bloude of Christe, and so giuen to good and badd, but that the signes beare the names of the thinges signifyed, as shall moste plainly appeare by the woordes of Theodoret him selfe in his firste dialogue called Incommutabilis.
                  
                  
                     Orthodoxus: Scis quòd Deus suum corpus appellauit panem? Eranistes. Scio. Orthodoxus. Porro etiam alibi carnem tritieum nominauit.
 Eran. Hoc etiam scio. Audiui enim eum dicentem, venit hora vt glorificetur filiut hominis. Et nisi granum tritici, quod cecidit in terram, mortuum fuerit, solum manet: sin autem mortuums fuerit, fert multum fructum. Orth. In mysteriorum autem traditione corpus panem appellauit, & id quod in calito infusum & commixtum est, sanguinem. Eran. Itae nominauit. Orth. Atqui & quod est secundùm naturam corpus, corpus iure vocabitur: & itidem sanguis. Eran. In confesio est. Orth. Seruator ceriè noster nomina commutauit: & corpori quidem, id quod erat symboli & signi, nomen imposuit: symbolo autem quod erat corpuris. Ita cùm se vitem nominasset, sanguinem id, quod erat symbolum appellauit. Eran. Hoc quidem verè dixist
                           •
                        . Vellem autem scire causam mutationis-nominum. Orth. Manifestum est institutum ijs qui sunt diuinis mysterijs initiati. Volebat enim eot qui sunt Diuinorum mysteriorum participes, non attendere naturam eorum quae videntur: sed propter nominum permutationem, mutationi, quę fit ex gratia, credere. Qui enim quod natura est corpus, triticum & panem appellauit, & vitem se rursus nominauit: is symbola quae videntur, appellatione corporis & sanguinis honorauit, non naturam quidem mutans, sed naturae gratiam adijciens. Eran. Et mysticè mystica dicta sunt, & apertè declarata quae non sunt nota omnibus. Orth. Quoniam ergo in confesso est, & Patriarcham corpus Domini vestem & indumentum nominasse, ad dicendum autem de Diuinis mysterijs ingressi sumus, dic per veritatem cuius symbolum, & figuram esse existimas alimentum sanstissimum? Diuinitatis ne Domini Christi, an corporis & sanguinis? Eran. Clarum quod illorum, quorum appellationem susceperunt. Orth. Corporis & sanguinis dicis. Eran. Ita dico. Orth. Vi decet amicum veritatis dixisti, Etenim Dominus cum accepisset symbolum aut signum, non dixit, Hoc est Deitas mea: sed, hoc est corpus meum. Et rursus hic est sanguis meus.
                     Et alibi: Panis autem quem ego dabo, caro mea est quam ego dabo pro mundi vita. Eran. Vera sunt haec. Sunt enim diuina eloquia Orth. Si ergo vera, corpus vtique habuit Dominus.
                  
                  In English thus:
                  
                     Orthodoxus. Knowest thou that God called his body breade? Eranistes. I knowe it. Orth. Moreouer, in in one place he called his flesh wheate. Eran. This also

I knowe. For I haue heard him, saying: The houre is come, that the sonne of man shall be glorified. And except the graine of wheate which is fallen into the earth do dye, it remaineth alone: but if it dye, it bringeth forth much fruit. Ortho. And in the deliuerie of the mysteries he called breade his body, and that which is powred in the cup and mingled, his bloud. Eranistes. He called it so in deede. Orthodoxus. Why then, that which is a naturall body, shall of right be called a body, and likewise bloud. Eranistes. That is confessed. Orthodoxus. Certainely our Sauiour chaunged the names: and gaue that name to his body, which was the name of the token or signe: and to the token, that which was the name of his body. So when he called him selfe a vine, hee called his body that which was the token thereof. Eranistes. This thou hast saide truely. But I would knowe the cause of the chaunge of the names. Orthodoxus. The purpose is manifest to them that are made partakers of the Diuine mysteries. For hee would haue them, which are partakers of the Diuine mysteries, not to regard the nature of those things that are seene: but in respect of the chaunging of the names, to giue credite to that chaunge which is by grace. For hee which called his naturall body wheate and breade, and named him selfe againe a vine: euen hee hath honoured the tokens that are seene, with the name of his body and bloud: not chaunging their nature, but adding grace vnto the nature. Eranistes. Those mysticall things are both vttered mystically, and those things are openly declared, which are not knowen to all men. Orthodoxus. Therefore seeing it is confessed, that the Patriarch called the Lordes body a vesture and a garment, and we are entred to speake of the Diuine mysteries, tell truely, whereof doest thou thanke this most holy foode to be a token and figure? of the Godhead of our Lorde Christe, or of his body and bloud? Eranistes. It is cleare to be of them whose names they haue receiued. Orthodoxus. Thou saiest of his body and bloud. Eranistes. So I say. Orthodoxus. Thou hast saide

as becommeth a louer of the trueth. For when our Lord had taken the token or signe: he saide not, This is my Godhead: but, this is my body. And againe: This is my bloud: and in an other place: The breade which I will giue is my flesh, which I will giue for ye life of the world. Eranistes. Those things are true. For they are the word of God. Orthodoxus. Then if they be true, our Lord had a body.
                  
                  This discourse of Theodoret is so plaine, as I neede to adde no exposition thereof, to declare what his iudgement was. As for the authoritie of Anselmus, which hee adioyneth, there is no more reason why we should admit it, then why Maister Heskins will not receiue the authoritie of Cranmer, which was Archbishop of Canterburie as well as Anselmus. Hee anueth also a saying of Oecumenius, but both bicause he is a late writer, and his wordes in a manner are the same that he alledged out of Theodoret, of whom it seemeth that Oecumenius borrowed them, I omit them as already aunswered, in aunswere to Theodoret.
               
               
                  The three and fiftieth Chapter beginneth the exposition of the next text of S. Paule, which is, Let euery man examine him selfe, and so let him eate.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  In this Chapter Maister Heskins promiseth to teach men howe to examine them selues,
                        Fulk.
                      that they may receiue worthily. And two things he requireth in due examination, vprightnesse of faith, and puritie of life. And this faith hee determineth to be the Apostolique and Catholique faith, which must be learned of hearing, as Saint Paule saith, Faith commeth of hearing, and as he saith, it must bee learned of the Elders, and so bee continued by tradition. But Saint Paule saith: Hearing must be of the worde of God, for Elders may erre, as well as youngers, but the worde of GOD can not erre, neither can he erre that followeth the doctrine of the worde of GOD in any thing.
                  
                     Vnto purenesse of life he requireth confession, alledging the confession of Augspurge for the confirmation thereof, as though Christian confession and the Popish shrift, were all one. As fond it is, that he saith, the Apostles were instructed by Christe in the faith of the sacrament before the institution thereof, by the miracle of the fiue loaues, and in purenesse of life by washing of his disciples feete. Where yet was neither contrition, confession, nor satisfaction. After this he rayleth vpon Luther, for saying that onely faith maketh men pure and worthie to receiue, as though by so saying, he did exclude the fruites of repentance and reformation of manners, which necessarily do followe of a true and liuely faith, which onely maketh vs righteous in the sight of God, and worthie receiuers by reputation or acceptation, which in the conclusion, Maister Heskins himselfe confesseth to be all the worthines, that any man hath or can haue, to be partaker of the body and bloud of Christ.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The foure and fiftieth Chapter beginneth the exposition of the Fathers vpon the same text with Saint Hierome and Saint Chrysostome:
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     S. Hierome is alledged in 1. Cor. 11. Si in linteum vel vat sordidum non illud mittere audeat &c. If a man dare not put that thing into a soule cloth or vessell, howe much more in a defiled hart, which vncleannesse God aboue all things detesteth, and which is the only iniurie that can be done to his body? For euen therefore did Ioseph that righteous man burie the Lordes body? wrapped in a cleane linnen cloth, in a newe tombe, prefiguring that they which should receiue the Lords body, should haue both a cleane minde and a new. M. Heskins saith, these wordes make plaine for the presence of Christ, in that Hierome saith, we receiue the body of Christe. And who denyeth either the presence of Christ, or that we receiue the body of Christ in the sacrament? Only we differ, whether Christ be present bodily, and whether we receiue his body after a corporall manner, or after a spirituall or heauenly manner. It is pitie he

can not see in Hieromes wordes, that Christes body must be receiued in a cleane sort, as in a cleane vessell. And whereas Maister Heskins translateth mittere illud, to put that body into a foule cloth or vessell, it is maruell he considered not, that which aunswereth in similitude to a foule vessell, namely a foule heart. He thought by that translation, or rather falsification, to make it seeme, that wicked men receiue the body of Christe with the mouth, but his authour saith, with a filthie heart, which is the only iniurie that can be done to the body of Christe, therefore he speaketh of the wicked presuming to receiue the sacrament of his body and bloud, not affirming that they do it in deede. For vpon these wordes, He that eateth and drinketh vnworthily, eateth and drinketh his owne damnation, he saith: 
                        Dupliciter reus effectus, presumptionis scilicet & peccati: Being made twise guiltie, namely of presumption and sinne: and vpon those words: He shall be guiltie of the body and bloud of our Lorde.] hee saith: 
                        Quia tanti mysterij sacramentum pro vili despexerit: bicause he hath despised the sacrament of so great a mysterie as nothing worth.
                  
                  But Maister Heskins citeth another place of Saint Hierome, against ye licentious doctrine of Luther, as he saith, that would haue none other preparation but onely faith: also to maintaine his carnall presence: Lib. 1. Apoll. contra Iouinian. Probet se vnusquis
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         &c. Let euery man examine him self, and so let him come to the Lords body: He would not (saith he) call it the body of Christe, if it were but bread. Howe often shall I tell him, that it is one thing to say, it is breade, an other thing to say, it is but breade. The former we say, and also that it is Christes body: the latter we vtterly deny.
                  But Saint Hierome more at large is cited, in 1. Cor. 11. vpon these wordes of Saint Paule: Who so euer shall eate of this breade, and drinke of this cup of the Lorde vnworthily, shall be guiltie: of the body and bloud of our Lorde: Sicut scriptum est: Omnis mundus manducabit &c. As it is written, Euery cleane person shall eate it, and againe: The

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
vncleane soule that shall eate it, shall be rooted out from his people. And our Lorde him selfe saith: If before the altar thou shalt remember, that thy brother hath any thing against thee, leaue thy gif
                           •
                         before the altar, and goe and be reconciled to thy brother. Therefore the conscience must first be searched, if it doe in nothing reprehend vs, and so we ought either to offer, or to communicate. There be some that say, he doth not here forbid an vnworthie person from the holy thing, but him that receiueth vnworthily. If therefore the worthie person comming vnworthily he drawne backe, howe much more the vnworthy person which can not receiue worthily? Wherfore it behoueth the idle person to cease from vices, that he may holily receiue the holy body of our Lord.
                  
                  In these wordes Maister Heskins noteth the preparation required, against Luthers onely faith, and the thing receiued to be the holy body of our Lorde. I haue aunswered before, that Luthers onely faith doth not exclude, but of necessitie drawe with it all things requisite to a due preparation. And that the holy body of our Lorde is receiued of the faithfull, wee doe willingly confesse, but not of the vnfaithfull and wicked persons. For the same Hierome in the Chapter before cited, vpon this saying of the Apostle, This is my body, writeth thus: 
                        Qui manducat corpus meum, & bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet & ego in eo. Vnde agnoscere se debet quisquis Christi corpus edit, aut sanguinem bibit, ne quid indignum ei faciat cuius corpus effectus est. Hee that eateth my body and drinketh my bloud, dwelleth in me and I in him. Wherefore hee ought to knowe him selfe, who so euer either eateth the body of Christe, or drinketh his bloud, that hee doe nothing vnworthily, to him whose body hee is made.
                  
                  This sentence plainely declareth, both howe the body and bloud of Christe are eaten and dronken, and of whome, namely, they are so receiued, as hee that receiued them is made the body of Christe, that is of necessitie spiritually, and they are receiued of them, in whome Christe dwelleth, and they in him, therefore of no wicked men.
                  
                     Nowe let vs heare Chrysostome whom hee citeth in foure places, but the two first are one compt In 1. Cor. 11. Probet seipsum &c. Let a man examine himselfe, whiche thing also he sayeth in the second Epistle: proue your selues whether you be in the faith: examine your owne selues, not as we doe now
                           •
                         comming rather for the times sake, then of any earnest desire of the minde. Neither doe we come as full of compunction prepared to purge out our vices, but we consider that wee may bee at the solemnities when all men are presente. But Paule doeth not so commaunde, but he knewe one time in whiche we should come to the purenesse of communication and conscience. For if we would neuer communicate at a sensible table, if wee be sicke of an ague, and doe abounde with humours, least we should be caste away: muche more wickednesse it is to touche this table, being intangled with noysome lustes, which are more greeuous then feuers. And when I speake of noysome lustes, I speake of lustes of the bodie, and of money, and of anger, and of wrath, and plainely all lustes that be naught. All which he that commeth to receiue, must auoide, and so touche that pure sacrifice, not to be slouthfully disposed, nor miserably to be compelled for the solemnities sake to come. Neither againe beeing penitent and prepared, to be hindered because there is no solemnitie. For solemnitie is an euident declaration of good workes, purenesse of soule, certeintie of life, whiche thinges if thou hast, thou mayest alwayes celebrate a solemnitie, and alwayes come, therefore (sayth he) let a man examine him selfe, and so let him eate. It followeth immediately: 
                        Non iubet vt alter alteri probetur, sed ipse sibi, non publicum faciens iudicium, & sine teste argutum. He doth not commaunde that one should be examined of an other, but eache man of him selfe, making the iudgement not publike, and the accusation without witnesse. Maister Heskins alledged the place to proue the necessitie of preparation, which no man denieth, but these last words of Chrysostome doe clearly ouerthrow auricular confession, which Maister Heskins compteth for a necessarie parte of repentance. He noteth further, that the sacrament is called of him a pure sacrifice, and the bodie of Christ. How it is called either a sacrifice,

or the body of Christ, we haue often shewed before, yet he will presse vs, with an other place, out of his Hom. Oporte
                           •
                         haereses, &c. Deinde vbi multum, &c. Then when he had disputed much of those, which vnworthily are partakers of the mysteries, and had gre
                           •
                        uously rebuked them and shewed, that they should suffer the same punishment, that they did which had slaine Christe, if they receiue his bloud and body without examination & rashly, he turneth againe his communication vnto the matter in hande.
                  
                  Of these wordes M. Heskins will needes gather both his carnall presence, and the presence of Christ vnto the wicked receiuer, but seeing Chrysostome expressely nameth the partaking of the mysteries, it is plaine in what sense, ye bodie of Christ is said to be receiued vnworthily, namely whē the mysteries yt is his sacrament are receiued vnworthily. But our doctrine (he saith) is without all ground of scriptures, yt only faith maketh Christe present in the sacrament: in deed meaning either such a presence as he fantasieth included in the sacrament, or suche an only faith, as he slandereth vs withal, neither do we affirme it, neither is it in the scriptures to be found, but that Christ dwelleth in our heartes by faith, both in the receiuing of the sacramentes, and in receiuing of the word of God, the Apostle teacheth vs, Eph. 3. and our sauiour Christ testifieth, Ioan. 6. that whosoeuer eateth his flesh and drinketh his bloud hath life euerlasting, euen as he saide before he that beleeueth in him hath life euerlasting, whervpon Augustine In Ioan. Tract. 26. doeth rightly gather, Credere in eum, hoc est manducare panem viuum: To beleeue in him, that is to eate the bread of life: and Tra. 25. Vt quid paras dentes & ventrem, crede & manducasti. Why doest thou prepare thy teeth and thy bellie, beleeue and thou hast eaten it.
                  Yet another place of Chrysostome M. Heskins heapeth vpon vs Hom. 3. in Ep. ad Eph. Considera nunc &c. Consider now what great sobrietie of life those partakers of the olde sacrifice did vse. For what did they not? They were purified euerie time. And doest thou comming to this wholsome sacrifice, which the Angels them selues doe receiue with trembling, measure so great a

thing with the compasse of times? With what face wilt thou appeare before the iudgement seate of Christ, which hast beene so bolde with vncleane handes and lippes so impudently to touch his bodie? Thou wouldst not choose to kisse the King if thou hast a stinking mouth: & doest thou shamelesse man, kisse the King of heauen with thy soule so stinking of vices? Surely this maner of thing is a cruell reproche. Tell me wouldest thou take vpon thee to come to so honorable a sacrifice with vnwashed handes? I thinke not, but as I coniecture, thou haddest rather altogether to refraine from comming, then to come with foule hands. And whylest thou art so religious in so small a thing, thou commest hauing thy soule defiled with the myre of vices, and darest thou touch it thou impudent man? Although a man for the vncleanenesse of his handes doe withholde himselfe for a time yet to cleanse his soule, from the filthie puddle of all vices, let him returne altogether. Maister Heskins noteth in this figuratiue speeche, three thinges, first the corporal presence of Christes bodie, that it may be touched with handes or lipps. And he is not ashamed to cite the saying of Christ: handle me and see that a spirite hath no fleshe and bones, as you see we haue: as though any man either by sight or feeling, could discerne Christe corporally present in the sacrament. But what a shamelesse man is this, to vrge the kissing of Christ with a foule mouth, which is a figuratiue and vnproper speech, when it followeth, that he is kissed of the wicked with a foule soule? Like impudencie is in the second note, that the bodie of Christe may be touched and receiued of him, that hath a filthie soule, which Chrysostome saith not, but inueyeth vehemently against their presumption, that hauing a filthie soule, would presume to receiue the sacrament. The thirde, that it is an wholsome sacrifice, which the Angels do honour, doth no more proue the corporall presence of Christ on earth, then the same Authors wordes soone after do proue the corporal presence of the receiuers in heauen. 
                        Dic quaeso si rex quispiam praecepisset ac dixisset, si quis istud vel istud fecerit, mensa mea abstineat, an non huius gratia omnia fecissetis? In coelot nos vocauit Deus, ad mensam magni & admirandi Regis, & recusamus, & moras nectimus, ad rem tantam nec festinantes, nec

accurrentes? Tel me I pray thee If any King had commanded and said: if any man haue done this or that, let him not come to my table, wouldest not thou haue done any thing for his sake? God hath called vs into heauen, vnto the table of the great and wonderfull King, and doe we refuse, and make delayes, neither making haste nor comming to so great and excellent a matter? This place of Chrysostome doth teach vs, that Christes bodie commeth not downe corporally to vs, but that we are called vp into heauen, to receiue him there spiritually by faith. This is in deede a great and wonderfull mysterie, which Chrysostome doeth garnish with many figures (as he was an eloquent preacher) to make the people to haue due reuerence thereof.
                  Neither is Luthers doctrine one hayre breadth differing from Chrysostoms iudgement concerning the preparation necessarie for all them, that shall receiue the sacrament worthily, howsoeuer it pleaseth Maister Heskins neuer to haue done railing and reuiling him, & charging him with yt, which I thinke the holy man neuer thought, certeine I am he neuer did teach, but the contrarie. And because this is the last testimonie he citeth out of Chrysostome, I thought good to set downe one place also directly ouerthrowing his transubstantiation, for which he striueth so egerly. It is written, Ad Caesa. monachum. Et Deus & homo est Christus: Deus propter impassibilitatem: homo propter passionem: vnus filius, vnus Dominus: idem ipse procul dubio, vnitarum naturarum vnam dominationem, vnam potestatem possidens, etiamsi non consubstantialiter existant & vnaquaeque incommixta proprietatis conseruas agnitionem, propter hoc quod inconfusa sunt duo. Sicut enim antequam sanctificetur panis, panem nominamus: Diuina autem illum sanctificante gratia, mediante sacerdote liberatus est quidem ab appellatione panis, dignus autem habitus est Dominici corporis appellatione, etsi natura panis in ipso remansit & non duo corpora sed vnum filij corpus predicatt
                              •
                           r: sic & haec Diuina inundante corporis natura vnum filium, vnam personam vtraque haec secerunt. Christe is both God and man, God because of his impassibilitie, man for his passion: being

one sonne and one Lord: he himselfe doubtlesse possessing one domination, one power of the two natures being vnited, although they haue not their being consubstantially, and either of them vnmingled doeth keepe the acknowledging of his propertie, because they are two vnconfounded. For euen as the bread before it be sanctified is called of vs bread, but when the grace of God doth sanctifie it, by meanes of the priest, it is in deede deliuered from the name of bread, and is compted worthie of the name of our Lordes bodie, although the nature of the bread hath remained in it, and it is not called two bodies but one body of the sonne, so both these, the diuine nature ouerflowing the body haue made one sonne, one person.
                  
                  I knowe Stephan Gardener when he can not aunswere this place denyeth it to bee written by Iohn Chrysostome, ascribing it to an other Iohn of Constantinople, but seeing it cā not be denied to be an ancient authoritie, it is sufficient to proue the doctrine of transubstantiation, to be newe and vnknowen to the Churche of God in the elder times.
               
               
                  The fiue and fiftieth Chapter proceedeth vpon the same by Isichius and S. Augustine.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  To garnishe his Booke, with the name of Isichius,
                        Fulke.
                      he continueth his most vniust and slaunderous quarrell against Luther, as though he denied all preparation requisite to the woorthie receiuing of this holie sacrament, which is so impudent an vntruth, that all the world doth see it, And God in time will reuenge it. Isichius is cited In 26. Leuit. Probet autem &c. Let a man examine him selfe and so let him eate of that bread, and drinke of that cuppe. What manner of examination doeth he speake of? It is this, that in a cleane heart and conscience, and to him that intendeth to repent those thinges wherein he hath offended, men should participate of the holy things to the washing away of their sinnes. M. Hesk. would make men beleeue, that Luthers doctrine

were contrarie to this saying, and multiplieth his slaunders against him, which seeing they be without al proofe, yea and manifest proofe to the contrarie, it shall suffice to denie them, and so to consider what he will bring foorth of S. Augustine.
                  He citeth him Ad Iulianum Ep. 111. Whereas in deede ther is no such Epistle in any good edition of Augustine, and the treatise he speaketh of, may rather be called a Booke then an Epistle for the length of it. But the stile of it, is as like vnto the stile of Augustine, as our Asse is to a Lyon. It hath no inscription to whom it should be directed, and therefore some say to Iulianus, some to Bonifacius. It beginneth O mi frater, &c. and so continueth in such balde Latine that Erasmus hath not only reiected it out of the number of Augustines Epistles, but also out of his authenticall workes, such iudgement or honestie M. Heskins vseth in citing the fathers, all is fishe that commeth to his nette. I will set downe the wordes: Ab ijs pietas, &c. From them let the pietie of our Lorde Iesus Christe deliuer vs, and giue himselfe to be eaten, who saide I am the bread of life which came downe from heauen, he that eateth my flesh, & drinketh my bloud hath euerlasting life in him. But let euerie man before he receiue the bodie and bloud of our Lord Iesus Christ, examine himself, and so according to the commandement of the Apostle, let him eate of that bread and drink of that cup. For he that vnworthily eateth the bodie and bloud of our Lord, eateth and drinketh his owne condemnation, making no difference of the bodie of our Lorde. Therefore when we shall receiue, we ought before to haue recourse to confession and repentance, and curiously to searche out all our actions, and if we finde in vs any punishable sinnes, le
                           •
                         vs hasten quickely to washe them away by confession and true repentance, least we with Iudas the traytor hyding the diuell within vs, doe perish protracting and hyding our sinnes from day to day. And if we haue thought any euill or naughtie thing let vs repent vs of it, and let vs make hast to scrape that speedily out of our heart.
                  
                  This is the saying of this counterfet and forged Augustine, out of which Maister Heskins gathereth not only his manner of presence, to be such as the wicked receiue

the bodie & bloud of Christ, but also his auricular confession.
                  But what the iudgement of the true Augustine is, you haue hearde before concerning the former: as for the later question is neuer touched in all his owne workes. De ciuit. Dei Lib. 21. Cap. 25. 
                        Non dicendum eum manducare corpus Christi, qui in corpore non est Christi. It is not to be saide, that he doth eate the bodie of Christe, which is not in the bodie of Christe. Againe: Vnus panis, vnum corpus multi sumus, qui ergo est in eius corporis vnitate, id est, in Christianorum compage membrorum, cuius corporis sacramentum fideles communicantes de altari sumere consueuerunt, ipse verè dicendus est manducare corpus Christi, & bibere sanguinem Christi. There is one bread we being many are one bodie, he therfore that is in the vnitie of his bodie, that is, in the coniunction of Christian members, the sacrament of which the faithfull communicating are accustomed to receiue from ye altar, he is truely to be saide to eate the bodie of Christ, and to drinke the bloud of Christ. And againe: Nec isti duo ergo dicendi sunt manducare corpus Christi, quoniam nec in membris computandi sunt Christi. Vt enim alia taceam, non possunt simul esse & membra Christi & membra meretricis. Deni
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ipse dicent, Qui manducat carnem meam & bibit sanguinem meum in me manet & ego in eo, ostendit quid sit non sacramento tenus sed reuera corpus Christi manducare & eius sanguinem bibere: Hoc est enim in Christo manere, vt in illo maneat & Christus. Sic enim hoc dixit tanquam diceret: qui non in me manet, & in quo ego non maneo, non se dicat aut existimet manducare corpus meum, aut bibere sanguinem meum. Neither are those two sortes of men to be saide to eate of the bodie of Christe, because they are not to be accompted among the members of Christe.
                  
                  
                     For, that I say nothing of other matters, they can not be both the members of Christ, and the members of an harlot. Finally he himselfe saying: he that eateth my fleshe and drinketh my bloud abideth in me and I in him, sheweth what it is (not in the sacrament only, but in very deede) to eate the bodie of Christ, & to drinke his bloud. For this it is to abide in Christ, ye Christ may abide

in him. For so he spake this, as if he had saide: he that abideth not in me, and in whom I doe not abide, let him not say or think that he eateth my body or drinketh my bloud. Thus much for Saint Augustines iudgement. As for the matter of Auricular confession which Maister Heskins without warrant of Gods worde, is so bolde to call Gods ordinaunce, vpon the authoritie of his forged Augustine, I thinke it not worthie any answere, if any man list to see the three properties of a Ghostly Father, and two commodities of confession, let him resorte to Maister Heskins booke for them. Other reason or authoritie he bringeth none for them, but this Iewde foolishe and barbarous counterfet, whome he called moste falsely and iniuriously S. Augustine.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The sixe and fiftieth Chapter endeth the exposition of this text by Theodoret, and Anselme.
                  
                     
                        Fulke.
                     Theodoret whom he greatly commendeth, he citeth in 1. Cor. 11. vpon this text in hand. Sic tui ipsius Index, &c. So thou being thine owne iudge exactly iudge thine owne life: searche and examine thy conscience, and then receiue the gifte. As this saying is good and godly, so it excludeth auricular confession, as Chrysostome doth vpon the same place. But that you might knowe what Theodoret meaneth by the gifte, he citeth him in Dialog. 2. Quid appellas donum quod offertur post sanctificationem? Orthodoxus. Corpus Christi, & sanguinem Christ. Eranistes. Et credis te participem fieri Christi corporis & sanguinis? Orthodoxus. Ita credo. What doest thou call the gift, which is offered after sanctification? Orthodoxus. The bodie of Christe and the bloud of Christ. Eranistes. And doest thou beleeue that thou art made partaker of the bodie and bloud of Christe? Orthodoxus. So doe I beleeue.
                  
                  Thus much Maister Heskins vouchsafeth to rehearse out of Theodoret, and saith it is a plain place for the proclaymer, both for reall presence and sacrifice. But howe plaine it is, and howe honestly Maister Heskins rendeth this peece from the rest, to abuse Theodorets name, you

shall perceiue by the whole discourse, which I will set downe. Orthodoxus. Dic ergo, mystica symbola quae Deo à Dei Sacerdotibus offeruntur, quorumnam symbola esse dicis? Eranistes. Corporis & sanguinis Domini. Orthodoxus. Corporis eius quod verè est, an eius quod verè non est? Eranistes. Quod verè est. Orthodoxus. Optimè. Oportet enim imaginis esse exemplar Archerypum. Etenim pictoret imitantur naturam: & eorum quae videntur pingunt imagines. Eranistes. Verum. Orthodoxus. Si ergo Diuina mysteria corpus, quod verè est, repraesentant, ergo corpus etiam nunc Domini quoque corpus est, non in Diuinam naturam mutatum, sed impletum Diuina gloria. Eranistes. Opportunè accidit vt verba faceres de D
                           •
                        uinis mysterijs. Nam & ex eo ipso tibi ostendam corpus Domini mutari in aliam naturam. Responde ergo ad mea interrogata? Orthodoxus. Respondebo. Eranistes. Quid appellas donum quod offertur ante inuocationem sacerdotis? Orthodoxus. Non oportet ap
                           •
                        rtè dicere: est enim verisimile, adesse aliquos mysterijs non initiatos. Eranister. Respondeatur aenigmaticè? Orthodoxus. Id, quod fit ex huiusmodi seminibus nutrimentum. Eranistes. Aliud etiam signum quomodo nominamus? Orthodoxus. Commune etiam hoc nomen, quod potus speciem significat. Eranistes. Post sanctificationem autem quomodo ea appellas? Orthodoxus. Corpus & sanguinem Christi. Eranistes. Et credis te fieri participeni Christi corporis & sanguinis? Orthodoxus. Ita credo. Eranistes. Sicut ergo symbola corporis & sanguinis Domini, alia quidem sunt ante inuocationem sacerdotis, & post inuocationem mutantur, & alia siunt: ita etiam corpus Domini post assumptionem mutatur in Diuinam substantiam. Orthodoxus. Quae ipse texuisti, retibus captus es. Neque enim signa mystica post sanctificationem recedunt à natura sut. Manent enim in priori substantia, figura & forma: & videri & tangi possunt sicut prius. Intelliguntur autem ea esse quae facta sunt, & creduntur & adorantur, vt quae illa sint, quae creduntur. Confer ergo imaginem cum exemplari: & videbis similitudinem? Oportet enim figuram esse veritati similem. Illud enim corpus priorem habet formam, & figuram & circumscriptionem & vt semel dicam corporis substantiam. 
                     
                        Immortale autem post resurrectionem factum est, & potentius, quàm vt vlla in illud

cadat corruptio, & interitus, sessione
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ad dextram Dei dignatum est: & ab omni creatura adoratur, vt quod appelletur corpu
                              •
                            naturae Domini. Eran. Atqui symbolum mysticum priorem muta
                              •
                            appellationem. Neque enim amplius nominatur, quod vocabatur prius: sed corpus appellatur. Oportet ergo etiam veritatem, Deum, & non corpus vocari. Ortho. Ignarus mihi videris esse. Non enim corpus solùm sed etiam panis vitae nominatur. Ita enim Dominus ipse appellanit. Porro autem ipsum corpus Diuinum corpus appellanus, & viuificum, & Dominicum: docentes non esse commune alicuius hominis, sed Domini nostri Iesu Christi: qui est Deus & homo. Orthodoxus. Say then, the mysticall tokens which are offered to God by the Priestes of God, of what thinges sayest thou they are tokens? Eran. Of the body & bloud of our Lorde. Orth. Of that bodie which truely is? Or of such a bodie as truely is not? Eran. Which truly is. Ortho. Very well. For it behoueth the patterne to be example of the image. For painters doe followe nature: and do paint the images of those thinges which are seene. Eran. It is true. Orth. Then if the Diuine mysteries doe represent that bodie which is a bodie in deede, therefore our Lordes bodie is euen nowe also a-bodie not beeing chaunged into his Diuine nature, but filled with Diuine glorie. Eran. It came well to passe that thou diddest speake of the Diuine mysteries. For euen out of the fame will I shewe vnto thee, that our Lordes bodie is chaunged into another nature. Therefore aunswere vnto my questions. Orth. I will answere. Eran. What doest thou call the gifte, which is offered, before the inuocation of the Priest? Orth. I may not speake it openly, for it is like that some are present, that are not admitted to the mysteries. Eran. Then answere darkely. Orth. That meate which is made of such kinde of seedes. Eran. And how doe we cal the other signe? Ortho. That is also a common name which signifieth a kinde of drinke. Eran. But after sanctification how doest thou call them? Ortho. The bodie and bloud of Christ. Eran. And doest thou beleeue that thou art made partaker of the bodie and bloud of Christ? Orth. So I beleeue. Eran. Therefore euen as the tokens

of the bodie and bloud of our Lord are other things before the inuocation of the priest, and after the inuocation are changed and made other thinges: euen so the Lordes bodie after ye assumption is changed into his Diuine substance. Orth. Thou art taken with thine owne nets which thou haste made. For the mysticall signes after sanctification, do not departe from their nature. For they remain in their former substance, figure, and shape: they may be both seene and handled, euen as before. But they are vnderstoode to be those thinges, which they are made to be, & are beleeued, & reuerenced, as those which are the same thinges that they are beleeued to be. Compare therefore the image with the examples, and thou shalt see the similitude. For the figure ought to be like to the trueth. For that same bodie hath the former shape and fashion, & circumscription, and to speake at once the substance of a bodie. But it is made immortall after his resurrection, and more mightie, then that any corruption or destruction can befall vnto it, and it is made worthie to sit at ye right hand of God: and is worshipped of euerie creature, as that which is called the naturall bodie of our Lorde. Eran. But yet the mysticall token changeth the former name. For it is no more called that it was called before: but it is called the bodie. Therefore the trueth also ought to be called, God, and not a bodie. Orth. Thou seemest vnto me to be ignorant. For it is not only called the body, but also the bread of life. For so our Lorde himselfe called it. But his very bodie, we call a Diuine bodie, & a quickening, and our Lordes bodie: teaching that it is not a common bodie of any man, but of our Lord Iesus Christ, which is both God and man. By this discourse of Theodoretus, you may see both howe syncerely Maister Heskins hath cited his authoritie, and also what the writers minde was both concerning transubstantiation and the carnall manner of presence. The authoritie of Anselmus Bishop of Canterburie, I passe ouer as I haue done alwayes with Burgesses of the lower house. But Maister Heskins affirmeth that the preparation we are commanded

to make for the receipt of the sacrament, & the danger of vnworthie receiuing, do argue the reall presence: for such preparation and perill should not be for receiuing a peece of bread. And if we aunswere, that by faith we receiue Christs bodie & bloud verily, but yet spiritually, he will confute vs by that wee affirme, the fathers to haue receiued Christ as verily as we doe, who yet had not like preparation, nor like punishment for vnworthie receiuing. For their preparation was onely in outwarde things, their punishment onely bodily and temporall.
                  But who is so grosse of vnderstanding, as M. Heskins, that will not acknowledge that the fathers of the olde Testament by that purifying and preparation in bodily things, were admonished that inward & spiritually purenesse was more necessarie? And wheras he sayeth, the vnworthie receiuers of those auncient sacraments were punished only with temporal death, how often doth those threatenings occurre in the lawe: That soule shalbe rooted out from my face: that soule shall perish from his people, he hath broken my couenant &c? Wil ye make vs beleeue that God threateneth onely a temporall and not an eternall death to the contemners of his ordinances? Finally, when the same punishment of condemnation remaineth to them yt receiue baptisme vnworthily, which abydeth them that receiue the Lordes supper vnworthily, how will hee proue a reall presence more in the one sacrament then in the other?
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The seuen and fiftieth Chapter expoundeth this text: For this cause manie are weake and sicke, &c. by Origen & Saint Ambrose.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     Origen is cited in Psalm. 37. Iudicium Dei parui pendis? &c. Settest thou little by the iudgement of God? and despisest thou the church admonishing thee? Thou are not afraide to communicate the bodie of Christ, comming to the Eucharistie, as cleane and pure, as though nothing vnworthie were in thee, and in all these thou thinkest that thou shalt escape the iudgement of God. Thou

doest not remember that which is written: that for this cause many among you are weake & sick, & many are fallen a sleepe. Why are many sicke? Because they iudge not them selues, neither examine themselues, neither do they vnderstand what it is to communicate with the church, or what it is to come to so great and so excellent sacraments. They suffer that, which men that be sicke of agues are wont to suffer, when they eat the meates of whole men, and so cast away them selues.
                  
                  Here Maister Heskins noteth, firste, that Origen calleth the sacrament in plaine wordes the bodye of Christe, therefore it is no breade, figure, or signe, of the bodie of Christ. Secondly, he calleth it mysteries, therefore it is two sacraments, & whole Christ bodie & bloud, is vnder eche kind. Thirdly, sicke men sometimes will eate whole mens meate, therefore euil men receiue the bodie of Christ. These be all as good reasons as yt
                     ▪ comon iest: The staffe standeth in the corner, therefore ye good man is not at home. As for the saying of Origen, we receiue it willingly, for hee speaketh of such receiuers as Saint Paule doth, that is not wicked and reprobate persons, but such as for their offences were chastened of the Lord, that they might not be condemned with ye worlde. But he will presse vs with a more vehement place of Origen: Hom. 13. in 25. Exod. Volo vos admonere, &c. I will admonish you with the examples of our own religion. You that are wont to be present at the diuine mysteries doe knowe howe you receiue the Lords bodie, you giue heede with all warinesse and reuerence, that no little portion of it should fall downe, that no parte of the consecrated gift should fall away, for you beleeue your selues to be guiltie, and you beleeue rightly, if any of it should fall from you through negligence. If then you vse so great warinesse about the conseruing of his bodie, and worthily do vse it, howe do you thinke it is lesse offence to haue neglected the worde of God then his bodie?
                  
                  Maister Heskins noteth two things in this sentence: First, a playne saying for the proclaimer, that without mention of figure, signe or sacramentall bread, hee sayeth the people receiued the bodie of Christe.
                  
                     Secondly, that he commendeth the reuerend vsage of the same. Concerning the first, there is expresse mention of the Diuine mysteries, and not that onely, but then in yt he calleth the sacrament the bodie of Christe, it appeareth both that there is bread, and that it is not so his bodie, as the Papistes do deeme. For whereof be those litle portions, that may fall away, partes? of the breade, or of the bodie of Christe? I thinke he is not so madde to say, that peeces may fall off from Christes holy and naturall bodie. Then it remaineth, that they bee peeces or crommes of breade that may fall away. And seeing that whereof peeces may fall away is called the bodye of Christe, it is manifest that hee meaneth not the naturall bodie of Christe to be corporally present, from which no peeces can fall away. Finally, seeing Origen maketh it as great a fault to neglect the worde of God, as to neglect the sacrament, it followeth that Christe is none otherwise present in the sacrament, then in his worde, & that is spiritually, and after an heauenly manner. As for the other matter, that Origen alloweth the reuerence of the people in handling the sacrament, we also do allowe the same, so farre as neither idolatrie nor superstition be mainteined. And whereas he raileth against vs, for our vsage of that breade and wine, which remaineth after the ministration of the communion, he sheweth his wisedome and charitie. For that, which remaineth on ye table when the ministration is ended, is no more the sacrament then it was before the ministration began: and therefore may be vsed as all other bread, whatsoeuer the Popes decrees are to the contrarie. Now let vs heare what he can say out of S. Ambrose against vs. He citeth him in 1. Cor. 11. Vt verum probaret, &c. That he might proue that there is a iudgement to come of them which receiue the Lords bodie, he doth nowe shewe a certeine image of the iudgement vppon them, which vnaduisedly had receiued the bodie of our Lord, while they were punished with feuers and infirmities, and many dyed, that by them the rest might learne, and being terrified by the example of a fewe, they might be reformed, knowing that to

receiue the bodie of our Lorde negligently, is not left vnpunished, but if his punishment be here deferred, that he shalbe more grieuously handled hereafter, because he hath contemned the example. Here againe M. Heskins chargeth Ambrose to saye, that the sacrament is the naturall bodie of Christe, and that it hath bene receiued of euil men, when hee sayeth neither of both: for he speaketh of them that were faithfull, and that might bee reformed, whereas the wicked reprobates be vncurable. And as for the carnal manner of presence, howe farre he was from it, let his owne wordes in the same place declare. Vppon this texte: You shewe the Lordes death vntill he come. 
                        Quia enim morte Domini liberati sumus, huius rei memores, in edendo & potando, carnem & sanguinem, quę pro nobis oblata sunt, significamus: Because we are deliuered by the death of our Lord, being mindfull of this thing, in eating and drinking, we do signifie his fleshe and bloud, which were offered for vs: And in the same place a little after: Testamentum ergo sanguine constitutum est, quia beneficij Diuini sanguis testis est: in cuius typum nos calicem mysticum sanguinis, ad tuitionem corporis & animae nostrę percipimus. The testament therefore is established by bloud, because his bloud is a witnesse of the diuine benefite, in figure of whose bloude, wee doe receiue the mysticall cuppe to the preseruation both of our bodie and of our soule. These sentences are plaine to declare to any man that wilbe satisfied with reason, that this writer acknowledged, not a carnall, but a spirituall manner of presence. But Maister Heskins will vrge vs with another place that followeth: Deuoto animo & cum timore accedendum ad communionem docet, vt sciat mens reuerentiam se debere ei, ad cuius corpus sumendum accedit: He teacheth vs to come to the communion with a deuoute minde and with feare, that the minde may knowe that it oweth reuerence to him, whose bodie it commeth to receiue.
                  
                  Maister Heskins sayeth, here be plaine termes for the proclaimer: in deede, I woulde wish no playner for the spirituall manner of presence of Christes bodie in the sacrament, because this author sayeth, the minde must

yeeld reuerence to him whose body it cōmeth to receiue. If the minde receiue the body of Christ, it must needs be spiritually, for the minde can receiue nothing corporally. And there followe as plaine termes in the next sentence immediatly: Hoc enim apud se debet iudicare, quia Dominus est cuius in mysterio sanguinem petat, qui est testis beneficij Dei. For this it ought to consider with it selfe, that it is the Lorde whose blood it drinketh in a mysterie, which blood is a witnesse of the benefite of God. In the former sentence the minde receiued the body of Christ, now in this it drinketh the blood of Christ in a mystery, which is a witnesse or assuraunce of the benefite of God, namely the redemption of the world by the blood of his onely sonne our Lorde Iesus Christ.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The eight and fiftie chapter endeth the exposition of the same text by Theophylact and Anselme.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     Theophylact saith nothing but of the temporall punishment that God layeth vppon the contemners of his mysterie. Anselme borrowed his wordes of Ambrose cited in the last chapter. And both Theophylact and Anselme, though great prelates in their lyfe, yet in this accompt of Master Heskins, they are burgesses of the lower house, and liued much about a time.
                  To fill vp the chapter, he citeth certaine miracles reported by Sainte Cyprian Sermone, 5. De lapsis: to shewe howe God punisheth the vnworthie receiuing of the sacrament, although they doe not all shewe it, for the first example is of an infante that coulde not brooke the sacramentall wyne, after it had tasted of breade and wine offred to Idolles, where the negligence of the parentes was rather punished then the vnworthinesse of the child. The whole story is at large set downe in the last chapiter of the second booke.
                  The seconde example is of a woman, who receiuinge vnworthily, was striken with sodaine death.
                  
                     The third of a woman who kept the sacrament in her coffer, and when she woulde with vnworthie handes open the coffer, in which was the holy thing of the Lorde, there sprange out a fire by which she was so terryfied, that she durst not touche it. A iust punishment for her reseruing of that, which should haue bene receiued. The fourth miracle is of a man who presuming to receiue the sacrament vnworthily, coulde neuer eate the holy thing of God nor handle it. For when he had opened his hand, he sawe nothing in it but ashes. This is a marueilous thing saith Master Heskins. Whereby is declared that God is not willing that his holy sacrament shoulde be receiued of a filthie sinner, for so muche as sodeinly it pleaseth him to chaunge it into ashes, he himselfe departinge from it. In deede this is a straunge and miraculous transubstantiation. But if I might be so bolde to aske M. Heskins, what is that which is chaunged, if there be no bread in the sacrament? God he saieth is departed from it, there remaineth the aceidentes onely of breade and wine, and so belike the accidentes are chaunged into ashes. O monstrous mutation.
                  But why doeth not M. Hes. gather by this miracle, that if the sacrament could not be receiued of a wicked man much lesse the body of Christ, and so doeth Cyprian gather of it. Documento vnius ostensum est, Dominum recedere cum negatur, nec immerentibus prodesse ad salutem quod sumitur, cum gratia salutaris in cinerem sanctitate fugiente mutetur. By example of this one it is shewed, that the Lorde doeth depart when he is denyed, neither doeth that which is receiued profit to saluation the vnworthie persons, seeinge the wholsome giftes, the holinesse departing from it, is chaunged into ashes. Cyprian gathereth by the chaunge of the outwarde sacramente, before it was receyued, that Christ departeth from them yt denye him, and is not receyued at all. But M. Hes. would learne forsoth, what one thing is in the sacrament receiued that profiteth & hurteth, he aunswereth it cānot be the bread & wine (for they profit alike to al men) therfore it must needes be the body of Christ: a wholsome conlusion, by whiche the bodye of Christe is made a hurtefull thing:

but if it please him to vnderstand our aunswere, we deny that there is any thing included in the bread or wine, that either profiteth or hurteth to saluation. It is the grace and spirite of God, which worketh as well by this sacrament our spirituall nourishing, as by baptisme our spirituall regeneration. And that, which hurteth the wicked man, is in him selfe, and not in the sacrament, euen his owne wickednesse and detestable presumption, to defile the holy sacraments of God. Wherefore it is diuelish and blasphemous, that M. Heskins affirmeth the body of Christ to be hurtful to any, bicause the vnworthy receiuing of the sacrament, hurteth him that receiueth, by his owne acte, and not by any thing that is receiued.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The nine and fiftieth Chapter treateth of these wordes of Saint Paul. We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones: by Irenaeus and Hilarius.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     Irenaeus is cited Lib. 5. Quomodo carnem negant esse capacem &c. Howe doe they deny that the flesh is able to receiue the gift of God, that is, eternall life, which is nourished with the bloud and body of Christ, and is made a member of him, euen as the Apostle saith, in that Epistle which is to the Ephesians: Bicause we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, speaking this not of any spirituall and inuisible man (for a spirite hath neither flesh nor bones) but of that disposition which is after the nature of man, which consisteth of flesh, and sinewes, and bones, which is nourished of the cup, which is his bloud, and is increased of the bread, which is his body. That both our bodies and soules are nourished vnto eternall life, by eating and drinking the body and bloud of Christe, we doe most willingly confesse and acknowledge. But withall we affirme, that as our bodyes are not naturally nourished and increased with the body of Christ, but spiritually after a diuine manner, so onely spiritually and after a diuine manner, we doe eate and drinke the body and bloud of Christ, and not after a carnall, naturall, or papisticall manner. And this is the plaine sense and meaning of Irenaeus his wordes. As our bodyes

are naturally nourished and increased with the bread and wine of the sacrament, so are our bodyes and soules spiritually nourished and increased vnto eternall life. For M. Heskins him selfe denyeth, that our bodyes are naturally nourished and increased with the body and bloud of Christ, when he saith, The flesh of Christ is not turned into our flesh, which must needes be, if we vnderstand that Irenaeus saith, our flesh is nourished and increased of the body of Christ, but he saith, of the bread which is his body, and of the cup which is his bloud, our flesh is nourished and increased. Therefore there is naturall and very bread in the sacrament, for our flesh can not be nourished and increased by accidentes, euen as certainely, as there is the body and bloud of Christe after a spirituall manner dispensed vnto the faithfull, which are the members of Christ, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. Therefore also the wicked receiue not the body and bloud of Christe, bicause they are no members of his body. That I haue not in this interpretation varied from the mynde of Irenaeus, his plaine words shall testifie, Lib. 4. Cap. 34. 
                        Quemadmodum enim qui est à terra panis percipiens vocationem Dei, iam non communis est, sed Eucharistia, ex duabus rebus constans, terrena & coelesti: sic & corpora nostra percipientia Eucharistiam, iam non sunt corruptibilia, spem resurrectionis habentia. Euen as that bread which is of the earth receiuing the calling of God, is not now comon bread, but the Eucharistie or sacrament of thankesgiuing, consisting of two thinges, an earthly thing and an heauenly thing: so also our bodyes receiuing the Eucharistie, are not nowe corruptible, hauing the hope of resurrection. The place that Maister Heskins citeth out of Cyril in 15. Ioan.
                      
                     Non poterat aliter &c. agreeth in effect with Irenaeus, and is set downe and aunswered in the second Booke and foureteenth Chapter, whither I remit the reader.
                  The places of Hilarius are also aunswered in the 20. and 24. Chapters of the second Booke, yet bicause hee applyeth them to an other text, I will set them downe here also. They are in the eight Booke De trinitate, though

Maister Heskins quote not the place: Eos qui inter patrem & filium &c. I aske them that bring in the vnitie of will betweene the Father and the Sonne, whether Christe be nowe in vs by veritie of nature, or by agreement of will? For if the worde was verily made flesh, and if we doe verily receiue the worde made flesh in the Lords meate, howe is he not to be thought to abide in vs naturally, who being borne man, did both take our nature nowe inseparable vpon him, and also hath admixed the nature of his flesh vnto the nature of eternitie vnder the sacrament of his flesh to be communicated vnto vs? For so we be all one, bicause the Father is in Christe, and Christ is in vs. Whosoeuer therfore shall deny the Father to be naturally in Christ, let him first deny, that he himself is not naturally in Christ, as Christ in him, bicause the Father being in Christe, and Christe in vs, make vs to be one in them. Therefore if Christe haue truely taken vpon him the flesh of our body, and that man which was borne of Marie, was truely Christe, and we doe truely vnder a mysterie receiue the flesh of his body, and by this we shall be one, bicause the Father is in him, and he in vs.
                  
                  
                     Here Maister Heskins cutteth off the conclusion, which is this: Quomodo voluntatis vnitas asseritur, cum naturalis per sacramentum proprietas perfectae sacramentum sit vnitatis? Howe is the veritie of Will maintained, when the naturall propertie by the sacrament, is a sacrament of perfect vnitie? Hilarie reasoneth against the Arrians that saide, God was not naturally or essentially in Christe, but by vnitie of wil, as God is in vs, but he proueth that Christe is naturally ioyned to vs by his incarnation, and doth also communicate his flesh vnto vs by the holy sacrament, which (as hee expoundeth him selfe in the last sentence, that M. Hes. hath cut off) is a sacramēt or mysterie of our perfect vnitie with Christ. Therefore he doth not simply say, yt we do naturally eat ye flesh of Christ, but vnder a mysterie, vnder a sacrament, by which he meaneth, yt we doe not eate the flesh of Christ carnally, but spiritually, not after a corporall manner, but after a spirituall maner. Finally he saith, that Christe is so naturally in vs, as we are naturally in Christ, but we are onely spiritually in Christ, therefore Christ is onely spiritually in vs. For naturally

as he vseth it for essentially, is not contrarie to spiritually. But he alledgeth another place of Hilarie, where he affirmeth, that Christ is in vs both carnally and corporally: Haec idcirco a nobis commemorata sunt &c. These thinges are for this cause spoken of vs, bicause the heretiques falsely affirming an vnitie of Will onely to be betweene the Father and the Sonne, did vse the example of our vnitie with GOD, as though we being vnited to the Sonne, and by the same to the Father, onely by obedience and will of religion, no propertie of naturall communion should be giuen by the sacrament of his naturall flesh and bloud, seing that both by the honor of the sonne of God giuen to vs; and by the sonne of God carnally abiding in vs, and we being corporally and inseparably vnited in him, the mysterie of the true and naturall vnitie is to be declared. By the words of corporally and carnally, he meaneth essentially, as he did before by the word naturally, both bicause Christe tooke our nature verily vpon him, and also doth communicat vnto vs by the same, his eternitie. And that he meaneth not carnally and corporally as the Papistes doe, it is manifest by that he saith, we are not onely corporally, but also inseparably vnited in him. For there, corporall coniunction maketh not an inseparable vnion, bicause they say, that Christ is as naturally; carnally, and corporally vnited to the wicked, from whome he is separated, as to the godly, wherefore it is left of necessitie, that this naturall, carnall, corporall, or essentiall dwelling of Christe in vs, is not after a naturall manner, but after a wonderfull manner, not after a fleshly but after a spirituall manner, not after a bodily, but after a diuine and heauenly manner. To conclude, howe plaine these places be for the proclamer, and plaine against Maister Heskins the exclamer, let the readers iudge. The proclamer doth admit these sayings according to the minde of the writers, and not according to Maister Heskins falsifications and gloses.
               
               
                  The Sixtieth Chapter treateth vpon this text of S. Paule to the Hebruer: We haue an altar &c.
                        Hesk.
                     
                  
                  
                     The text is written Heb. 13. We haue an altar, of which is it not lawful for them to eat, which serue in the tabernacle. By which he meaneth, that none can be partakers of the sacrifice of Christe, that remaine in the ceremoniall obseruation of the Leuiticall lawe. But Maister Heskins vnderstandeth it, that we haue the body of Christe in the sacrament, of which it is not lawfull for any Iewe abiding in Moses lawe to eate. And this he wil proue by Isichius and Theophylact. Isichius he citeth in Leuit. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Omnem sanguinem &c. He commaunded all the rest of the bloud of the calfe to be powred out about the foote of the altar of the burnt offering, which is in the tabernacle of witnesse. Let vs againe vnderstand, the altar of the burned sacrifice, to be the body of Christ. For as he is the Priest and the sacrifice, so he is the altar. And knowe that S. Paule doth vnderstand the intelligible altar to be the body of Christ: for he saith we haue an altar, of which they haue no power to eate, which doe serue in the tabernacle, that is to say, the body of Christ. For of that it is not lawful for the Iewes to eate M. Heskins would haue it plaine, that he meaneth the reall presence of Christes body in the sacrament, when neither the Apostle, nor Isichius speake one worde of the sacrament, but of the spirituall participation of the sacrifice of Christes death, for he saith, Christ is the Priest, the sacrifice, and the altar. Therefore hee speaketh of that sacrifice that Christe him selfe did offer, not of that sacrifice, which the Papistes do imagine their blasphemous Priestes do offer. And whereas M. Heskins trifleth of M. Hoopers glose of edere and credere, that, to eate is to beleeue, although to eat the flesh of Christe be the effect of faith, bicause that by faith we eate Christ, yet may we more aptly say, to eate is to beleeue, then the Papistes say, that men may eat Christ which doe not beleeue at all. And it is a very childish sophisme, out of which M. Heskins woulde gather, that if to eate be to beleeue, and it be not lawfull for the Iewes to eate Christe, it is not lawfull for them to beleeue in Christ. For continuing in Iudaisme they can no more beleeue in Christ, then they can eate the flesh of Christe. But contrariwise by their doctrine, if the sacrament be giuen

to a Iewe, that is no Christian, yet he eateth the body of Christ as he that beleeueth in Christe. The testimonie of Theophylact, although it make little for M. Hesk. yet as alwayes before, so nowe at the last I will refuse to examine, bicause I will not yeeld to his authoritie, he being a late writer. But M. Hesk. noteth vpon ye Apostles words, We haue an altar, that ye Church hath but one altar, which is the body of Christ, and that is very true, of the true Catholique Church: but the hereticall and schismaticall Church of Rome hath many thousand altars, which they can not say are all one altar, although they cauill that their infinite multitudes of hostes, are one sacrifice of Christes body. Therefore the Church of Rome is not the Catholique Church of Christe, by his owne reason. And the saying of Hierome, which he citeth, Lib 2. in Hose. Cap. 8. and wresteth against vs, doth very aptly condemne him selfe and his felow Papistes for heretiques: Vnum esse altare &c. The Apostle teacheth, that there is in the Church but one altar, and one faith, & one baptisme, which the heretiques forsaking haue set vp to themselues many altars, not to appease God, but to increase the multitude of sinnes, therefore they are not worthie to receiue the lawes of God, seeing they haue despised them, which they haue receiued before. And if they shall speake any thing out of the scriptures, it is not to be compared to the words of God, but to the senses of Ethnikes. These men do offer many sacrifices, and eate the flesh of them, forsaking the only sacrifice of Christ, nor eating his flesh▪ whose flesh is the meat of the beleeuers, whatsoeuer they do counterfeting the order and custom of the sacrifices, whether they giue almes, whether they promise chastitie, whether they counterfet humilitie, and with feigned flatterings, deceiue simple persons, the Lord will receiue nothing of such sacrifices. We forsake not the only sacrifice of Christ once offred, but our whole trust is in the merits of that sacrifice, therefore we set vp no newe altars. The Papistes set vp an other sacrifice, and therefore other altars. If our allegation & interpretation of ye scriptures may not be warranted by the spirite of God, iudging in the same scriptures by other textes, that are plaine and euident: we desire not that any man shall receiue them, as the Papistes

doe, whatsoeuer the Popish Church doth define, though it be contrarie to the expresse word of God. And although wee admitte not that grosse and carnall manner of Christes body in that sacrament that they doe hold, yet do we eate the flesh of Christ verily after that maner, which the Papistes themselues do confesse to be the only profitable eating thereof, namely that which is spirituall. What our workes be, I referre them to the iudgement of God, wee boast not of them. And although fasting for merite bee iustly punishable by statute, yet godly and Christian fasting is not cleane exiled out of our Church, though not so often perhaps vsed, as meere it were it should. Our doctrine of fasting is sound and agreeable to the word of God, and therefore we dare iustifie it, our doing wee will not iustifie, nor excuse our faultes, but humbly submitte our selues to his iudgement, who knoweth our hearts, of whome we craue pardon for our offences, and grace to keepe his commandements. But now to conclude this matter, I will produce one testimonie of Gelasius an ancient Bishop of Rome, which I thinke shuld be of great weight with al Papists, if they giue in deed such reuerence either to yt See, or to antiquitie as they pretend. And thus he writeth Cont. Eusychet. Certè sacramēta, quae sumimus corporis, & sanguinis Christi, diuina res est: propter quod & per eadē, diuinę efficimur consortes naturae: & tamen esse non desinit substantia & natura panis & vini▪ Et certè imago vel similitudo corporis & sanguinis Christi in actione mysteriorū celebratur. Satis ergo nobis euidenter ostēditur, hoc in ipso Domino Christo sentiendū, quod in eius imagine, ꝓfitemur, celebramus & sumimꝰ. vt sicut hęc in diuinā trā feūt spiritu sancto ꝑficiente substantiā ꝑmanent tamen in suę ꝓprietate naturae: sic illud ipsū mysteriū principale, cuius nobis officientiā veritatem
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            veraciter repręsentat, ex ijs quibus conflat, propriè permanentibus, vnū Christū, quoniam integrū verū
                           
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            permanere demonstret. Certainly, the sacraments of the body and bloud of Christ which we receiue, are a diuine thing: & therefore by them we are made partakers of the diuine nature, and yet the substance & nature of the bread and wine ceasseth not to be. And surely, an image or similitude of the body

and bloud of Christ, is celebrated in ye action of ye mysteries. Therfore it is shewed vnto vs euidently ynough, that we must iudge ye same thing euen in our Lord Christ him selfe, which we professe, celebrate, & receiue, in yt which is an image of him: yt as by the working of the holy Ghost, they passe into a diuine substance, & yet abide stil in ye propertie of their owne nature: euen so ye same principal mysterie doth shew, that one Christ abideth whole and true, whose efficiencie & truth, it doth truly represent vnto vs, those thinges of which he consisteth properly still remaining. Thou seest, gentle reader, yt this auncient Bishop of Rome, first doth vtterly ouerthrowe transubstantiation, when he saith, that the substance & nature of the bread & wine do remaine still in the sacraments, although they be a diuine thing. Secondly, that he excludeth ye carnall maner of presence, when he saith, we celebrate & receiue an image and similitude of the body & bloud of Christ in ye sacraments, & lastly, yt he aduoucheth ye spiritual & diuine maner of presence of Christ, when he saith, yt the sacramēts are turned into a diuine substance, which he meaneth not of ye substance of ye deitie, but of ye heauenly & wonderful manner of presence, by which Christ vouchsafeth to giue vnto his faithfull members, his very body and bloud in a mysterie. And yt the Church of Rome in much later times did not acknowledge this carnall presence, it shal appeare euen out of the Popes own Canon law, euen in ye decrees. 
                        De Consecrat. distinct. 2. Cap. Hoc est. Coelestis panis qui Christi caro est, suo modo nominatur corpus Christi, cum reuera sit sacramentū corporis Christi. Vocatur
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ipsa īmolario carnis, que sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi passio, mors, crucifixio, nō rei veritate, sed significā
                           te mysterio. The heauenly bread which is the flesh of Christ, after a peculiar maner, is called the body of Christe, when as in very deed it is ye sacramēt of the body of Christ. And euen ye oblation of his flesh, which is done by ye hands of ye priest, is called the passion, death, & crucifying of Christ, not in truth of ye thing, but in a signifying mysteri. Those words which are borrowed out of August. into ye decrees, the glose doth thus vnderstand, Coeleste sacraementū, quod verè repraesentat Christi carnem, dicitur corpus Christi sed impropriè.

Vnde dicitur, suo modo sed non in veritate, sed significante mysterio
                              •
                            Vt sit sensus: vocatur corpus Christi, id est significat. The heauenly sacrament, which doth truly represent ye flesh of Christ, is called the body of Christ, but vnproperly. Therefore it is saide to be: after a peculiar manner, but not in truth of the thing, but in a signifying mysterie. So that the sense is: it is called the body of Christe, that is, it doth signifie the body of Christe. If these testimonies, that are taken out of the Romish Bishops owne writings, decrees, and gloses, that are so plaine will not satisfie the Papistes, that their doctrine of transubstantiation and carnall presence is neither true, ancient, nor Catholike, it is in vaine to spend more wordes with them, as with men that are obstinate, and will not be satisfied with any truth contrarie to their presumed heresie.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hesk.
                     The one and sixtieth Chapter maketh a recapitulation of that, that is done in this worke.
                  
                     
                        Fulk.
                     Seeing this Chapter containeth no argument or authoritie to defend his cause, but only rehearseth what he fantasieth, that he hath brought in other places throughout all his booke for the maintenance of the same, I referre it to the indifferent readers iudgement, what I haue done in this breefe confutation of the same. And here I conclude this acte of repeale, that notwithstanding this bill offered to the Parleament by Tho. Hesk. in the lower house hath many friends, so that the greater part of voyces, if the house were diuided, might seeme to ouercome the better: yet for as much as in the higher house, the greatest number haue spoken directly against his bill, and no one lord of that house, which liued within the compasse of 600. yeres of the challenge, hath giuen his voyce to allowe it, not only the pretensed acte of Parleament set forth by the said Tho. Hesk. is proued to be false, forged, & counterfet, but also the bill that he hath put in to be considered, is vtterly reiected & condemned, & spurned out of the house.
               
            
            GOD BE PRAYSED.
         
         
            
            A CONFVTATION OF AN IDOLATROVS TREATISE OF NICOLAS SANDER Doctor in Diuinitie, which mainteyneth the making and honouring of Images, by W.F. Doctour in Diuinitie.
            ECCLESIASTIC. 45.
            The memoriall of the beloued of God is blessed, that is to say, any thing that maketh vs to remember him that is beloued of God, is worthie of praise and honour.
                  Sander.
               
            
            
               A Doctour like interpretation:
                  Fulke.
                and a pithy argument, whereupon I may conclude: The idols that Salomon made are things that make vs remember Salomon, who was the beloued of God, and so called of God him selfe: therefore the idols were worthie of prayse and honour.
            The preface conteining a breefe declaration, which is the true Churche.
                  Sander.
               
            
            Maister Sander taking in hand so absurde and wicked an argument, as is the defence of idolatrie,
                  Fulk.
                or honouring of Images, thought good to present it in the best vessel that he had, which is the painted boxe of the Churche: which that he might the rather commend to his countrimen, he hath taken vpon him to describe it, both inside and outside, as he saith, by certeine knowen truethes in number no lesse then 112. which after they haue been all well vewed and sufficiently considered, I doubt not, but to the reasonable and indifferent Reader, shall appeare nothing else but a faire coloured, but yet an empty

vessell. I will followe his diuisions, and where I finde any trueth I will confesse it without wrangling, where in steede of trueth he offereth falshode, I will breefely confute it.
            1 The first I graunt, that Christe hath alwayes had and alwayes shall haue a Church on earth, out of which there is no saluation. This Churche consisteth of men whiche beleeue in him, haue their faith sealed and confirmed by outward sacramentes.
            2 The Church is the kindome of Christe, the Citie of God, and the kingdome of heauen, wherein Christ shall reigne for euer.
            3 The kingdome is spread more largely, and gouerned more prudently, then any earthly kingdome euer was, euen to the endes of the worlde, & to continue world without end.
            4 Notwithstanding all this, to say that the Churche, or this kingdome of Christe was hidden any one houre from the eyes of the worlde, is not to make it more obscure then any earthly kingdome euer was as Maister Sander doeth affirme: for the glorie of this Kingdome whiche is spirituall neuer did, nor shall appeare to the wicked of this worlde. The Churche is an article of our faith, and faith is of those thinges whiche are not seene, Hebru. 11. but with spirituall eyes. Therfore the exaltation of the Lordes hill that Esaie 2. and Micheas 4. doe speake of, is of a spirituall aduauncement, and a citie built vpon an hill, is euerie true minister of Gods worde. Matthewe 5. and not the whole Churche. Finally the glorie and ioye that Esaie 60. promiseth vnto the Church, and her happie enlargement among the nations, Cap. 61. proue no worldly pompe or greatnesse, to be seene with carnall eyes, but is ment of the ioyfull and comfortable addition of the Churche of the Gentiles, vnto the Churche of the Iewes. For otherwise these wordes could not be verified of all wicked men: All that see them shall knowe them, that they are the blessed seede, which the Lorde hath blessed.
            
            
               5 The cheefe meane whereby the Church is so clearely seene, and so glorious in the sight of men, is that Christ being the true light, hath cōmunicated his brightnesse to his Apostles, sayng you are the light of the worlde. A citie built vpon an hill can not be hidden. Neither do men light a candel and put it vnder a bushel, but vpon a candlestick, that it may giue light to al them, that are in the house. But this brightnesse is heauenly and spirituall, not worldly and carnall, to be seene of the children of light, not of the blind bussards of the worlde.
            6 The Churche dyed not when the Apostles dyed, for Bishops and Pastours succeeded in their place, as lightes set vpon the candlestickes, which are the seuerall Churches: Apoc. 1.
            7 The light and glorie of Gods Churche, commeth chiefely from the Bishops and Pastours thereof, I meane from their heauenly doctrine, not from their persons, as Maister Sander perhaps would insinuate. And the hystorie of the Church is described by Eusebius, Socrates Theodore, &c. by the doctrine vttered in preaching, writings, and consent in councels, and doings, and sufferings of the Elders of the Churches, and not altogether or cheefely, by their knowen gouernement, as Maister Sander affirmeth: As for example Eusebius sheweth the doctrine of Clement out of his writing, for the allowance of marriage, who affirmeth yt the Apostles were married & begot children, Lib. 3. Cap. 30. Socrates sheweth that, Spiridion a Bishop of Cypres in time of his Bishopricke, of great humilitie kept sheepe Lib. 4. Cap. 12. Sozomenus saith he had a wife and children, and sheweth his iudgement for eating flesh on a fasting day, accounting him no Christian that would refuse it, Lib. 1. Cap, 11. Finally although some Churches haue ben known by their Pastors and Bishops, yet haue there bene infinite Churches known to be in the worlde, whose Bishops & Pastours are altogether vnknowen. And although some heretical and Schismatical companies, haue bene knowen by their heades, yet not all, for the Acephali were so called, because they had no head,

the Anthropomorphites also were rustical Monkes or Eremites in Aegypt, vnder no head of their owne, but the Bishop of Alexandria, which was a Catholike. Niceph. Lib. 13. Cap 10.
            8 Although the Churche of Christ ceassed not at the end of the first fiue or sixe hundreth yeares, nor the glory of Christes kingdome was euer darkened: yet a greate number of the Bishops and pastors of the visible Church, began then to be dimme, and some altogether darke, because they lighted not their candels at the word of God, the onely true light, shyning in the darke, but declined to the inuentions of men and doctrine of diuels according to the prophesie, of Saint Paule, 2. Thess. 2. of the apostasie and departing from the faith, 1. Tim. 4. towarde the comming & reuelation of Antichrist. Neither is it true, that M. Sander saith, that after the first 600. yeares, the Church was spread into mo countries, then it was before, but the contrarie. For Mahomet soone after peruerted the greatest parte of the worlde, whereas Affrica, long before was ouerrunne, and Christianitie spoyled by the Vandales, which were either Heathens, or Arrians. Notwithstanding, some small countries haue beene since that time turned to the Christian profession. And as it is true that Pastors and Doctors must still be to the end of the worlde in the Church, and Christ neuer forsaketh the same: so is it false, that Popish Bishops, & Priestes, which either were ignorant or altogether negligent in feeding and teaching the Churche with the foode and doctrine of Gods worde, whereof Saint Paule spake Ephesi. 4. or taught the doctrine of Diuels in steede thereof, be those Pastours, and Doctours by whome the preaching of the Gospell is continued, though they sitte in the same places, where sometime, the true teachers satt, euen as Antichrist their head, sitteth in the Temple of GOD, which is the proper place of Christe. Neither is the credite of such late writers, as account them for successors of the Apostles and godly pastours and teachers, sufficient to authorise them for such in deed, when their whole life

and doctrine is contrarie to the writings of the Apostles, and those auncient godly Pastors & Doctors.
            9 We say not, that the Church of Christ was knowen for the first 
                  •
               00. yeres after Christ only or chiefely by ye Bishops & Pastors therof, but by their doctrine agreable to the word of God. And therefore it is sufficient ground for vs, to deny the later rout, that professeth not ye same doctrine, to be the church of Christ. The succession of persons or places, without the continuance of the same true doctrine, can no more defende the Pope & poperie, then it could defend Caiphas & Sadduceisme. For Caiphas a Sadducei, which denyed the resurrection, coulde more certeinly declare his personall and locall successiō from Aaron, then the Pope can from Peter.
            10 I haue proued before, that it is false, which Master Sander againe sayeth to be true, that Eusebius and other writers point foorth the church of 500. yeres, onely or chiefely by Bishops which ruled in Rome, Antioche, Alexandria, &c. The doctrine & actes of those Bishops agreeable to the scriptures,
                  The later church compared with the former.
                is their description & not their personall or locall succession, as it was accompted in the latter times, when they had nothing else to commende their counterfet Bishops, being in life and doctrine contrarie to the worde of God, & the testimonie of the primitiue church. And where he sayeth noting in ye margent, August. Ep. 165. that in olde time they were knowen to be heretikes, which departed from the knowen companie of Bishops & Pastors, agreeing in one faith, &c. it is verie true, but then this faith was proued to be true, not onely by successions of Bishops, but by the holye scriptures, as the same Augustine sayeth in the same place: 
                  Quanquam nos non tam de istis documentis praesumamus, quàm de scripturis sanctis. Although wee do not presume so much of those documentes, as of the holie scriptures. To conclude, all practises and councels, that are contrary to the holie Scriptures, were then refused,
                  Practises Councels.
                euen as they be nowe. Cyprian refused the practise of ministring the communion with water, because it was contrarie

to the scripture. Augustine refused the practise of Cyprian, and the Councell of Carthage▪ for rebaptizing them that were baptized by heretikes: and for the same cause, our church refuseth the Masse, the Laterane, and the Tridentin councels, without daunger of schisme or heresie.
            11 The vniuersall church is a spiritual collection, of many members into one bodie, whereof Christe is the onely head, both in heauen and earth, as the Apostle sayeth Eph. 3. Cor. 15. The vnitie hereof is mainteyned by following the direction of his worde, and his holye spirite. The order of particuler churches, is mainteined by the seuerall gouernement of them. But their whole church, although it be like an armie of men well sett in arraye, yet can it haue no one chiefe Capteine in earth to direct it, but hee that is omnipotent, and fitteth in heauen, not onely to ouerlooke it, but to rule and order it. For no mortall man can looke into all places, knowe all cases, prouide against all mischiefes, nor giue ayde in all dangers.
            12 Therefore Peter was none such: and although Pascere be both to feede and rule, yet it is to rule like a Shepeheard, and not like an Emperour. Neither were the sheepe by Christe committed to Peter more then to the other, because hee loued more then the other, but Peter was charged as hee woulde by his forwardnesse shewe more zeale and loue then the rest, so to employe the same to the feeding of Christes flocke. And whereas Maister Sanders quoteth Chrysostome in Ioan Hom. 87. I knowe not wherefore, except it were to shewe the prerogatiue of Peter aboue the rest. You shall heare what his iudgement was of Peters authoritie, notwithstanding all his prerogatiue, in Act. Apost. Hom. 3. Iam & illud considera, quòd & Petrus agit omnia ex communi discipulorum sententia, nihil authoritate sua, nihil cum imperio. Nowe consider this also howe euen Peter doth all things by the common decree of the disciples, nothing by his owne authoritie, nothing by commaundement, or

with rule.
            13 Therefore it is false which Maister Sander affirmeth, that the gouernement of the faithfull was committed to one aboue all other: for it did as well perteine to euery Apostle, as to Peter to feede the sheepe of Christe. And when distinction for orders sake was made in the ministerie by God, Peter acknowledged the Apostleship of the circumcision, which was neither the greatest nor the chiefest parte of the church, to be allotted to him Gal. 2. vers. 7. Therefore, although there be one flocke of Christ vpon earth, yet Christe is the onely one shepeheard thereof,
                  One shepeheard.
                as he affirmeth Iohn. 10. vers. 16 Although hee haue many seruauntes that ouersee his sheepe, as they bee scattered in many places, whose collection into one flocke, as it is not locall, nor visible, so they must needes haue an almightie, and inuisible shepeheard to gather them together, and no mortal man were he neuer so excellent, least of all the Pope the vilest man aliue.
            14 For which cause, although euery particuler flocke must haue one Pastour,
                  A perticular flock.
                which is not necessarie, for some may haue more then one, yet cannot the whole church militant on earth,
                  Church militant.
                haue one earthly man to be head therof. And albeit M. Sander woulde proue it particuler, in respect of the whole number of the elect, yet is it vniuersall in respect of all perticuler congregations on earth, at one time, and so vniuersall, as no singular man can possibly knowe it, much lesse gouerne it.
            15 And therefore although Christe the vniuersall shepeheard wil suffer no particuler church to continue without a seruaunt to ouersee it vnder him, yet will hee committ to no seruaunt any charge, which is impossible for him to execute, as is the ouersight of the Catholike or vniuersall Church vppon earth. And here note the impudencie of the Papistes, which affirme that their particular Synagogue of Rome, is the Catholike or vniuersall Church, and yet denye, the whole church of

Christ militant on earth, to be the Catholik churche.
            16 It shall neuer be proued, that Peter was made by Christe the firste sheapheard ouer all the sheepe of Christ on the earth, otherwise then as all the Apostles were.
            And yet if that were true, and that which Maister Sander inferreth also, that one chiefe sheapeheade shoulde be like Peter, as one that executeth the same office that Peter did: yet it followeth by no reason of consequence, that he concludeth, that all other bishops are excluded from this office, sauing, he that occupyeth his place at Rome, if euer he had any there. For he that were moste like to Peter in giftes, meete to execute such an office, were by all reason more meete to succeede Peter, then euery vnlearned asse, & wicked helhound, that is aduaunced into that chaire of Rome, where Peter is supposed to haue sitt.
            17 Nowe seeing Peter is sayd, first to haue sit at Antioche, and afterward to haue remoued to Rome, what reason is there seeing his supremacie was personall, that his successoures of Antioche after his death shoulde not claime it, as well as they of Rome, if it went by right of succession? For change of place can make no change of right. And the title of Antioche is the elder, therfore the better. Except Master Sander will say, that Rome hath it by his legacie, and then he must shewe vs S. Peters last will and testament.
            18 And whereas he sayeth, it is well knowen, that S. Peter dyed at Rome, it is not so well knowen, as yt Christ dyed at Ierusalē, wherfore ye Bishop of Ierusalem should more reasonably claime this supremacie & vicarship vnto Christ. And that Peter writeth from Babylon, it is an argument he was not at Rome, but in Babylon of Aegypt, although S. Hierom thinketh he was at Rome, and calleth Rome Babylon as the seat of Antichrist, which M Sander is content to take, yt he might haue some colour of Scripture, to proue yt S. Peter was at Rome. Although it be such, as may serue to proue Rome to be the seate of Antichrist, but not the chiefe seat of the Church of

Christ. Apoc. 19.
            19 It is true that among al countries and cities, none was so notable as the citie and people of Rome, because of the seat of the Empire that was there, in which respecte also the churche of Rome was muche noted and reuerenced, so long as it continued in synceritie. But the bishops thereof, haue not bene so notable as many other of other cities. What one bishop of Rome like to Athanasius of Alexandria, Chrysostome of Constantinople, Ambrose of Millain? Yea poore Augustine of Hippo, or Osius of Corduba in their times, or before their times? And whereas hee saieth, no places so conuenient for the head of Christes churche to be setled in, it is altogether false, because it was not conuenient, that the heade of Christs churche should be setled there, where Antichrist shoulde sit, lest the one should be taken for the other.
            20 And although it were graunted that Italie is the fittest place for worldly Empire, yet it foloweth not that it is aptest for spirituall gouernement. For in all worldly respects, the land of Promise far excelleth Italie, which now is the most slauishe countrie in Europe, being parted into so many seignories almost, as there be great cities, as Machiauill doth confesse.
            21 Although at somtime, no citie in Italie was so notable as Rome, yet was it not so alwayes, since Christes birth, for it hath bene diuers times taken and destroyed by the Gotthes, and for many yeares left vnhabited. And although it was most notable in worldly glory, yet that was most vnmeete for to set vp the kingdom of Christ, & when it was in greatest glory it did alwaies withstand it. Therefore Ierusalem in the lande of promise, if God woulde haue chosen one citie for his vicare to sit in, had bene in all respectes the meetest place in the worlde.
            22 That he saith no Apostle was more glorious then S. Peter, it is vntrue, for S. Paule affirmeth that he was equall with him, and the rest, & laboured more then they all. 2. Cor. 11. vers. 5. & 1. Cor. 15. vers. 10. But admit that Peter was the chiefe, yet it followeth not, which M.S. affirmed,

that the bishop of Rome hath the most notable predecessor or founder of his chaire, that euer anye bishop had. For the bishop of Antioche, hath the same by his owne confession, and the elder title.
            23 Where he saith that the church of Rome, was also founded by S. Paule, it is a manifest vntruth: for ye church was there before S. Paule euer came there, as it is plaine by his Epistle to the Romaines, and before Peter also came thither, as it is plaine by the Epistle to the Galath. cap. 2. And therefore seeing the church of Rome was first founded, neither by Peter nor Paule, she hath nothing to brag of their preheminence, which many churches planted by the Apostles, might with more equitie challenge. As for the bequething of Peter and Paule, that hee speaketh of, when he can shew vs a copie of their Testament, we wil shape him an other answere.
            24 That there were many martyrs and confessours at Rome in the primitiue churche, the cause was the great multitude of people in that church, by reason of the frequens of the imperial city. But this proueth no prerogatiue of ancestrie ouer other churches. That so many of ye first bishops suffred death for Christs cause (although it may be doubted of ye number of 30. & vpwarde, because no auncient writer doth testifie it) it was by reason they were neerest vnto ye greatest persecutors, which were the emperors of Rome. But this proueth not ye supremacy of ye bishop of Rome, before the bishops of other cities, who haue likewise suffred death for Christ.
            25 It is vtterly false yt he affirmeth yt no faithful people of any citye had euer so notable witnes, as the church of Rome of S. Paul, your faith is preached in ye whol world. In which translation he falsifieth ye words of S. Paule, for he saith your faith is reported, or commended in all the world, not yt it was preached, for thē an vnsufficient faith should haue bin preached, which needed the iustification of yt Epistle. And whereas M.S. saith, yt Cyprian saith, the Apostle spake it prophetically, not onely in respect of their faith present, but also of thē yt should folow, it is to

smal purpose, except M.S. can proue yt the Romanes now do hold the same faith which S. Paul, & S. Cyprian commended in his felow bishop Cornelius and the Romanes of his time. And as for as notable, and a more notable testimonie of an other people then ye Romanes, read the beginning of the 2. Thessalon. capit. 1.1. Collossians, cap. 1.
            26 Whereas he saith that S. Hiero. proueth the faith of the Romaines which Saint Paule praised, to haue remayned in his dayes, because none other people did so deuoutly visite the sepulchres of the martyres, which the protestantes counte for infidelitie, rather then faith, he sheweth himselfe to bee an impudent wrangler. The words of Hierom be these, In prooem. lib. 2. in Epist. ad Gal. 3. Vultis scire ô Paula & Eustochiū, quomodo Apostolus vnam quā
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      prouinciā suis proprietatibus denotarit? Vs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      hodie cadem vel virtutum vestigia permanent vel errorum. Romanae plebis laudatur fides. Vbi alibi tanto studio & frequentia, ad ecclesias & martyrum sepulchra concurritur? vbi sic ad similitudinem caelestis tonitrui Amen reboat, & vacua idolorū templa quatiuntur? Non quod aliam habeant Romani fidem, nisi hanc 
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      omnes Christi ecclesie, sed quod deuotio in eis maior sit & simplicitas ad credendum. Rursum facilitatis & superbię arguuntur. Will you know, ô Paula & Eustochium, how the Apostle hath described euerye prouince in their owne properties? Euen to this daye, the steppes remaine either of vertues or of errors. The faith of the Pope of Rome is praised. Where is there such concourse any where els, with so great desire and frequence, vnto the churches and sepulchres of martyres? Where doth Amen so rebound like to heauenly thunder, & the emptye temples of Idoles, so shaken with it? Not that the Romaines haue any other faith, but the same which al ye churches of Christ haue, but because in them is greater deuotion and simplicitie to beleeue, likewise they are reproued for too much facility & pride. These words declareth yt Hierome speaketh of no Popish pilgrimage, but of resorting to the churches, which were builded vpō the sepulchres of ye martyrs, therefore called ye memories

of the martyrs. Secōdly, what he meaneth by faith, namely, deuotion & simplicitie of beleeuing & not doctrine. Thirdly, that the Romaines reteined aswell ye vices as the vertues of their auncesters. But nowe they reteine onely the vices.
            27 The Papists liue vnder a visible head, but ye same is Antichrist, the protestants vnder an inuisible head, which is Christ. The Pope fitteth in Rome the mother of al abhominations, hauing nothing to brag of, but the vertues of such as haue dwelled there before him, and no good qualitie of his owne. Yet the title of vniuersall shepherd M.S. denieth vnto him, although he most arrogantly do vsurpe it. Howbeit properly M.S. saith, he ought not to haue it.
            28 Therfore the bishops of Rome before Gregory the first, refused the same title as prophane & proude, which belongeth onely to Christ. Yet the councel of Chalcedō offred it to Pope Leo the first, but he refused it as slanderous. This being cōfessed by M S. chuse whether you wil say the councell did erre in offring the same, or Pope Leo in refusing, or the latter Popes in vsing the same.
            29 Gregorie the first in deede, tooke vppon him the humble style of the seruaunt of the seruaunts of God, as M.S. saith, but his successors, vsing that title for a formality, hauing bene content to be called Lord of Lords, and God aboue all gods, and our lord God the Pope, and the most holiest, and an hundreth more blasphemous titles, beside treading on the Emperours necke, & such like examples of prophane pride, as Nero, Heliogabalus, no Dioclesian euer shewed the like.
            30 It is not to be proued that he saith, there were 4. Patriarks at the beginning, nor that the Pope of Rome was chiefe. For the councell of Nice, Canon 6. doth make the patriarke of Alexandria, and the rest equall with the bishop of Rome. Although afterward ye bishops of Rome, as they were cōmonly ambitious, when persecution was staied, by prerogatiue of the imperiall citie, challenged a kinde of primacie, yet not of authoritie, but of order.

And whereas he sayeth, other Patriarches were preferred in respect of the affinitie they had with S. Peter, it is false: for the Patriarch of Constantinople was placed next to him of olde Rome, because Constantinople was newe Rome, & the imperiall cittie Concil. Constantinop. Cap. 2. or after Garanza. Cap. 5. That the Pope did erect patriarchal Seas at Aquileia, & at Senis, it was not for that the other were infected with heresie, but that they refused to acknowledge his Antichristian authoritie, bought of Phocas the murtherer, by Boniface the third: for if his authoritie had bene so great, as is pretended, he would haue deposed those hereticall bishops, and set vp Catholikes in their places, rather then to haue spoyled the seates of their dignities for euer, for the fault of the bishops.
            31 It is false yt he sayeth, neuer any bishop was so much esteemed as the bishop of Rome, for Athanasius of Alexandria, was more esteemed of the godly, then any bishop of Rome, in his time. Likewise when the Sea of Rome vsurped prerogatiue, it was reiected by the Councell of Africa, which decreed that none should appeale thither & discouered the counterfaiting of the bishops of Rome. Con. Mileuit. Cap. 22. & Conc. Aphrican. Ep. ad Coelestin. Likewise it was reiected of the church of Alexandria, whereof great dissention arose, Con Affric. Cap. 68. That Irenaeus, Tertullian, Optatus, Hierom, Augustine, Eugenius, Theodoretus poynted to the church of Rome, as to a witnesse of trueth, it proueth her clearnesse from those heresies in their tymes, but giueth her none authoritie ouer other churches, nor yet maketh her a rule of trueth to all churches, for then there needed none other arguments against heretikes, but the authoritie of the church of Rome, whereas the testimonie of that church was one of the weakest reasons they vsed, and that least preuailed.
            32 That he affirmeth other cities to haue chosen Bishops of their owne tongue, it is also true of Rome. For he cannot shewe one Pope yt was ignorant of the Latine tongue, while it was spoken in Rome. And not many,

I thinke not one ignorant of the Italian tongue, since that time, although they were borne in other countries. Besides that it is the fondest reason that euer I heard, one or other alledge, that the Popes haue bene borne in diuerse countries, therefore they are supreme heade of the church, more then other bishops that were bishops in the countries where they were born: and yet more foolish that speaking of Bishops of other tongues, hee nameth so manye places all of one tongue: As Syna, Antioche, Galile, Ierusalem, Bethelem, which are all of one tongue: Campania, Thuscia, Aquileia, Pisa, Genua, Bononia, Millaine, Parma, Rauenna, which are all Italian: Gascoyne, Lorayne, Sauoy, Burgundie, Rhemes, Tholose, which are all frenche: Saxonie, Bauier, Hollande, Alsaria, Mastriche, which are all duche: Cappadocia, Thracia, Creta, Sicilia, Sardinia, Athens, Nicopolis, which are all Greeke. There remaineth Spaine, which is in a manner Italian, and last of all Englande and Affrick. So that there are not past fiue or sixe diuerse tongues of so many places as hee hath alledged to bleare the eyes of foolish Papistes: As if one shoulde saye, the Bishops of Caunterburie haue beene borne, some in Yorke shire, some in Durham, some in Chester, some in London, some in Norfolke, some in Cambridge, &c. Some in Italie, some in Greece, some in Fraunce, some in Wales, some in Normandie, therefore that churche of Caunterburie is the chiefe Sea in the worlde.
            33 The See of Rome in deed was verie forward in vsurping authoritie of a chiefe iudge ouer other churches, as Victor in excommunicating the bishops of Asia, about the celebration of Easter. But they vtterly neglected his sentence, yea, and diuerse did not (as Maister Sanders sayeth) gently wish him not to deale so seuerely, but sharpely rebuked him for his presumption and contention, as Eusebius sayeth, lib. 5. Cap. 25. 
                  Extant autem & verba illorum qui victorem acriter reprehenderunt, Equibus & Irenaeus, &c. Their wordes are extant,

which sharply reprehended Victor, of which number Irenaeus was one. And whereas hee sayeth that Saint Cypriane desyreth Pope Stephanus to depose Martianus bishop of Arles in Fraunce, it is false, for hee exhorteth Stephanus beeing somewhat slacke, against the Nouatians, to write his letters vnto his fellowe Bishops in Fraunce, as he him self oft had done, that they woulde depose Martianus the heretike, and suffer him no longer to insult ouer the churche, which argueth the remissenes of Stephanus, to doe that which was the charitable duetie of euerie bishop, as Cyprian sheweth, but proueth not his authoritie ouer all bishops. That Felix the thirde deposed Aacarius bishop of Constantinople, hee shewed the time of the full reuelation of Antichriste to bee at hande, yet did hee it not of his owne authoritie, but by authoritie of a Synode, and afterwarde by a Synode restored him.
            But Iustinianus the Emperour deposed two bishoppes of Rome, Syluerius and Vigilius by his owne authoritie.
            34 That the bishop of Rome hath beene made the Committie of diuerse Councels, to receiue the subscription of such as haue beene noted of heresies, after their repentance, it prooueth no superioritie in the worlde, but a good opinion that those Councels had of his fidelitie.
            35 The letters of Leo to Flauianus and Theodosius, proue not that the Patriarches Flauianus and Anatolius were commaunded to giue an accompt to the Bishop of Rome: but rather Leo humbly desyred the Emperour Theodosius to commaunde a Synode to bee gathered in Italy, because Flauianus had appealed not onely to the Bishop of Rome, but to all the Bishop
                  •
                of Italie, Ep. 23. And that hee writ that Anatolius shoulde confesse his faith before hee were ordeined, it was his good councell to the Emperour, no commaundement to either of them, Ep. 31.
            36 It is false that all nations appealed to the Pope

of Africa, & did excommunicate all them, that so would or thought meete to appeale. Concil. Mileuit. Ca. 22. Concil. Aph. Ep. ad Coelest. And although some appealed to the iudgement of the church or Bishop of Rome, yet that proueth no generall authoritie. The Councell of Sardike which M. Sanders citeth Can. 7. did moderate those appeales which had not bene lawfull, if they perteined to the Bishop of Rome de iure of right. Liberatus whom he citeth for the appeale of Athanasius, affirmeth that the Councel of Chalcedon confirmed by the Emperor, gaue no place to the contradiction of the Bishop of Rome, nor his legates. Cap. 13. which disproueth his supremacie, more then any appeale can proue it. As for the appeale of Athanasius, if any were, it was euer ruled by the Emperour, who appointed him a synode to iudge his cause at Tyre. Socrat. lib. 1. Cap. 28. & Theodorete testifieth, that after he was called to Rome by Iulius the bishop, by the Emperour Constantius his commaundement, his cause was referred to the councell of Sardica, when he had first appealed to the Emperour Constans, lib. 2. Cap. 4. He citeth Chrys. Ep. ad Innocentium, to proue that he did appeale to the Bishop of Rome, where there is no such matter. Only he declareth how iniuriously he was dealt withal, by meanes of Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, from whome he appealed not to the Bishop of Rome, but to a Synode. Of the appeale of Flauianus, we haue spoken euen now by the confession of Leo himselfe Ep. 23. As for other appeales of later times, they proue the ambition of ye Romish bishops that would receiue them, although of many they were misliked.
            37 That Gelasius affirmed bishops condemned by prouincial councels were restored by the Pope alone, hee citeth his Epist. ad Faustum, in which is no such matter, & yet if it were so, I say it proueth nothing, but the ambition of that See, which before his time, began to encrease toward a supremacie, and not long after obteined, that it sought for. But from the beginning it was not so. The bishop of Rome bearing witnesse of him self for his

owne aduauntage is not to be credited. In that Epistle he sheweth that Acacius by Lyra was cōdemned according to the Councell of Chalcedon, which was lawful not only for him, but for any other Bishop to haue done, in as much as he inuented no newe heresie, but did communicate with an other heresie alreadie condemned in a Councell.
            38 In the third generall Councell holden at Ephesus, there is mention that Cyrillus was President of the councell, but not that hee was Lieuetenant of the Bishop of Rome, although Euasius a late writer in comparison, doth so suppose. But the wordes of the Councel are these: 
                  Deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Petrus & Ioannes aequalis sunt ad alterutrum dignitatis, propter quod Apostoli & sancti discipuli esse monstrantur. Peter and Iohn are of equall dignitie, one with the other, bicause they are shewed to be Apostles and holy Disciples. This confession of the Councel maketh more against the Popes supremacie, then the Lieuetenantship of Cyrillus to the Pope, if it were true, could proue for it.
            39 Maister Sander saith (without proofe but of declining times almost 500. yeares after Christe, and later) that the See of Rome had Legates both ordinarie and extraordinarie, throughout all Christendome, which if it were true, proueth no more his supremacie, then that the King of Spaine hath dominion ouer all those countries, where he hath Legates ordinarie and extraordinarie. He citeth the seuenth Canon of the councel of Sardica, which was, that he might send a Priest from his side: Which in deede was a restraint of his vsurped authoritie, and not a confirmation or an enlargement thereof. For the Canon is this: That if any Bishop, yt was deposed by the Bishops of his owne countrie, did appeale to the Bishoppe of the Church of Rome, the Bishop of Rome should write to the Bishops of the next prouince, to examine his cause, and if the partie by his opportunitie should moue the Bishop of Rome the second time to be heard againe, then he might send Presbyterum à latere, an elder from his side, one or more, which either with the Bishops aforesaid, should

iudge and determine the matter, or else leaue it wholy to the iudgment of the Bishops of the Prouince. By this Canon the singular authoritie of the Romish Bishop is modestly excluded.
            40 The examples of Bishops Perigenes and Martinus translated by the Bishops of Rome, in the declining times, proueth not the perpetual supremacie of the Pope: seeing by generall Councels al such translations haue bene forbidden in elder times. Nic. c. 15. chalc. c. 5.
            41 The consent of the B. of Rome was not so necessarie to generall Councels, but yt they were held wtout his presence, or his sending. For concerning his personal presence, he was not at any of the 4. first approued generall Councels: neither any for him at the second of thē, which was held at Constantinople, where Nectarius Bishop of ye citie was president. Also the fourth of Chalcedon, made ye See of Constantinople equal with the See of Rome, which although Leo Bishop of Rome disalowed, yet did it take place as Liberatus testifieth, Cap. 13.
            42 Although the Bishop of Rome had his Legate in some prouinciall Councels, yet it is great impudencie to say, he had them in al. And such as then were present, they bare no rule or preheminence, but as the Legates of other Bishops. Philippus and Asellius were at the Councell of Aphrica, in which decrees were made against the supremacie of the Bishop of Rome, and yet they subscribed, cap. 92
            43 That the Pope hath procured a fewe nations to be conuerted within these thousand or 900. yeares, as England by Augustine, Saxoni by Bonifacius &c: it can not excuse him from being Antichrist him selfe▪ although M. Sander saith, we account him to be but the forerunner of Antichrist. For though Gregorie otherwise a ceremoniall and superstitious man, was moued with zeale of Christes glorie, to seeke the conuersion of as many as he could, yet the Popes which followed after him, in procuring the cō
               uersion of some countries, rather by cruell warres, then by preaching of the Gospell, as Prusia, Liuonia, Lithuania, &c. sought their owne glorie and aduauntage, vnder

the colour of Christes religion, and therefore were not diuided against Satan, but ioyned with him in hypocrisie.
            44 As for the conuersion of the Infidels in the newe found landes, is a newe found argument, to proue the primacie of the See of Rome. Like as the conuersion of Elias the Iewe by Pius. 5. Many Iewes and some of greate learning as Emanuel Tremelius, haue bene conuerted to the Gospel. And one within this two yeares was baptized in London.
            45 That the See of Rome hath so long flourished like a Queene in worldly pompe, it is the more like to the See and citie of Antichrist, Apoc. 18. verse. 7. And that the cities of the other Patriarches, and their Bishops be oppressed with Infidels, it letteth them not to be true Christians. For Esaie 60. prophesieth not of worldly pompe, but of the spirituall glorie of the Church, which was as great before Constantius stayed the persecution, as euer since.
            46 That no Bishop was euer so honoured of Princes, Kings, or Emperours, as the Pope &c: it proueth him to be Antichrist, and his Church the whore of Babylon, Apo. 17. vers. 2. &. 17. &. cap. 13. & 16.
            47 That the Frenchmen deposed their King Childericus by the Oracle of Pope Zacharie, which discharged them of their lawful othe of obedience, it proueth mightily the Pope to be Antichrist. Peter saith, Feare God, honour the King, 1. Pet. 2.
            48 And much more that Pope Leo the third did transferre the Empire it selfe into the West. For Peter commaunded obedience to be giuen to euery ordinance of man, for the Lord, whether to the King, as to the most excellent, or to those rulers that are sent of him. 1. Pet. 2.
            49 That Pope Gregorie the fift gaue an order for the election of the Emperour, confirmeth our iudgement of the Pope to be Antichrist, as also that Nicholas the first, threatened the Emperour Michael the ouerthrowe of the Empire of the East, whereof hee by his proud rebellion and disobedience, and diuiding the West part from it, was a cause.
            
               50 That the succession of the Bishops of Rome hath ben continued in histories with the reigne of Emperours and Kings, it proueth in deede, that the Church of Rome hath ben either very famous, when it was gouerned of good Bishops, or infamous when it was degenerated into Antichristian tyrannie, but this proueth no more the authoritie thereof to be lawfull, or the religion good, then the succession of Heathen tyrants, Emperours, Kings, & great Turkes, proueth their religion true, or their vsurpation lawfull. As for ye light of worldly fame, that M.S. boasteth of, is spirituall darknesse, and not the light of the Gospell, which our Sauiour speaketh of, Luke 5. No man lighteth a candle, &c.
            51 As it is true, that the Bishops of Rome in the first 300. yeares were greatly persecuted by tyrants, so is it false, that all heretiques agreed to resist that See. For diuers Bishops were heretiques. Liberius was an Arrian peruerted by Fortunatianus: Hierom. in Catalog. Vigilius was priuily an Eutychian, as appeareth by an Epistle of his, written to those heretiques at the procurement of the Empresse: Liberatus Cap. 22. Honorius was a Monothelite, condemned in the sixt generall Councell at Constantinople: Act. 13. Anastasius was a fauourer of Nestorians, as many Ecclesiastical histories do confesse: Garanza in Anast.
            
            52 That the Church of Rome hath continued, although diuers Christian Princes haue opposed them selues against it with the citizens of Rome, and the Cardinalls, and that neither the wicked life of the Popes, nor the schismes of many Popes at once haue subuerted it, doeth not proue it to be the rocke, against which the gates of hell shall not preuaile. For when Antichristian heresie, and diuelish wickednesse hath ouerflowed all the Church of Rome, it is manifest, the gates of hell haue mightily preuailed against that See, although the finall ouerthrowe of that Antichristian head with the body, be reserued vnto the almightie power of our Sauiour Christe toward the end of the world: 2. Thessa. 2. And it is false that Christian Princes, the Romane Citizens, the Cardinals,

or the factions of Diuers Popes haue assaulted the See of Rome, but rather the ambition, and tyrannie of some persons occupying the same.
            53 It is false that all countries which forsooke the obedience of the Bishop of Rome, were shortly after possessed by Infidels, for Affrica was none otherwise possessed by the Vandales, then Italy by the Gothes & other barbarous nations. The Graecians immediately before their oppression by the Turkes, were reconciled to the Church of Rome in the councell of Ferrar, and Florens▪ Before which time the Bohemians forsooke the Romish See, and yet remaine a nation at this day: howe many mightie nations haue forsaken the the Pope? which by Gods grace shall be kept as long from oppression of Infidels, as they keep in obedience of ye Gospel, the contempt whereof, and not of the Pope was punished in the Asians, Africans and Graecians. And the prophecie of Esaie, 60. That nation and kingdome, which shall not serue thee shall perish, is to be vnderstoode, of finall and eternall perdition, and not of oppression by Infidels. For the nation of the Persians, Turkes, Saracens, and other which submit not themselues to the Church of Christ, shal perish, although they triumph in the worlde neuer so long.
            54 Diuerse councels without the bishop of Rome, did with as great and greater credite, determine of the Canonicall Bookes of holie scripture, as Gelasius did with his 70. Bishops, Cap. 59. Carth. 3. Cap. 74. and others.
            55 The Popes liberalitie toward forrein nations, was neuer so great by the hundreth parte, as his couetous extortions and Antichristian exactions haue beene, witnesse Matth. Paris. Matth. West, Anno Reg. 1244. and in a manner all Popish Historiographers of late times. As for his liberalitie in these times, is but to his owne bondslaues, whom he hyreth with a litle exhibition, to blase his charitie, least hee should bee forsaken of all men.
            56 The greatest archheretike that euer was, is the Pope of Rome, so farre passing the archheretikes that haue bene

in the other patriarchall Sees, as Antichrist the head of all heresies, passeth the members of that bodie. For other heretikes take away but some part of Christes person, or his office, but the Pope vnder pretence of honoring him, putteth him quite out of place, by his vsurped supremacie, false doctrine, blasphemous sacrifice of the Masse, and all other his abhominations. And that our Sauiour CHRISTE prayed for Peter, that his faith might not fayle, it perteined onely to his person, and to the temptation that immediately followed. For otherwise Peter erred, when he was reproued of God in vision Act. 10. and of Paule Gallath. 2. And that Bishops of Rome haue erred and beene heretiques, I haue proued in the 51. article, to which you may adde Iohn the 23. that was condemned in the councell of Constance for that he denied the immortalitie of the soule, the resurrection of the bodie, and the life euerlasting. Sess. 11.
            57 That the See of Rome hath made so many wicked decrees, so vniuersally obserued, with such consent of many nations, it came not of the spirite of godly vnitie, but of the efficacie of errour, whiche God sent into the worlde for a iust plague of the contempt of the trueth. 2. Thessalonians 2. And this consent of so many nations vnto her abhominable decrees, proueth Rome to be Babilon the mother of all abhominations, that hath made all nations dronke with the wine of the furie of her fornications, Apoc. 18. verse 3. The degrees of marriage prohibited, are of the Lawe of God, and not of the Pope: the celebration of Easter although it be an indifferent ceremonie, yet it is elder then the Antichristian authoritie of the Pope. Albeit the mysterie of iniquitie beganne to worke in Victor about it. That many Bishops and priuate men haue written to suche Bishops of Rome as were learned, namely Leo, and Gregorie, for their resolution in diuerse questions, it proueth no supremacie: for as many haue written in like cases to Augustine a poore Bishop

of Hippo, and to Hieronyme but a Prieste of Rome, yea Damasus Bishop of Rome himselfe hath written to Hieronyme for his iudgement. Pope Sergius did write to Ceolfride Abbot of Woremouth in England, to be resolued of certeine questions of Beda, one of his Monkes. Math. West. Ant. 734.
            59 That this resorte to Rome for councell, was not onely of deuotion but of duetie, because the Pope had reserued the hardest cases to his owne iudgement as Moses did, hee bringeth no proofe but the Popes owne decrees, whiche are of small credite in his owne case, and the corrupt practise of the later times, when men had submitted themselues vnto the beast.
            60 That not onely the Bishoppes of Italie, but also of Sicilia, whiche is not farre off did come in person to Rome at certeine times, it prooueth not that all Bishoppes in the worlde were obedient to the Bishop of Rome, or were bound so to visite him, or that they did so visite him.
            61 The primacie of the Bishoppe of Rome in olde times, was but of order, not of power, his presidence in councels was but honour, not of authoritie, and that by graunt or permission at the pleasure of the councell. Ioan. Patr. Ant. in con. Basil. The councell of Nice made him equall with other Patriarches: The councell of Constantinople made the see of Constantinople equall with Rome. Sozomen. Lib. 7. Cap. 7. & 9▪ so did the councell of Chalcedon leauing Rome no prerogatiue but of Senioritie, and referring all causes of difficultie to the iudgement of the see of Constantinople, whiche was new Rome. Con. 9. & Con. 16.
            62 That Iustinian was content to permitte to the Pope of the Elder Rome to be Primus Sacerdotum, according to the definition of the Canons, it proueth not his pretended supreame authoritie ouer all other men, but onely that he was first in Order. For hee himselfe deposed two Popes Syluerius, and Vigilius. And

where Maister Sander interpreteth the definitions of the Cannon, to be all the foure first councells, he ouerreacheth too much, for the Pope could neuer proue his primacie by the Councell of Nice, although he forged a decree thereof as is shewed before.
            63 It is true, that Phocas the traytor and murderer of his M. Mauritius vsurping the Empire, for a great summe of monie receiued of Boniface the thirde, determined the controuersie between Constantinople and Rome, giuing Rome the title of Antichrist, which from such a holy beginning it claimeth and vsurpeth vnto this day. But if the See of Rome, had beene the head of all churches by the word of God, what neede had the Bishop of Rome to buy it of Phocas, but onely to shewe himselfe the successor of Simon Magus, not of Simon Peter?
            64 As it is true, that God vsed the peace and authoritie of the Romane Empire, to spread abroade the doctrine of the Gospel, so is it altogether vntrue, that Constantine resigned the citie of Rome, to Syluester the Bishop thereof, because he builded another imperiall citie in the East to keepe those partes of the Empire in peace and subiection. For it is well knowen, that many hundreth yeres after Constantine the great, his successors inioyed the citie and pallaces of Rome, vntill they were defaced by the Gothes, and yet afterward the citie was restored to Iustinianus the Emperour out of the handes of ye Gothes by Bellisarius and Narses. And whereas M. Sander saith that neuer any Emperour of the West had his seate at Rome after Constantinus, he sheweth either his great impudence, or ignorance in histories. For although some of them occupied in warres kept at Milliane, Treueres or other cities, yet is it vtterly false, that there was neuer any Emperour suffered to make his ordinarie mansion place at Rome. For Honorius, & Valentinianus Iunior, dwelt at Rome, before the subuersion of it by the Gothes, & many other, euen vnto Augustus. After which time, Italy being oppressed with barbarous nations, was no place for the Emperours safetie to dwell in. In which meane time, the

Pope grewe to such greatnesse, that he made challenge not onely to the citie, but euen to the Empire it selfe, taking vppon himselfe Antichrist, to remoue it from the East vnto the West, which was in deede a great miracle, but such a miracle as was more meete for Antichriste to make, then the successour of Peter.
            65 It is true that Rome hath lost no preheminence by the departure of the Emperor, for as Chrysostome sheweth in 2. Thes. Antichrist was to succeed the Emperour in the seat of the Empire being made voide, and to vsurpe all auctoritie both of God and men: pretending the seat of Peter, but being in deede the seat of the beast: Apoca. 13. and of the Whore of Babylon, Apo. 17. as both Augustine and Hieronym doe often times confesse. Augu. De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 18. cap. 2. & 22. Hie. Algas. 9.11. In Esai. lib. 13. cap. 47.
            66 Although it be confessed by vs that the prerogatiue of the first place was graunted to the bishoppes of Rome in many metings and councels, yet is it not granted that it was so alwayes, nor in all generall councels. And therefore this our confession prooueth not the Pope to be suche a starre, candell, or light, as M. Sanders doeth imagine. Nor that hee shoulde bee heade of the church, because hee was first in place, no more then an archbishoppe is head of the churche of his prouince, because he is first in place, although his church be compared to the members of a body. For all particular churches make but one bodye, whereof Christ is the onely head, for it were a monstrous body that shoulde haue two heades, and therefore it is truely saide in the councel of Basil, Papa non est caput principale, nec ministeriale vniuersalis ecclesiae. The Pope is neither the principall, nor the ministeriall heade of the vniuersall churche. And therefore as it is saide in the same place, the Pope neuer had any prerogatiue but by concession or permission of councels. Now make what you can M. Sander of our confession and your owne popish councels.
            67 It is a faint proofe, that the church of Rome is the

head, rote and mother of all churches, because Ambrose and Hierome called the faith of the church of Rome the Catholike faith, at suche time as it was true and Catholike in deede. As if a man shoulde say, the faith of the church of Englande, is all one with the Catholike fayth, therefore the churche of Englande is the head, roote and mother to all churches. Likewise that the Vandales which were barbarous people, and Arrians, calleth the Catholikes Romanes, differing from them in nation, as much as in religion.
            68 The fathers neuer beleeued that the Romaine churche cannot erre in the profession of their faith. For Cyprian lib 4. Epist. 3. ad Romanos, &c. Falshood canne haue no accesse to the Romanes, meaneth not (as M.S. saith) such Romaines as tarye in the vnitie of S. Peters chaire: but of such as continue in the faith which S. Paule praised: therefore hee saith, Ad Romanos, quorum fides, &c. The Romanes whose faith was praised by the Apostles. Againe he speaketh not of erringe in profession of fayth, but of falshood in winking at Scismatikes, which sought for a refuge in S. Peters Chaire, the principal churche, beinge iustly banished out of other Churches. And that Cyprian thought not, that the Churche of Rome cannot erre in profession of faith, it is most manifest by this, that if he had bin so perswaded, he woulde not haue contrary to the iudgement of the churche of Rome, decreed with his felow bishops, to adnihilate the sacraments ministred by heretikes. As for the decretall epistle of Lucius, we reiect it, as a counterfet with all the rest of that rable, in which these ancient bishops of Rome are faine to write so barbarously, as no Carter did speake Latine in their time when they liued, and alway extoll the dignity of that See of Rome, as though in these great persecutions, they had nothing els to talke of, but their prerogatiues & priuiledges. The testimonies of Leo which he citeth, sauour of a Romane stomake, drawing as neere to the Antichristian pride, as the man was to the time which wrote them. Barnarde was but a late writer, when Antichrist

was in the top of his pride, & therefore his iudgement argueth the corruption of his time. Finally when so many Popes haue bin condemned for heretikes, what impudācie is to say ye Pope or See of Rome cānot erre▪
            
            69 To proue that the Emperours acknowledged the church of Rome to be the head of all churches, he citeth Iustinian which was almost 660. yeares after Christ. Cod. de summa trini
                     •
                  . lege. 4. writing to Pope Ioannes: Sanctitas vestra capu
                     •
                   est omnium sanctarum ecclesiarum. Your holines is heade of all holy churches: I will not quarrell with him that he citeth the words otherwise then they are read in yt Epist. by which it seemed he saw not ye book himself: but I answere yt this epistle is a meere counterfet and forged euidence being not founde in the auncient coppies, and therefore hath no glose of age vppon it, as it is testified by Gregorius Haloander in a marginall note vppon the same Epistle. No maruaile if a false title be defended with a forged euidence. For if no men had admonished vs of yt forgery, yet the verie style vnlike Iustinians writing in other places, argueth a later inuenter then either that Ioannes, or Iustinian.
            Likewise he citeth the saying of Eugenius, not long before bishop of Carthage, which called the Churche of Rome the head of all Churches, and yet he reposed not all his confidence in the bishoppe of Romes aucthoritie: but saide he woulde write to his brethren the other bishoppes, that they might come to demonstrate the true faith against the Arrians, especially to the bishop of the Church of Rome, which is the head of all the Churches, meaning the principall Churche, Vict. lib. 2.
            70 Thirdly hee citeth the words of the bishop of Patara, intreatinge the Emperour Iustinian for Syluerius bishoppe of Rome, whom he had banished. There is not one king, as Syluerius is Pope ouer the church of yt whol world. This bishoppe being 550. yeares after Christ, and a suter also, is not sufficient to make the Bishop of Rome so great a king. And whereas Maister Sander sayeth, that the Emperor yeelded to his saying, & repented & willed

him to be restored, and therfore chargeth M. Iewel with impudency for alledging the example of Iustinian banishing Syluerius, and Vigilius, to proue that he had somewhat to doe in the churche of Rome, affirming that hee might as well alledge the homicide and adultery of Dauid, to prooue that hee had somewhat to doe with an other mans wife: the trueth is, M. Sanders forgeth a matter contrary to al histories, which affirme that Syluerius dyed in banishment. And how vnlike it is, that Iustinianus repented of the banishinge of Syluerius, vppon the words of the bishop of Patara, in respect yt he was Pope ouer the church of the whole worlde, appeareth by this, that he afterward banished Vigilius his next successor in the same sea. The wordes of Liberatus whom M.S. citeth cap. 22. bee these: 
                  Quem audiens imperator reuocari. Roman
                        •
                      Syluerium iussit, &c. Whom when the Emperour heard, he commaunded that Syluerius shoulde be called againe to Rome, and that iudgement should be made of these letters, so that if it were prooued that they were written by him, the bishop might remaine in any citie, and if they were prooued to bee false, he shoulde bee restored to his owne See. These wordes doe manifestly shew, that Iustinian repented him not of banishing the Pope, as a thing vnlawfull for him to doe, but onely that whereas it was alledged in the Popes behalfe, that the letters of treason were forged, which he was charged to haue written to the Emperours enemies, Iustinian was content, that his cause might come to a newe iudgement, and if he were found cleare, to bee restored, if not, to continue in banishment. To conclude the sayinges of Gregory bishop of Rome, in defence of his owne dignitie, are of small credit. And yet they are a great deale more modest, then the proude decrees of his successours. For he challengeth the hearing of such controuersies only, as arise in those dioces, which haue no Metropolitane or Patriarche of their owne to resort vnto, to determine them. And againe, I cannot tell what bishop is not subiect to the Apostolike See, if any fault be found in them, otherwise all the bishoppes are

equall, lib. 11. Ep. 58. lib. 7. Ep. 64.
            70 The fame, glorie, and authoritie of the auncient church of Rome, is a shame and dishonour to the present popish church of Rome. Because it keepeth not nowe, but hath altogether reiected the doctrine deliuered by the Apostles, that Irenęus commended in his time, libr. 3. Cap. 3. nor holdeth that rule or beleefe of the Apostles vndefyled, which Ambrose praised in his time, Ep. 81.
            71 This land of Britaine receiued the faith of Christ, as Gildas a Britaine, a more auncient and certeine writer, then Ado M. Sanders author, in the time of ye reigne of Tiberius 160. before Eleutherius was Bishop of Rome, by the preaching of the Apostles and Euangelists, as some write of Saint Paule, some of Saint Simon of Cana, some of Saint Philip, some of Ioseph of Aramathia. Neither did Eleutherius sende Fugatius and Damianus by him selfe, or as of authoritie, but being required by Lucius or Leuer Maure, one of the little Kinges of some shiere of Britaine, as Ninnius a Britaine doeth testifie. For that Lucius was King of all Britaine, it is proued false by all the Romaine histories, which testifie that the Emperour was then soueraigne of Britaine, vnder whome ruled certeine petie Kinges in some partes not throughly conquered.
            72 Beda an English Saxon, more like to knowe matters of this lande, then Prosper a forreyne writer, affirmeth that the Britaines against the Pellagians heretiks, desired ayde of the Bishops of Fraunce, who by a Synod there gathered, sent Germanus and Lupus two Bishops to confute the Pelagians, without any sending to Rome, or from Coelestinus Bishop of Rome, lib. 1. Cap. 17. Likewise the seconde time at the request of the Clergie of Britaine, Germanus returneth with Seuerus to roote out the heresie of the Pellagians.
            73 The zeale of Gregorie the first is to be commended, that he sent Augustine to conuert the Saxons to the faith of Christe, although the superstitions which hee

brought in with the Christian faith, cannot be defended. The diligence of Augustin in teaching according to his knowledge, deserueth praise, yet can it not make him an Apostle, because an Apostle hath his calling immediatly of God, Gal. 1. If we report his pride and crueltie as wee finde in our histories written by Papistes, let the worlde iudge, whether we or they do him iniurie.
            74 From Vitellianus the Pope, was Theodorus a Grecian sent to be Archebishop of Caunterburie, rather to reteine the countrie vnder the vsurped authoritie of the Romish bishop, then to instruct them in matters perteining to the faith. For the Pope him selfe was afraide of him, that beeing a Gręcian, hee shoulde teache any thing contrarie to the Romishe religion, Beda. lib. 4. Cap. 1.
            75 King Henrie the eight found his dominions subiect to the tyrannie of the Pope of Rome, which vppon good ground and authoritie of the scriptures, hee banished out of his realme, what cause soeuer papistes do surmise, or to speake plainly, notwithstanding the iniurious and contumelious dealing of the Pope about his deuorse from his first vnlawfull mariage gaue him occasion to enquire and finde out what weake foundation the vsurped power of the See of Rome was buylded vppon.
            76 King Henrie departed not out of the societie of the churche of Rome, onely for the vices of the men thereof, but for their false and Antichristian heresies which they obstinately mainteined, and ioyned him selfe to the true, auncient, and vniuersall Church of Christe, when hee departed out of that false newe sett vp, schismaticall, and particuler Synagogue of Rome, as Saint Augustine went from the Manichees to the Catholicke church. And as King Henrie the eyght knewe whence hee went, so knewe hee also whither he went, euen from Rome with seuen hilles, to Ierusalem which is aboue, and is the mother of vs all.
            
               77 Hee that goeth out of an hereticall church, as King Henrie did, must goe to the Catholike church of Christe, as hee did, without making any newe church, or being without a church. I knowe not the age of Maister Sander, but if hee bee not much aboue fourtie yeares olde, hee was borne and baptized as manye other Papistes were, in that which hee calleth a newe church, or no church, which howe hee will aunswere, let him and them aduise, which holde it necessarie, that a man must tarrie in that church, in which hee is baptized.
            78 King Henrie the eight was not without a churche, but in the church of Englande, a member of the Catholike church of Christe: neither did hee call him the supreme head of the church of Englande, before that title was giuen him by the Popish Clergie in their submission, after they were cast in the premunire: Edw. Hall.
            79 That hee receiued not fully the true doctrine of Christ, as he banished the false vsurped power of ye Pope, is to bee imputed to the trayterous practises of his dissembling Clergie, which although they durste not withstande him in mainteining the Popes authoritie, yet they laboured all that they coulde, to reteine the Popes doctrine, in as many poyntes as they might: hereof came the lawe of the sixe articles, which mainteined the sacrifice of the Masse, transubstantiation, communion in one kynde, and such other heresies. Neuerthelesse, the authoritie of Antichrist, much Idolatrie, & superstition, and false doctrine was abolished, Iustification by faith in Christe was preached, the scripture was read in the vulgar tongue, which was a beginning of a reformation, and returning vnto the true church of Christe, and not a setting vp of a newe churche: Except Maister Sander will saye, that those Kinges of Iuda, which refourmed some parte of religion, and yet left the hill altares & other abuses, did set vp a newe

church, because they made not a perfect reformation. Finally, where he sayth, that King Henrie adioyned himselfe to no companie of faithfull men in earth, which had from Christes time liued after that profession of faith which he allowed, proueth not, that hee set vp a newe church. For he ioyned to the Catholike church, in so many pointes of true doctrine as hee acknowledged, from which the Popish church was departed, although he was not rightly instructed in all.
            80 The church of Englande in King Henries time, was a true church, although all the doctrine which was then mainteined by publique authoritie (through the subtile practises of popish hypocrites) was not true. And the church of England at this daye, is the same that it was then, but nowe by publike authoritie embraceing all true doctrine, which by the true members of the church in King Henries dayes was mainteined, and withstoode by hypocrites or other, not yet rightly instructed.
            81 The church vnto which King Henrie went, and brought the realme, when he departed from Rome, was the same church, which began at Ierusalem, and so increased into all nations, and continueth in the world for euer, though not among all nations.
            82 King Henry went out of the Antichristian church of Rome into the Catholike church of Christe, embracing some part of the doctrine therof, therefore hee needed no reconciliation to the Romish church, but a more perfect information of the church of Christ.
            83 In King Edwardes time, the reformation began and hindred in his fathers time, was perfected and accomplished for all pointes of Christian doctrine, neither was there any reconciliation vsed to the churche of Rome, but the Church of Englande by publike authoritie, perfectly vnyted to the Catholike Churche of Christe ioyning in profession of faith, with the best refourmed Christian churches in the worlde.
            84 The abolishing of forrein power, hindred not the

ioyning in faith and doctrine, with all the Churches of God, that were without the realme of England. The propitiatorie sacrifices of the Masse, was in King Edwardes time abolished by publique authoritie out of the Church of England, as it was in King Henries time abhorred of all true members of the Church, that were then rightly instructed, as much as the supremacie of the Pope.
            85 The power of being the sonnes of God, the power of preaching and forgiuing of sinnes in the Church of Christe, is no forreigne power, neither was any such power euer excluded, but the false and vsurped tyrannie of Antichrist of Rome.
            86 We beleeue and professe a Catholique or vniuersall Church of Christe, whereof we are members, and therefore we detest the hereticall, schismaticall, and particular Church of Rome.
            87 The Church of England vnder King Edward, did professe her selfe to be a member of the most auncient, Catholike, and Apostolique Church of Christe, which is the piller of trueth, to bee iudged by the worde of GOD, which is the trueth it selfe: Iohn. 17. being not so ignoraunt, but that she could distinguish the worde of GOD, from the Church of GOD, as the lawe of GOD from the houshold of GOD, which is gouerned by that lawe: And not as Maister Sanders similitude is, as the statutes of England differ from the men of England, which make them, but the Church maketh not the worde of God, but contrariwise, the word of God maketh the Church.
            88 It is not necessarie to shewe a companie of men in a peculiar place, as Geneua or any such like, for them that will ioyne them selues with the Catholike Church of all the world, although it were easie to name diuers companies of men in seuerall places, which continued in the true Church out of the Church of Rome, both in Fraunce and Italie, beside Bohemia, which long before was returned out of the Popish Church, into the Church of Christ: and all the East Churches, which neuer ioyned

with the Church of Rome.
            89 The Churches of Zurich and Saxonie be members of the Catholique Church of Christe, which is fifteene hundreth yeares olde and vpward, although the same Churches were gathered and returned in those places, within these three score yeares.
            90 There needed no embassages to goe to and fro, to the Churches of God beyond the seas, for reconciliation, bicause there was no debate betweene the Church of England and them. Although for conference and aduise in reformation, no doubt but there were mutuall messages betweene them. The vnion and communion of our Church, with other particular Churches of God throughout the world, is spirituall, made by the working of the holy Ghost, and not by embassages, or orders taken by men. But the same is declared and shewed by the confession of our faith, fully agreeing in all necessarie Articles with them.
            91 The publique protestations and confessions of our faith, doe shewe our reconciliation and coniunction with the Catholique Church of Christ, without that it is needfull for vs, to exhibite any billes of submission to any singular persons, as hath bene vsed in cases of particular discipline, as in reconciliation of Vrsarius and Valens to Iulius of Rome: Maximus, Vrbanus, & other, to Cyprian of Carthage.
            92 The realme did neuer submit it selfe to Luther, Zuinglius, or Caluine, but to Christe and his Church. As for offring of billes of submission to forreigne Bishops, it is no part of Christian discipline. But if it were a matter of any substance, al the Cleargie of England gaue their subscription to the Archbishop of Canturburie and other Bishops, for the departure out of the Popish Church, into the Church of England. That we receiued not the errour of Luther concerning the reall presence, it sheweth wee depend not vpon any man, further then his doctrine is true and agreeable to the word of God.
            
               93 Caluine and Zuinglius, although they receiued some light of vnderstanding by the ministerie of Luther, yet came they not from him, but were stirred vp of God as he was.
            94 The realme in King Edwards time, neuer purposed to submit them selues to Caluine: who although he misliked the title of supreme head, in that sense whiche Steuen Gardiner maintained it at Ratisbone, as though it gaue vnto the King an absolute authoritie to do what he would in the Church: yet in that sence that it was receiued of King Edward, and vnderstoode of all godly men, that is, to bee the highest Magistrate in the Church, as well for the ordering of Ecclesiasticall as ciuill matters, he neuer did condemne it.
            95 King Edward retaining that title in the godly sense aboue rehearsed, the Church of England notwithstanding was vnited to the Catholique Church of Christ, throughout the world.
            96 When Queene Marie came to the Crowne, shee found the realme a member of the Catholique Church of Christe, which she forsooke, and sought to bring it in bondage againe to the Antichristian See of Rome: which by meanes of a Legacie from the Pope brought by Cardinall Poole, (long before attainted for treason against his Prince and countrie) was by an acte of Parleament yeelded vnto. Although GOD reserued more then seuen thousand, that neuer bowed their knee to Baal of Rome, whereof many were cruelly put to death, and suffered martyrdome, the rest were persecuted, and by the protection of God escaped out of that bloudie and fierie persecution.
            97 The seat of Peter could not be planted at Rome in the dayes of Claudius the Emperour, bycause that in the tenth or eleuenth yeare of his Empire, Peter was at Antioch reproued by Paule, Gala. 2. The last yeare, or the first of Nero, S. Paule writte his Epistle to the Romanes,

from Corinth, where he taried almost two yeres, in which Epistle he sending salutation to sixe and twentie singular persons, beside diuers families, would not haue omitted to salute Peter, if he had bene there. But admit that Peter had a seat at Rome, yet the Papacie hath not continued from that time, but since the dayes of Boniface the third, which was more then 
                  •
               00. yeares after Christe. Neither hath the faith of the See of Rome continued without chaunge (as M. Sanders saith) these 1500. yeares, but is altogether in a manner chaunged from the faith of Peter, and of the Apostolike Church, therefore Queene Marie bringing the realme to that Church, did not reconcile it to the true Church of Christ, but restored it to the slauerie of the Antichristian tyrannie.
            98 Seeing the realme is nowe againe returned to the embracing of the doctrine of the Gospell, set foorth in the holy scriptures, taught in the Primitiue Church, many hundreth yeares after Christe, continued in all times, though vnder persecution of Antichrist, and nowe openly and publiquely professed of many nations, it is a member of the true Catholike Church of Christe, whereof Christe onely is the head, and communicateth with the Church of Christ of all nations, in all pointes of true religion, necessarie to saluation, and therefore is no seismaticall Church, but a Catholique and Apostolique Church.
            99 The Catholique Church of Christe, whereof the Church of England is a part, is an inuisible Church, and therefore an Article of our faith, which is of things inuisible Heb. 10. and no Church vnder a bushell. But Hierusalem that is in heauen is the mother of vs all: Gala. 4. Contrariwise, the Popish Church which is visible, is the Church of Infidels, and Rome which is vpon earth, is the mother of all Antichristians.
            100 The preaching of Gods worde is the ground of faith▪ the celebrating of the sacramentes, is the confirmation of the same, these exercises haue alwayes beene in the true Churche of God, when they be not hindred by

persecution.
            101 The Gospell of Christ hath beene preached vnto all nations. And the Church hath had Pastours and teachers frō Christes time vnto Luthers age. Maister Sander asketh where they were, through all nations? As though it were necessarie, they should be in euerie nation at all times. Poperie when it was at the largest, had not teachers in all nations. For many cōtinue in barbarous Gentilisme, beside Mahometisme which hath filled ye greatest part of the worlde. The Church of Christe is scattered in many nations, and hath had, and now also hath, many Kinges that walke in the light thereof. And at this time more then the Popish Church hath.
            102 The true Church in England is honoured & nourished, by the Kinges, whome she honoureth as supreme gouernours, heades, or rulers thereof. And although Ecclesiasticall persons, pay subsidies vnto their princes, yet are not their Princes, and their Courtiers nourished by the goodes of the Church, as Maister Sander moste slaunderously reporteth, otherwise then it is meete, that subiects should contribute to the maintenance of the state of the Prince, and their owne defence.
            103 The worde of God written is in deede honorable and true, and conteineth all that doctrine, by whiche the Church of God was gouerned, two thousand yeres before any word of the Bible was written, when by reason of that long life of the Patriarches, the tradition might be certeine. The Gospell also was preached by the Apostles, before any of the foure Gospels was penned, but yet agreable to the scriptures of the olde Testament, and is the same that is written and none other: which written word of God, is able to make the man of God perfect, and is deliuered vnto the Church of Christe, as a moste certeine rule to followe, that it might not be deceiued by vncerteine traditions and inuentions of man, in steeede of the doctrine of God.
            104 The Popishe Church hath not kept the worde of God faithfully, but in a corrupt and false Latine translation.

The certeintie therfore of the scriptures was not receiued from them, but from the Iewes, concerning ye olde Testament in Hebrue, and from the Gręcians, concerning ye new Testament in Greek. Although the very common Latine translation of the Bible, is sufficient to conuince ye Popish Church of horrible heresies, and blasphemies.
            105 To refourme the Church according to the doctrine of the holie scripture, and the example of the Primitiue Church, is not like as if one reading of the olde lawes of England in an other Ilande, would say it were England, and that the countrie whiche is so called is departed from olde England. For chaunge of Lawes, cannot change places and regions, but departing from the trueth of Gods worde, is a departing from the Churche of Christe, and the returning to that trueth is a returning to the Church of Christ, notwithstanding Maister Sanders wise similitude. The Prophetes in deede Esaie, Ieremie, &c. by the lawe of Moses, shewed the errours of the Church of Ierusalem, and by it sought the reformation thereof. But they renounced not the lawful gouernement of the high Priest, because it was established by the lawe, whereas the tyrannicall vsurpation of the Pope, is contrarie to the lawe of Christ, and therefore is moste iustly renounced.
            106 It is graunted that the Church of Rome was once a principall parte of the Churche of Christe. But the successions of Popes since Popes were, hath not continued so without interruption, as the successions of the highe Priestes at Ierusalem, by meanes of so many Schismes & Antipapes, and translation of the See from Rome to Auinion with so many, and so long variations of the See. And the succession of Christians except in a fewe, hath vtterly failed, as Esaie saith of Ierusalem, how is the faithfull citie become an harlot? Esaie. 1.
            107 It is graunted that of olde time, the Romane faith was accounted the catholike faith, while it was so in deed, euen as the Britanne faith, the French faith, the Germane faith, was likewise. But that whiche he inferreth is vtterly denied: namely, that the Pope and his citie haue

continued in the profession of that faith to this day. For the contrarie beeing proued, it is not onely the euill manners of the Pope, and that citie that haue moued vs to departe from the Churche, but the false religion therof. Although it is nothing like, that where suche a sinke of all abhominations is, and hath beene openly and generally seene aswel in the Popes, as in the people of his citie, there should be a true and sincere faith, and religion, whiche bringeth foorth wicked and vngodly fruites.
            108 The glorie of Christes Church and kingdome, is not like to the kingdome and glorie of an earthly Empire, but contrarie to it: namely, it is spirituall and not carnal, inwarde and not outwarde, in appearance of weaknesse, pouertie, & foolishnesse, and not of strength, riches, and wisedome. 1. Cor. 1.
            109 The wayes to see and heare the Church of God, is to heare the worde of God, whereof commeth faith, by the eyes whereof the Church of God is seene, and not by bodily eyes to be painted out, loe here, loe there, for the kingdome of God is within vs: Luc. 17. vers. 21.
            110 Notwithstanding any thing repeated in this article, conteined in seuerall articles before, 19.20.64.18.22.24.25.26.31.46.27.41.42.56.43.45.48.36.39.67.65.68.20. the Popish Church is the Church of Antichrist, & therefore we haue iustly departed from it to the Churche of Christ.
            111 In the Church of Christ is the word of God, the sacramentes, forgiuenesse of sinnes, the holie Ghost, the communion of Saintes and Christ himselfe, which is the onely head and sauiour thereof. But whether the Papistes holde this Church or we, let them proue, as S. Augustine vrgeth the Donatistes, by none of these fonde and carnall reasons, but only by the authoritie of the scriptures, De vnitate Eccles. Cap. 16.
            112 The rest of the preface is consumed in dissuading ye Papists of England frō dissembling their professiō of Papistrie, & exhorting them to make open confessiō therof, which next vnto their conuersion, I wish as much as M.

Sander, that if they may not be conuerted to become true Christians and good subiectes, they might be knowen as they are for open heretikes, enimies of their Prince and Realme.
         
         
            
               Sander.¶ A TREATISE OF IMAGES OF Christe, and of his Saintes, and that it is vnlawfull to breake them, and lawfull to honour them, &c.
            
               THE FIRST CHAPTER.
               
                  THe Argument of the treatise following. In which he noteth especially The storie of the spoyle of Images in the lowe countries: The diuersitie of sectes there: The holie Bible burnt: Hermannus a preacher capteine of the spoyle.
               
               THE defence of idolatrie, whiche he taketh in hand, beeing so abhominable to be heard among Christians,
                     Fulk.
                   after he hath first sought to dasell mens eyes with the vaine glitering glorie of the Romish Church, now he goeth about to tickle their eares, with a plausible tale of some disorderly doinges, in breaking of Images in the lowe countries. As though the inconsiderate zeale of a fewe image breakers, or perhaps the licentious riot of some pilfering spoylers, beeing either Papistes or of no religion that were mixed with them, were sufficient to excuse such horrible Idolatrie, as the Papistes daily commit, and M. Sander is not ashamed to defend. He pretendeth as though his purpose were no more, but to answere an obiection of I cannot tell what Protestants, nor he him selfe is able to name any of credite, which affirmed, that the casting downe of idolatrie in the lowe countries, and liberty of preaching ye gospel procured by a few naked & base men, against an armed Prince, and so many wealthy persons as were enimies to it, must come of the mightie hand of God, and that it was a great miracle. Whiche thing might well and truely be saide, without allowing of any thing, that was done beside order.
               
                  For there is no doubt, but God directed all things to his glory, although men sought not the same by lawfull & ordinarie meanes. It was no miracle saith M. Sander, because they were not resisted in suche places where the spoyle was made. But so much the greater was the miracle, that in so many places, the heartes of the magistrates with the people were so daunted, that they durst make no resistance.
               The storie as M. Sander reporteth it, is, that the Lordes of the low countries, dissenting from king Philip about the Spanish inquisition, the king lyke to be assaulted by the Turkes in Naples, and Malta, resorte was made to a certaine preacher, not called by anye auctoritie, in the woods and fieldes neere to Antwerpe. The first quarrell he picketh, is to the preachers callinge, whiche in suche times as religion is in a manner ouerthrowne and defaced by Idolatrie, as now by the papistes, cannot bee but extraordinarie, and yet lawfull, as hauinge authoritie of God, and approbation of Gods Churche, mooued with chariti
                     •
                   to call men out of the blindnes of Idolatrie, into the light of the Gospell. This I saye, as if he had not bin called thither to preach by the Church of God, which was in persecution in those places, which is an ordinarie & a most lawfull calling. The seconde fault he findeth, is of their preaching in the woodes and fieldes, which hath not bene vsed in a Christian countrie, but in time of warre. As though he hath not reade that in Affrica, when the Arrians which are as good Christians as the papists, persecuted the true Catholikes, and draue them out of the cities, they were constrained to meete in such places, as they could, in woods, or fieldes, or desert corners.
               That there were sectes amonge them, it was to be lamented, and yet not to bee marueiled, for there muste bee euen heresies amonge you, sayeth the Apostle, that they which are tryed may be made manifest: 1. Corinth. 11. verse 19.
               That the feast of the Assumption was chosen, wherein they began the spoile, I hope it was of no hatred to the

Virgin Mary, whom they honour with such honour as is due to her, and called her blessed, because God hath chosen her to be a mother of Christ, although they allow not the new cōception of Christs body vnder forme of bread, by the popish priests, compared in dignitie by papistes vnto the blessed Virgine (as I remember) in fiue pointes. M. Sander is angry that the newe preachers hate that feast of the Assumption of Mary, & yet keepe holy the day of the death of S. Paule and S. Thomas. They hate it, because of the popishe fable of the Assumption of the body of the virgin liuing, which yet M. Sander is ashamed of, and calleth it the daye of her death. The other feastes which they keepe, they keepe not in ye honor of men, but to the honour of God, they vse the dayes in which ye people is accustomed to be assembled, as things indifferent, which except it be in cases of offence geuing, may well be vsed.
               The watche worde giuen by a boye, who striking the Image saide, Marye thou must come downe, is a vaine matter, and yet much more probably to bee defended, then the prayers of the Idolaters made to that deafe Idole. Blessed Lady helpe me, &c. Pater noster qui es in coelis, &c. After the watche worde followed the spoyle of all Idoles, and monuments of Idolatrie, the magistrates forbidding in vaine. I saide before the disordered doing of priuate men cannot bee defended, although where M.S. chargeth them with stealinge and caryinge away, I am perswaded he slaundereth them, as men of as good credit as he do testifie, except some pilfering theeues thrust in amongst them, who as the report goeth, being apprehended, were iustly punished.
               The maner of their vtter defacing of al tables, and all that belonged to them, whiche Master Sander so muche misliked, if it had not wāted lawful authoritie, had been verie commendable, yea euen the pissing vpon the foule Idoll of the altar, might haue bene defended by the example of Iehu, which turned the temple of Baall, into a lakes, if it had bene done by the commandement of a

zelous Magistrate. For M.S. most impudently doth bely vs, when he saith, that by our doctrine, their Masse cake is a mysticall figure of Christes bodye, when it is rather a foule stinking and abhominable Idoll.
               If any Library was destroied by them, with the bibles, doctors works, & maps of countries, it was very euil & barbarously done of them, & yet I am sure they burned no booke of holy scriptures, knowing them to be such, as the papists doe, not by tumult of a few ignoraunt persons, but by consultation & deliberation of the wisest of them, knowing them to be the holy scriptures, & wilfully defacing them, not more with flames of fire, then vilainous & despightful words. It is wel known yt D. Cole the papist, being visitor in Cambridge, when a Bible was brought to him to be defaced, called it bible bable.
               They defaced the Friers kitchin stuffe, spoyled and caried away their vitailes & stuffe, it was more then may be defended, & I thinke more then was true, and especially that they shoulde bring strumpets into the Abbeyes to prouoke the yong Monkes and Fryers to lust, which was needlesse, for their chastitie is well inough knowne.
               But lest the fault should be laid vpon a disordered multitude without a head, M.S. saith, they had one Hermanus a preacher to their captaine, which had bin a theefe, and had lost one of his eares, if his report be true, he was like to be captaine of such a band. As for ye praier of the Nuns yt stopped his mouth, yt he was able to say no more to them, let them beleeue it, that thinke papistes cannot lye. There might be cause why Hermanus would geue ouer his perswasions, when hee sawe them obstinate, though his mouth were not stopped with their prayer. To conclude, although the defacing and destroying of Idolatrie be good, yet may it not be attempted without auctoritie and order, vnder pretence of zeale, and therefore this fact of the lowe countrie men is not by anye wise man defended, howsoeuer their zeale may be praised, or ye worke of god in their inconsiderate doings may be considered.
            
            
               
               
                  Sander.THE II. CHAP.
               
                  The state of the question concerninge the adoration of holy Images, where also a reason is giuen of the order which is taken in the booke following.
               
               In this chapter, hee mooueth foure questions, 1. whether Images may be made,
                     Fulke.
                   2. whether any Images may bee worshipped, 3. whether it bee expedient that anie shoulde be worshipped, 4 with what kinde of worship Images may be worshipped. To the first he aunswereth that Images may be made. To the seconde, that these Images onely may be worshipped, in respect of Christian religion, which bring vs in minde either that there is a God, or that there are three persons of the Trinitie, or which represent Christ, or his holy Angels and Saints, by which he alloweth the making and worshippinge of the Images of god, or of the trinity, beside ye images of Christ, men, and Angels.
               To the third, he answereth that it is expedient that Images should be worshipped. To the fourth, he defendeth it for more probable, that the same degree of honor is not due to the Image of Christ, of our Lady, or of other saintes, which is due to Christ, our Lady, & other saintes themselues, but there is a certaine proper honour due to holy Images, which may be called a worship or honour due to a good remembraunce or monument. These be his owne wordes, by which hee sheweth himselfe contrary to other Papistes, that defende that Images are to be worshipped with the same honour that is due to the thinges whereof they are Images. As that the Image of God is to be worshipped, euen with the same honour that is due to God himselfe.
               But going ouer his questions againe, hee saieth, it is graunted for the most part of all men, that Images may be made so they be not abused, which is vtterly false, for no Christian man will graunt, that it is lawfull in anye respect to make any Image of God, that is, to transforme the glorye of the immortall God into the image of a

mortal man, or to make that monstrous image of the Trinitie, with three faces or three bodies: of an old man, a yong man, and a doue. Rom. 1. vers. 23. The seconde and thirde, he sayeth are denyed by the Caluenistes and Lutherans. In the fourth, there hath been controuersie among the Popish Catholikes, some thinking the honor dewe to the thing it selfe (by reason that the image is all one with ye thing, when it exerciseth the act of an image) might be giuen to the image therof. But other be of another minde. Beside this controuersie among the Papistes themselues confessed about the honour of God, which is one of the chiefest pointes of Christian religiō, note that the former sort make dombe & dead images, to exercise an act, which is a grosse & monstrous absurditie. But of all those foure questions, M. Sanders promiseth to intreate: first to proue the making of images lawful and commendable: 2. the worshipping of them to be lawfull & commendable, as the signes of honorable verities for the verities sake, which is all one, as if you would saye, we must worship falsities for loue of verities, for betweene veritie & falsitie there is no meane, the creature in steede of the creator, Rom. 1. vers. 25. But how absurdly doth he confound images with the signes of all kinds? Or what kinde of argument is this? Iohn Baptist confessed him selfe vnworthie to loose the latchet of Christes shooe, therefore he woulde worship his shooe or we must worship his image. Or these, a man embraceth a seruant or messenger sent from his friende, kisseth a ring that commeth from him, loueth to heare of his name, esteemeth his picture, therefore wee must embrase, kisse, loue, & esteeme images of God, &c. which hee hath not sent vnto vs, but expressely forbidden vs to make or haue in any vse of religion. But yt he shoulde not be mistaken, in saying, images ought to be honoured, he doeth not as a learned man shoulde doe, make a lawfull diuision or distinction of honour, but like a blinde or craftie Sophister, he maketh a confusion and iumbling of diuerse names and kindes of honour, to

trouble the vnderstanding of a simple reader, as of honour due to God, to Saintes, to our prince, to his liuetenant, to our parents, friends, fellowes, superiours, and to holy remembrance, and one of these kindes of honour he will proue due to images, and not that which is due to God alone. As though all honour of religion, were not dewe onely to God, Mat. 4. vers. 10. and honour of charitie, were not to be directed by Gods lawe, by which, honour of images is expressely forbidden. But with M. Sander the difference of honour commeth from the minde, and therefore falling downe before an image. Kissing, &c. if he thinke it not to be God, nor any reasonable creature, but an image of Christ. &c. is no idolatrie. As if God had not by expresse wordes forbidden, the falling downe before images, yea, although the minde knowe they be false idols. For else how are they commended, which haue not bowed their knees to Baal, nor kissed him with their mouth, among so many idolaters and dissemblers? But Abraham (saith M. Sander) adored the people of the land, yet was he no idolater. As though he could not put a difference betweene ciuile worship & religious: yea, he giueth a rule how to auoide idolatrie: Giue God thy heart (saith he) and after be secure, that ye honour which is giuen in any respect be for Gods sake, & all is well. By this reason, we may worship not onely all idols, but we may make idols of all Gods creatures, & worship them for Gods sake, as the Aegyptians did Oxen, crocodiles, cattes, apes & onions, for they be al good monuments & remembrances of God their creatour, and better then any forged idoll. To auoide which absurditie, it were good not only to looke that you worship not any thing for Gods sake, but to be sure, what God hath commaunded you to worship, & that to honor with such honour also as he hath appointed. So shall you worship God aright, & honour his ministers ecclesiasticall or ciuil, his friendes, and your brethren, and whatsoeuer else is worthie of any honour. But Maister Sander to auoide the offence that might be taken by the termes of adoration,

worshipping, honouring, &c. protesteth that hee alloweth onely that honouring of images, when the partie in the faith of one God, and one mediatour Iesus Christ, doth direct his honour by the image to the trueth represented, which faith and intention doth deliuer him quite from all spice of idolatrie. But how false this determination of M. Sanders is, we see euidently by the historie of the golden Calfe, which Aaron and the people worshipped, euen according to his faith and intention, namely, they worshipped the God which brought them forth of the land of Aegypt by that image, euen Iehoua, that made heauen and earth, Exod. 32. vers. 4. & 5. Againe, what manner of faith this is, which is not onely not grounded vppon the worde of God, but also cleane contrarie to it, children that learne their Cathechisme can sufficiently vnderstand. In the ende of this Chapter M. Sander practiseth a figure of popish rethorike, which is, after great bragges & promises of proofe, to occupie the reader with some by matters, before the performance taken in hand, partly that his vnderstanding should not be so quick, as when his minde is newly kindled wt desire of the sight of such things as he promised, & partly yt being half wearied with other needelesse discourses, he shoulde not be so attentiue to consider the force of his reasons. Therfore he promiseth first to answere the obiections of ye aduersaries, & yet because that argument is not so fitt for his purpose, he turneth it ouer also, vntil he haue for disputations sake, fayned the honouring of images vnlawful, & yet proued yt the image breakers in the lowe countries did not well.
            
            
               THE III. CHAPTER.
               
                  That although the images of Christ and of his saincts had beene falsely worshiped, yet the Churches were vniustly spoyled, and the images vniustly throwen downe, and consequently that the doers of it must needes be the ministers of the diuell. Also he noteth, the reason of breaking the Brasen serpent. The keepers of church goods are Idolaters. The foundation of the newe gospell in the lowe countries is shamefull. The inconstancie of the Protestantes doctrine.
                        Sander.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Fulk.
                  It is confessed, and therefore needeth no proofe, that the act of breaking the popish Idols in the lowe countries, if it wanted the authoritie of the Magistrate, was vnlawful, & yet it followeth not, that the doer
                     •
                   were the ministers of the diuel. For they that offend of inconsiderate zeale, are not by and by the ministers of the diuell. The people that would haue made Christ a King, Ioh. 6. attempted a thing vnlawfull for them to doe, yet were they not for that, the ministers of the diuel. The euil was of the diuell, the persons for the moste parte sought to serue God, or else M. Sander how will you defend them that commit idolatrie vppon good intent, in worshipping of an vnconsecrated hoste, or in worshipping the diuell in the likenesse of Angels? But to come to your reasons. The abuses of the images (you say) might haue bene taken away, and the images let alone, and that in deede was the iudgement of Gregorie, ad Seren. lib. 7. Ep. 109. but his authoritie against the manifest worde of God, which forbiddeth all images in any vse of religion, is of small weight with vs: Ex. 20. The example of King Ezechias breaking the brasen serpent is vnfitly alledged, to defende the breaking of images by priuate persons: but the two last reasons that M. Sander alledgeth of the breaking thereof, are to be considered: the one that the brasen serpent was a figure, rather then an image, the other, yt it was worshipped as the trueth it self. That it was both a figure & an image, he might haue said truely, but so to make it a figure, yt he denyeth it to be an image, is grosse impudencie: for first it was an image of a serpent, before it was a figure of Christ. And then it followeth hereof, yt if such an image as was lawfully made & was a figure of Christ, by lawfull authoritie was broken, when it was abused: howe much more images that were neuer lawfully made, and also haue beene abused to idolatrie, as all the famous images in Poperie haue beene, ought by like authoritie to be vtterly defaced & destroyed?
               To the seconde reason, that the people did worship

the brasen serpēt as God, it is nothing credible, although they gaue vnto it the honour due vnto God. For that Ezechias called it Nechushtan, which is a lumpe of brasse, it shewed that God is not to be worshipped in any materiall image, it proueth not what opinion the people had of it. M. San. saith, the Papistes worship not the mettall of their images, but they vse them as occasions to put them in remembrance of them whose images they are. It were an hard point for him to proue, that the Israelits did worship the brasse of the serpent, but rather that image of the serpent, as a holy relique, by which their forefathers had deliuerance from the stinging of fierie serpents. But to the matter, it is needlesse for him to cite out of Augustin, that it is not lawfull to breake Idolls, but for them that haue authoritie, and lesse to proue that they which stale siluer crosses and challices &c. if any such were, (as I thinke hee slaundereth them) did euill. But he will proue that keepers of Church goods be Idolaters, bicause they be couetous. He may so proue a greater number of obstinate Papistes Idolaters, who both keepe Church goodes in their houses, and the very Churches or Abbeys, which he maketh all one, for their houses. And yet Augustine whome he citeth, alloweth the conuerting of idolatrous treasures to common vses, as was the giuing of Abbeys by cōmon consent of the realme into the Kings hand, of whome diuers inioy them as bought or giuen. If any man vniustly got into his possessiō any such stuffe of couetousnes, I for my part will not excuse him of idolatrie, nor Sander of treason for cursing ye Prince, which is inriched by Abbey landes lawfully giuen, vnder colour of giuing offence. But the foundation of the newe Gospell is shamefull, bicause the Protestants contemne this acte of spoyling, and yet their preachers and Doctours were the captaines of the spoyle. In the first Chapter, where he tolde vs the storie, he could name but one preacher, & him an infamous person, and yet perhaps he slandereth him in all yt he saith against him. Now he seemeth as though al the preachers & Doctours were captaines of this disorder, which is an impudent

and shamelesse lye: as yt which followeth is a malicious and foolish slander, yt the inconstancie of the protestants is such, as there is no ground or assurance of our faith, bicause there be diuers opinions in some matters, yt are no articles of faith, or bicause Papistes may feigne inconstancie in their doctrine, where there is none at al. For albeit that some haue thought, yt men must not be enforced to profession of religion, and one or two haue written against ye regimēt of women, as a French Papist also hath done in his Emblemes: yet generally we hold, yt heretikes are to be punished, and all men compelled to serue God truly, and none suffred to commit idolatrie: likewise we hold the regiment of women lawful, as well in the highest estate of a Queene, as in inferiour degrees of a mother or a mistresse. We always teach obedience vnto ye Prince. And it is the Pope that armeth subiectes against their Prince, discharging them of their allegeance, as in the rebellion of the North. The doings of Fraunce and Scotland, are by publique instruments testified vnto ye world, by the Princes them selues, that they were good and lawfull, and not done against them, but in their seruice and obedience. For miracles and Doctours, we neuer taught diuersly of them, but alwayes, that they were to be embraced according to the trueth, which they are brought to confirme, which trueth must be tryed onely by the authoritie of scriptures, neither by miracles, nor Doctours. And bicause he toucheth by name the miracle of Maister Lane of Westchester, although we make no great account of it, as a miracle, which might be a natural cure, yet it is more vnlike to be a fable, and more like to be a true miracle, then that which Maister Bristowe alledgeth of Margeret Iesop with the short leg. The decrees of the Pope, though hee bee Antichrist, are sufficient to beate downe the papistes, which holde that he can not erre, the like I say of the gloses and late writers of their owne, to whome we owe no obedience, as they professe their faith to be gouerned by them. And seeing of custome some be good & some be bad, why may we not receiue the good and refuse

the bad without M. San. frumpe, Let olde customes preuaile quoth M. Iewell. The old Latin translation of the Bible is in many places corrupt, but neuer to be preferred before the originall of the Greeke and Hebrue, although it may be cited where it differeth against the Papistes, which receiue it as only true. Old writers haue called the holy table an altar, and the Communion, a sacrifice or Masse, yet followeth it not, that Popish altars & Popish Masse may not be condemned. But what slaunders are these, the body of Christe is the signe of his body, and the signe of the crosse, is the body it selfe crucified, who euer heard these monsters proceed out of our mouthes? Againe, The communion is taught to be but holy bread. Priestes and Bishops need haue no temporal possessions, except they thē
                  selues be Priestes and Bishops. Priestes and Bishops are equal by Gods law, therefore Popish Priestes, which be the diuels Priestes, must be equall with Christian Bishops, which for gouernment sake are preferred before Christian Ministers.
               Finally, if the Papistes burne oure malicious and false translations of the Bible, they are saide to burne the holy Bible of Iesus Christe. If the Protestants burne the Hebrue, Greeke, Latine, & Duch text, as they did in ye Low countries, they are cōmended as holy workers in ye Lords vine. No M. Sander, thy malicious eares neuer heard that, which thy slanderous pen hath set downe, that any man was of vs commended, for burning any text of the Bible: and if by disorder, and through ignorance, any texts were burned, yet thou feignest too impudently, in saying, they burned the Duch text. And whereas thou wouldest excuse the purposed malicious burning of English Bibles, by the falsenesse of their translations, beside that thou speakest absurdly in all learned mens eares, who knowe the trueth of them by conference of them with the originall toungs, yet this bewrayeth your malice against the word of God, that hauing so long complained of our false translations, neuer a papist of you all will take the paines to translate ye Bible truly, that ye people might be rightly

instructed in Gods word by your true translation, if you feared their peruerting, by our false translation.
            
            
               ¶ CAP. 4. or as the errour of his Printer hath made it, CAP. 3. and so continueth in that errour to the end, which I note, bicause there should be no varying in the conference of his booke and mine answere.
               
                  
                     Sander.
                  The petegreu of such as heretofore haue destroyed the altars, the temples, the chalices of God, or the images of Christe and of his Saintes: with aunswere to certaine obiections which might seeme to make for image breakers. Also he noteth a notable storie of honour done to Church plate in the auncient time.
               
                  
                     Fulk.
                  This blaser of the Popes armes, pretending to drawe a petegreu of such as haue destroyed altars, temples, &c. rehearseth a beadroll of Infidells and heretiques, which haue defaced the true religion of God, which pertaineth nothing to them that by lawfull authoritie deface and destroy the monuments of Popish Idolatrie, hauing an expresse commandement of God so to doe. You shall ouerthrowe their altars, & breake downe their pillers, ye shall cut downe their groues, and burne their grauen images with fire, Deu. 7. v. 5. But this (he saith) pertaineth not vnto vs to execute, except we had conquered an heathen nation, that worshipped Iupiter and Iuno: Mars and Minerua &c. By what commandement then did Ezechias, Iosias, and all the godly Kings destroye and deface the monuments of Idolatry in the land of Iuda, which was no heathen nation, but the most peculiar people of God? By what authoritie did they destroy the hill altars or high places, in which the people did offer sacrifice only to God? 1. Reg. 3. Finally, by what precept did Ezechias breake downe the brasen serpent, which was a figure of Christ infinitely more excellent, then al the images of the Papistes, bicause yt had a godly beginning, wheras theirs haue a wicked beginning & a worse continuance and abuse? This cōmandemēt therfore serueth against al Idolatrie, whether it be committed of people yt are heathnish, or of such as hauing so
                     •
                   sacraments of God, are degenerated into false religiō
                  
& Idolatry. Wherfore the examples yt M. S. alledgeth, beside yt some of them are very violently drawne to image breakers, do nothing touche them that deface false religion, but such as destroy true religion. The Philistines were punished for looking vpon the arke, Vzza for touching it vpon a good intent, Ieroboam for forsaking the temple of Salomon, and setting vp two prophane Temples with Idols in them (which M. Sander omitteth,) and making priests of the vilest of the people. This last prank saith he, is practised, in Anwerpe. How so M.S? New temples are erected. Why sir, is it lawfull to haue but one temple as then at Ierusalem? Newe ministers are made in Schisme. I trust they be not so vile rascals, as the multitude of your Popish hedge priestes. But where be the idols in the newe temples of Anwerpe, that were in Ieroboams Temple?
               But let vs heare the rest of his examples. The seruantes of Iessabel destroyed the altars of God in the dayes of Elias: It is very true: And Elias with the godly people destroyed the altars of Baal, and slew his Priests. Nabuchodonosor burned the Temple of Salomon: he did wickedly: Balthasar abused the holy vessels, he smarted for it. But Iehu destroyed the religion of Baall, and the ornamentes thereof, and he is commended, so be all the godly Kinges for destroying of idolatrie: 2. Reg. 10.18.23.
               In Malachie God reproueth the Priests for offering the blind and lame, and the polluted bread. Manasses ye priest set vp a false Temple in mount Garizim, Antiochus Epaphanes defiled the temple of God, Pompeius entered into the sanctuarie. All these did wickedly, but they that with Lawfull authoritie deface, and destroy idolatrie, doe that which is right in the sight of the Lord: 2. Reg. 18. & 23.
               Christ honored the Temple with his presence, yet he chased out the abusers therof: Luc. 19. Ioan 2. &c.
               
               The Christians in Tertullians time, vsed crossing of their forheades, to shewe them selues Christians, but no worshipping of any crosse, as the Papists do, yet came that estimation of the crosse from the Valentinian heretikes.

                  Irenaeus, Lib. 1. Ca. 1. An. 150.
               The Nouatians kept conuenticles from the Catholiks, such are the assemblies of the Papistes, separated from the Churche of God, though they be neuer so many in number, as the Arrians in the East and in Affrica were.
               The Manichees did hate the Image of Christe, whom they denied to be a very man, testified in the 2. Councel of Nice, which was almoste 800. yeares after Christe, when Images were made and honoured, yet M. Sander noteth it Anno Dom. 280. when in the Churche of God were no Images of Christ. But among the heretikes Gnostici was there images of Christ, which they honoured, An. 129. Ire. Lib. 1. Cap. 24.
               Dioclesian and Maximian commanded the Churches of Christians to be destroied, & the Bibles to be burned, so did the Papistes at Orleans, and Anwerpe, to the Churches, & in all places where they come for the Bibles burning. Yet the good man, chargeth the protestants at Anwerpe in S. Frances monasterie, for burning the Bible.
               When Georgius an Arrian Bishop was brought into Alexandria by force, there was great sedition and spoyle of Church goodes, there hath beene as great sedition and spoyle in bringing in of Catholike Bishops of Rome & greater also, as many hystories do witnesse, and the Papistes wil not denie, so many Schismes haue ben about election of their Popes.
               But neerer to the matter, Iulian the Apostata with the paganes pulled downe the image of Christ, that was set vp in the streete of Caesarea Philippi in remembraunce of the miracle done vpon the woman that was healed of her issue of bloud, not in the Church to be worshipped. Wel: he shewed his malice, but he did no hurt to Christian religion. This example hurteth not them that lawfully pul downe, & deface Images in the Church of Christ: for Epiphanius before Iulian, did so at Anablatha, Epiph. epi. 34. But Iulianus did obiect vnto the Christians, that they did worship the woode of the crosse, when they painted Images therof, on their foreheades, and before their houses.

Hereof M. Sander gathereth, that the Christians had a grauen image of Christe him selfe euen from his owne time, in Paneade, or Caesarea Philippi, as images of the crosse before their houses: for the image of Christe, Eusebius testifieth, it was set vp by the Heathen men, and not by Christians, Lib. 7. Cap. 18. Although it is not like, that it was set vp in Christes time, when it is manifest by Iosephus, that the Iewes could not abide so much as the image of the Emperour, or of his standerd the Eagle to be set vp among them. The images of the crosses set before their doores, declare they had not them, and much lesse any other of Christ and his saintes in Churches, which Iulian would not haue omitted, to proue them woode worshippers and idolaters. Cyrillus in deede defendeth these signes of crosses as better memorials of Christ, and of his vertues, then ye Images of ye Gentiles, yet he defendeth not setting vp of crosses, or any images in Churches, & creeping to them, which is the filthie idolatrie of the Papists.
               Iulian the vncle of this Apostata, did sit vpon the vessels vsed at the communion, in despight of our religion, and was iustely plagued therefore. Eustachius ye heretike kept his conuenticles in priuate places, he would not be ruled by his Bishop. The protestants kepe open assemblies, whē they are not hindred by persecution, and are ordered by the Bishops & Elders of their Church, though they will not be obedient to the Hereticall Bishops of the Popishe Church. The same Eustachius condemned the marriage of Priestes, as the Papistes doe. Ep. Con. Gangr. Vigilantius iustly reproued the Christians for superstitious estimatiō of reliques, which Hieronyme could not honestly defend for all his quarrelling.
               To conclude, Chrysostome complayneth of the iniurie done to him, his church, and the sacraments, by barbarous souldiers: Optatus of the like by the Donatistes, Victor by the Arrians, all these and an hundreth more that might be brought of like examples, beeing actes of Infidels, and Heretiques against true religion, doe not proue, but the commaundement of God must be

executed, against false religion, by them who haue authoritie of God so to doe.
               
                  But now he commeth to answere our obiections, and first the example of Epiphanius a godly bishop of Cyprus whose wordes I will first set downe, as they are conteyned in an epistle of his, to Iohn Bishop of Ierusalem. Praeterea quod audini, &c. Moreouer whereas I heard that some men did murmur against me, because that when we went together to the holie place, whiche is called Bethel, that there I might make a gathering with you after the Ecclesiasticall manner: and was come to the village, which is called Anablatha, and had seene there as I passed by a candle burning, and had inquired what place it was, and had learned that it was a Churche, and came into pray: I found there a vale hanging at the doore of the saide Church, steyned and painted, and hauing the image as it were of Christe or of some Saint, for I doe not well remember whose Image it was. Therefore when I saw this thing, that the Image of a man did hang in the Church of Christ, contrarie to the authoritie of the scriptures, I rent it, and gaue councel to the keepers of that place, that they should rather wrappe some dead poore man in it & carry him to buriall in it. And they contrariwise murmured & said, if he would haue rent it, it had beene meete that he should haue giuen vs another vayle, and haue changed it. Which when I heard, I promised that I would giue them one, and send it shortly. Now there was some stay in the meane time, while I seeke to send them a very good vaile in steed of yt. For I thought one should haue ben sent me out of Cypres. But now I haue sent such a one as I could get. And I pray you yt you will commaunde the elders of yt place, to receiue this vale, which we haue sent by this bearer. And to charge them that here after no such vayles be hanged vp in the Church of Christ, which are against our religion. For it becommeth your honestie, to haue such carefulnesse to take away scrupulositie, which is vnworthie of the Church of Christ, and the people which i
                        •
                      committed to you.
               
               
                  These be the words of Epiphanius in his Epistle translated by S. Hierom. For answere to this, first he will not affirme whether yt Epiphanius ye byshop of Cypres wrote this Epistle, or some other of that name, because Damascen that impudent corrupter of antiquitie, when he can not answere the Epistle, he moueth such suspition in his Apologie for the worshipping of Images. But let Hierome himselfe testifie the matter, Contra errores Ioan Hierosol. ad Pampathiam, in the end of the Epistle. Secondly he answereth that notwithstanding the iudgement of Epiphanius, it is not against the authoritie of the scriptures to haue Images in the churches, for then shoulde not Theodorus the martyr, haue had his martyrdome painted on the walles, as Gregorius Nyssenus witnesseth. In deede Gregorius Nyssenus, which liued somewhat after Epiphanius, speaking of the ornaments of the Churche, affirmeth that there was the history of the martyr painted on the wall, but so farre from anye spice of adoration, that the same was also expressed vppon the pauement which men did tread vppon. Like as for ornamente, there were grauen also in woode the Images of beastes. These were the beginnings and as it were the first budding vp of Idolatrie in the church, yet gainesaide by godly men, and forbidden in the councell of Eliberis.
               Another reason he hath, of those simple mens authoritie, that hang vp the Image, and their murmuring, which was not for putting downe the Image, but for that he gaue them not another vail or curtaine first. That it was not his priuate opinion, it appeareth in this, that he writeth so confidently thereof to the bishop of Ierusalem, in whose dyocesse Anablatha was, and who was present whē the saide Image was defaced.
               But if he had thought (saith M. Sander) the hauing of Images to bee an heresie, he woulde haue noted it in his booke of Fourescore and more heresies, where he noteth no suche opinion of hauing Images in the Churche for hereticall.
               
                  This balde reason he learned out of the councell of Nice 2. act. 4. of one Epiphanius which taketh vpon him to reiecte and controll the authoritie of this ancient Epiphanius of Cypres. But howe falsely, they haue affirmed this of him, you may see in diuers places of Epiphanius booke against heresies. First lib. 1. Tom. 1. he sheweth the punishment of God against Tharra an Image maker, which ouer liued his sonne Aran, which no man (as he saith) did before him. Secondly, lib. 1. Tom. 2. hee sheweth that Simon Magus the father of heretikes, made Images of him selfe and his harlot Helena to be worshipped: & that Carpocrats the heretik made the Images of Iesus, and of S. Peter, and did cense them and worship them. Also Her. 27. he saith, Gnostici & Carpocratitae, &c. 
                  The Gnostikes and Carpocratites, haue Images painted in collours, some also of golde and siluer and other matter, which they say be the Images of Iesus, and that these Images of Iesus were made when hee liued among men vnder Pontius Pilate. Againe lib. 2. T. 1. her. 55. he sheweth yt there were some in Arabia, Robas and Edom, which worshipped the Image of Moses. And Centra Cullyridianos, her. 79. which worshipped the Images of ye blessed virgin Marye, he saith: Vnde non est, &c. Howe is not this desire of making Images a diuelish attempt? Prętextu enim Iustitię, for the deuil alwais entring into the mind of men vnder pretence of righteousnes, deifying the mortal nature in ye eres of men, by variety of arts, hath set forth stocks or statues, bearing ye Image of men. And they truely which are worshipped by thē are dead, but they bring in their Images to be worshipped, which neuer liued, for they cā
                     not be dead which neuer liued. Finally Lib. Autorato. prima enim scortatio est excogitatio simulachrorum inquit scriptura. The inuenting of Images was ye first whordome saith the scripture.
               
               By these places iudge howe true it is which Damascen writeth, that his owne church was decked with Images. But yet M.S. hath another shift of descāt, yt the cause of rēding this vail might be, for auoiding of offence of ye
                  
weak Iews, & Pagās, lately cōuerted in yt place. As thogh Epiphanius doth not plainly declare ye cause to haue bin, for yt it was cōtrari to ye scriptures. The like cause he wold haue to be of the decree of the councell of Eliberis in Spaine: 
                     Placuit pict
                           •
                        ras in ecclesia esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut adoratur in, arietibut depingatur. It is decreed yt there ought to be no pictures in ye Church, lest yt which is worshipped & adored, should be painted on ye walles. But the Canon it self sheweth a reason why they would haue no pictures in ye churches, lest God whō onely they worshipped & adored might be painted on the wals, which were an abhominable absurditie, yet hath bene practised & i
                        •
                      defended, men be so prone to Idolatrie. But M.S. gathereth that seeing there might be no pictures in churches, ergo they might be in priuate houses, & if they be lawful to be in priuate houses, much more they might be permitted in churches. A proper ringworm, a doctor like argumēt, by which I may cōclude as foloweth. There may be no shoppes in churches, ergo they may be in priuate houses, and if they may be permitted 
                     •
                  n priuate houses, much more in churches. But yet he hath an other answer. This fact of Epiphanius was a priuate zeale, which is not to be folowed cōtrary to ye decree of ye catholike church: but I reply, it was a godly zeal, because it was ruled by ye cōmandement of God & ye holy scripture, against which no church hath authority to decree. But the last answere is as good as cake & pudding, which yet he thinketh worthy of a note in the margent. Images could not be brokē before they were set vp, therfore the setters vp of Images are ancienter & neerer ye Apostles time then the pullers down. That is out of questiō Euen so heresies could not be confuted before they were inuented, therfore the inuenters of heresies, are ancienter & neerer the Apostles times then the confuters. Note ye papistes for your learninge or else note that this note of Master Sander is not worthye the notinge. But hee proceedeth and will prooue (as he sayeth) that as there were some Images in Churches in the time of Epiphanius, so straight after his

time, they were cōmon in all churches: but this straightway was almost 200. yeares after Epiphanius,
                     An. 493 as he citeth out of Nicephorus, of one Xenias who, he saith, was the first that spake against worshipping of Images, which howe false it is, al men that haue read the works of ye ancient writers doe knowe sufficiently. The next breaker of Images, he would haue to be Serenus bishop of Marsiles,
                     An. 596. who wa
                     •
                   reproued by Pope Gregorie, which wrote vnto him, that he shoulde not haue broken the Images, but prohibited the people from worshipping of them: Lib. 7. Epist. 169. But M. Sander will auoide that 
                     •
                  rohibition, by the distinction of adoratiō, that they should not be worshipped as God: because Gregorie saith, lib. 7. epist. 53. Scio quod, &c. I know that you desire not the Image of our Sauiour, to this purpose, to worshippe it as God. By which wordes he meaneth, that all worshippe is due vnto God, and that by worshipping an Image, it is made a false God.
               But it foloweth in the same Epistle (saith M. Sander) which proueth that Gregorie acknowledged some worshippe due to Images. Nos non, quasi ante Diuinitatem, ante imaginem proster nimur, &c. We fall not downe before an Image, as before ye godhead, but we worship him whome by the Image we remēber to haue ben borne, or to haue suffred, and also to sitte in the throne. But these wordes import no such matter, but rather the contrarye, except M. Sander can prooue, that it is all one to fall downe before an Image, and to fall downe vnto an Image. Although he seemeth to say, that they falled not downe at all before anye Image, but onely vsed them for their remembraunce.
               M. Sander continuing his petegrue, sheweth that Philippicus the Emperour being a monothelite, anno. 710. threwe downe the Images of the fathers of the sixe generall councels that were set in the Churche porche of Sophia: belike he was afraide they woulde come shortly into the Church. Pope Constantine caused the like pictures to be set vp in the Church porche of Saint Peter at

Rome. And what of this? Forsooth hee was an heretike that threwe downe images. So was Pope Honorius condemned for a monotholite archeheretike in the seuenth generall councell, that mainteined images. After him An. 730. Leo, persuaded by two Iewes, saith the late idolatrous writers, threwe downe the images at Constantinople: and anno 740. Constantine his sonne, a wicked man, and an heretike followed him. But vnder Irene & Constantine anno 796. by the seconde councell of Nice, images were restored and their worship established. Of these stories of pulling downe and setting vp of images, M. Sander noteth, that the mainteiners of images passed their aduersaries in foure things. The first, that they were quietly set vp, and broken downe with tumult, so were many heresies by the subtile serpent quietly setled, which without great tumult could not be rooted out, as ye Arrian heresie, for example. But that images were vsed from the Apostles, and Christ him selfe, he promiseth to shewe afterward. The second, whereas they were set vp in diuerse countries, they were pulled downe only in Greece: a wise matter, whereas idols were worshipped in ye days of Ezechias, throughout all the worlde, they were pulled downe onely in Iewrie. And yet against this idolatrous councell of Nice Carolus Magnus Emperour of ye West writ a booke, which is yet extant. The thirde prerogatiue, the idolaters haue had two generall councels of their side, the idoll breakers none: and yet hee confesseth they had one at Ephesus, another at Constantinople, but he sayeth, they had them by stealth, that is marueile, when they were gathered by the Emperours, as all other generall councels were. And many of them (sayth he) recanted after: so did they of Nice when the Emperours which followed immediatly after the Nicen councell, threwe downe the images, as their predecessours had done. Finally, where as hee alledgeth the sixte councell of Constantinople for images, there is not one worde in all that councell to defende them, but a counterfect Canon foysted in by the idolatrous councell of

Nice, which they say was made foure or fiue yeres after, vnder Iustinian to cloke their forgerie.
               The fourth, yt notwithstanding so many Emperours resisting, yet images at length preuailed among ye Greekes, which haue them at this day painted, & as he sayeth, doe reuerence them, but hee sayeth falsly, if hee meane they worship them, as the Papistes do theirs: and they are only painted on walles or tables, not carued or grauen, lest they shoulde be worshipped. They continue still also enemies to the Church of Rome, if continuance be any matter to iustifie their doings. But nowe he concludeth howe vaine a thing it is to oppose Epiphanius which was but one man, and a fewe hereticall Emperours against all the rest of the fathers, and the generall councels. As though because hee hath cited onely Epiphanius, there were none of the fathers against images but hee, beside that he skippeth ouer the Eliberin councell cited by him selfe. But what fathers and councels haue beene against images, I shall haue better occasion to shewe hereafter. Nowe he proceedeth in his peuish pelfe: there were heretikes called Bogomili anno 1180. which condemned the worshipping of images. All is not good that heretikes condemne: the Arrians condemned the Manichees: the Pellagians condemned the Arrians. There was neuer any heresie but allowed some good thinges▪ and condemned some euill things. Next he adioyneth Anno Do. 1160. the Waldensies, whome hee calleth beggers of Lyons, yet Pauperes signifieth not beggers, but poore men, which were true Christians, and condemned not onely idolatrie, but also all Papistrie. The Sarazens also iustly condemne the Papistes for Idolaters, whose idols being so contrarie to the manifest commaundement of God, were a greate occasion to make so many nations to forsake Christianitie, and for the Mahometists to continue in their wicked and false religion. Last of all hee commeth to Wickelefe, Hus. Luther, &c. and them of the lowe countries, whome especially hee chargeth with sacriledge. But to omitt their fact which

I haue often shewed cannot be defended if it wanted lawfull authoritie, all the stories that hee bringeth, or can bring of godly princes, and other persons erecting altars, churches, colledges, &c. and furnishing true religion with all ornamentes meete for the same, are nothing to the purpose to defende the temples of idols, with their idols and altars, and other their trumperie from destruction by godly and lawfull authoritie. At length hee alledgeth the decrees of Arcadius, Honorius, Theodosius, and Valentinianus, which alloweth the erecting of their owne images, and of all notable men, as Iudges, Magistrates, &c. which when it was a ciuile honour vsed among the Romanes, and nothing at all touched religion, I marueile with what face hee can alledge it, for setting vp of images in churches to bee worshipped, and yet that honouring of the Emperours images is condemned by Saint Ierome in Daniell, lib. 1. Cap. 3. Likewise, that they decreede, that such as fledd to the Emperours image, should be safe from violence, which was only a ciuil policie, to bring the maiestie of the Emperour in estimatiō with the common people, & therefore it followeth not yt much lesse they would haue commaunded the image of Christe to haue bene pulled downe, which could not be set vp, but to the dishonour of Christ, because he hath forbidden it: And therfore they made a decree, that wheresoeuer it was set vp, it should be taken downe. M. Sander sayeth, that M. Iewel alledging this edict, doth translate tolli to be taken downe, which signifieth to bee taken vp, as though the decree had been of crosses on the grounde to be taken vp lest they shoulde bee trodden vppon, but when M. Sander hath sayed his pleasure, tolli signifieth to be taken cleane awaye. And although in Iustinian Ti. 11. lib. 1. the signe of our sauiour Christ is forbidden to be grauen or painted on the grounde in flint or marble: yet it followeth not, but the edict cited by the bishop of Sarum, may be vnderstood of taking away all images, wheresoeuer they were.
               The conclusion of the Chapter is, that he findeth nothing

on Maister Iewels syde, but Infidels, Iewes, heretikes, Idolaters, or else he maketh many lyes vpō Christian Princes, as though the lawe of God were nothing, but Paganisme, Epiphanius were an heretike, the fathers of the councell of Eliberis were rennagates or Iewes, the edictes of the Christian Emperours, were restreined by Maister Sanders glose, because an image was made by the woman that was healed (saith he) but Eusebius sayeth by the Gentiles, lib. 7. Cap. 16. and the Gospell reporteth that shee had consumed all her goods vppon Phisitions, and therefore was not able to set vp such a piller and two such images of brasse, one of Christe, the other of her selfe, as those were reported to bee. From which day forwarde (saith he) all Catholike fathers and Councels, and Christians, made and reuerenced holy images as it shall appeare afterward. Of all the lowde lyes that euer I heard, this may goe for the whetstone. What shall appeare afterward, we shall consider afterwarde. But in the meane time, remember his lye sufficiently confuted, euen by such testimonies as hee himselfe hath alledged, by way of obiection the Epistle of Epiphanius, and the councell of Eliberis.
            
            
               
                  Sander.THE V. OR IIII. CHAP.
               
                  That the worde of God forbiddeth not generally the making of all kinde of images, and in what sence images are forbidden to be made.
               
               
                  
                     Fulke.
                  That the worde of God forbiddeth not the making of all images generally, it is a matter out of controuersie with vs, although the Iewes and Mahometistes think the contrarie. But seeing making of images is by the seconde commaundement expressely forbidden, wee may clearely perceiue, what images are forbidden to be made, if wee consider that this is a precept of the first table, which concerneth religion.
               Therefore, by it were are forbidden to make to our

selues any manner of images for any vse of religion. M. Sander saith: that Iewes were onely forbidden to make them as straunge Gods, for when the Lord had said, Thou shalt haue no straunge Gods: imediatly shewing what are straunge Gods, hee saith, thou shalt make no grauen images. Beside that, this interpretation is a confusion of two commaundements in one, the former shewing the matter or substance of Gods honour, the other the essentiall forme thereof to be spirituall, it is proued false by these reasons: diuers nations worshipped liuing creatures which were no images, as Cattes, Oxen, Crocodiles, Serpents, Apes, as Gods, therfore the interpretation of strange Gods can not be images. The Israelites worshipped the true God Iehoua, which brought them out of the land of Aegypt, in the image of a Calfe, Exo. 3
                     •
                  . So did the Israelites vnder Ieroboam: and euen those Gentiles that did worship images with godly honour, they did worship thē but as images of the Gods them selues, whome they confessed to dwel in heauen, earth, the sea, or hell, except some ignoraunt persons among them, euen as among the Papistes the like haue bene, that did thinke the very Idols to be Saintes, and were moued thereto, by the falshood of the Popish Priestes, which would make their eyes to gogle & water, their lippes to stirre, their noses to bleede; their faces to sweat, euen as by pricking their finger they made their Masse cakes to bleede. The Gentiles also, though they worshipped many Gods, yet they honoured one Iupiter aboue all the rest of the inferiour Gods, whom they worshipped but euen as the Papistes worship the Saintes. And to that one God they did attribute as great praise, as the Papistes doe to the highest God. The Poet Horace saith, Quire
                        •
                      hominum ac Deorum, Qui mare & terras variis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      mundum, Temperat horis: Vnde nil maius generatur ipso, Nec viget quicquam simile aut secundum: Proximos illi tamen occupanit Pallas honores. It is hee which gouerneth the affaires of men and Gods, which ruleth the Sea and the land, and the whole world with diuers seasons. So that nothing is brought foorth greater then hee, neither is there any

thing like him or second vnto him. Yet Pallas receiueth the next honour vnto him. Compare this confession of the Heathen Poet, with that the Papistes teach of the worshippe of GOD and our Ladie, and see howe like they be.
               But to returne to Maister Sanders interpretations, hee maketh a second restraint, vpon these wordes, Thou shalt not make to thy selfe, that is, by thine owne priuate iudgement, but such images as I shal appoint to be made, thou maist haue. This restraint is right, and according to the meaning of the worde of GOD. For by this are excepted the brasen serpent, the Cherubims, and what so euer beside GOD commaunded to be made, and had in any vse of religion. As for the images of the Lions about Salomons throne, the Oxen that bare vp the see of brasse, the Pomgranets, Date trees, and other flowers made for the ornament of the temple, were in no vse of religion, and without all daunger of worshipping, therefore not prohibited by this commaundement, no more then the images of beastes, fishes, birdes, trees, in bookes of Philosophie, or the painting of stories in clothes or galleries, &c.
               But whereas Maister Sander in this restriction, enlargeth the commaundement of God to be vnderstoode, not onely that which is deliuered by the speciall and certaine messingers of God, Moses, the Prophetes, and the Apostles, but also addeth their successours, of whose calling we haue no warrant of GOD, I may not therein agree with him. For hee quoteth for successours of the Apostles, Paulinus, Gregorie, and the second Councell of Nice, yea, Eusebius, Basil, Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostome, which all erred from the Apostolique doctrine in some pointes, although none of the fiue last named, allowed the hauing of images in Churches. Eusebius Li. 7. cap. 18. speaketh of an image in the streat, made by the Gentiles. Basil, Hom. in 40. Martyres: of images of men of warre painted for imitation, but not in the Churche. Chrysostomes Liturgie was written in the dayes of

the Emperour Alexius, sixe or seuen hundreth yeares after Chrysostomes death. Ambrose in vita Geruasij, is a meere forgerie, for the right Ambrose, De suga saeculi cap. 5. Eccles
                           ••
                         manes idęas, & vanas nescit simulachrorum figuras. The Church knoweth no improfitable formes and vaine figures of images. Augustine De consensu Eu. cap. 10. the place by him quoted, condemneth them that sought Christe in painted walles, of Gregorie Nyssen we haue spoken in the Chapter before, the other whome he citeth, Paulinus and Gregorie of Rome, we refuse as erronious, and the second Nicen assembly as Idolatrous.
               
               But M. Sanders proceedeth to defend the makers of images, whome the scripture accurseth, saying, that it meaneth either makers of idols, or else makers of wanton images, or at least, such as make them for an euill end and purpose. Concerning the first, hee findeth fault with the English translation, which euery where almost, turneth idols into images. As though the Hebrue wordes, which the English translation expresseth, had that ridiculous distinction of idols and images, yea, as though the very vulgar Latine translation Psalme 113. which he quoteth, calleth them not Simulachra images, the makers whereof, are accursed. Concerning the second, it is plaine the Psalmist speaketh not of wanton images, but of such as were worshipped of the Heathen. And to the thirde, I graunt it meaneth them that make them to an euill end and purpose, as all Popish image makers doe, which make them to the end they might be set vp in Churches, to be worshipped, contrarie to Gods commaundement.
               But the last reason for the defence of image making, would serue to perce a marble stone, with the subtiltie thereof, and yet when all is done, hath as much reason in it, as the blockes which it defendeth. Mans naturall vnderstanding is, by conceiuing images, made and brought vnto it by the externall and inward senses, therefore it is lawfull to make carued images. We may conceiue in our mind an image of Christe nayled on the crosse, therefore we may make it of wood or stone, and worship it.
               
                  O subtile argument. But syr, you graunt the making of Idols to be forbidden, but those conceiued images of the minde are called Idolls by them, that teach you that they be such conceptions of things: therefore this argument a paribus, will serue you to defend Idolls as well as images. Yet one question or two about this diffuse argument I would demaund. Doeth God forbid by the second commaundement naturall, or artificiall images? If artificiall, then they haue no comparison with naturall images.
               Againe syr, are our seeing and hearing from whome these images you speake of first doe come, by your Philosophie actions or passions? If they be passions, howe are they compared with making of grauen images, whiche are actions? Finally, where he saith, this prohibition was not immutable, but temporall to that people, he passeth all bounds of reason and common vnderstanding, as by the iudgment of God is become like vnto those Idols whome he defendeth. For hauing graunted before that Idolatrie was forbidden by this precept, nowe he restraineth the forbidding of idolatrie, only to the Iewes of that time, as though it were lawfull for Christians, who more streightly then the Iewes, must worship God in spirit and trueth Iohn. 4. and are commaunded to keepe them selues pure from Idols. 1. Iohn 5.
            
            
               
                  Sander.THE VI. OR V. CHAP.
               
                  That the word of God only forbiddeth Latria which is Gods own honour, to be giuen to artificiall images, leauing it to the lawe of nature, and to the gouernors of his Church, what other honour may be giuen to holy images. Also the place of Exodus, Thou shalt not adore images, is expounded, and that Christe by his incarnation taketh away all idolatrie that Maister Iewell vainely reproueth. Doctour Harding condemneth his owne conscience, and is proued a wrangler. The difference in honour betweene Latria and Doulia.
               
               
                  As M.S. saith, images are forbidden to be worshipped, as they are forbidden to be made, so say I,
                     Fulk.
                   but with a farre differing vnderstanding. They may not be made to any vse of religion, so they may not be worshipped wt any religious worship, which apperteineth to God. For our religion is a seruice of God onely. And where he saith as Images might be made by the authoritie of Moses, or of the gouernours of Gods people, so they wert not to be taken for Gods: so they may be likewise worshipped by the authoritie of Gods church, this only prouiso being made, that Gods owne honour be not giuen vnto them. I aunswere that as neither Moses, nor any gouernour, had authoritie to make any images in any vse of religion, other then God commanded, no more hath the Church any authoritie to allowe any worshipping of them whiche she hath none authoritie by God to make, but an expresse commandement forbidding both the making & the worshipping of them, in the first table of the law, which concerneth onely religion. Nowe we haue saide both, let vs consider M. Sanders reasons. First he saith, God forbidding his owne honour to be giuen to images, left it to the lawe of nature, and to the gouernors of his Churche, what honour images should haue. Concerning the lawe of nature, he saith, that God perceiued that when images of honourable personages are made, honor was due vnto them. What lawe of nature is this M. Sander, that is distinct from the law of God? Or what nature is that, whose lawe alloweth the worshipping of images? In deed the corruption of mans nature, is to worship falshode in steed of trueth, but the law of nature hath no such rule, beeing al one with the lawe of God, as nature is nothing else but the ordinaunce of God. And where find you one title in the lawe, that God hath leaft it to the gouernours of his Church to appoint a worship meete for images? Worde you haue none, letter you haue none, nor pricke of a letter sounding that way. But you haue collections.
               First of the signification of Latria, as though God had written his Lawe in Greeke, and not in Hebrue: and

yet Latria, according to the Graecians, hath no such restraint to signifie the seruice of God only, but euerie seruice of men also, and is all one that Doulia, and so vsed of Greeke writers, excep
                     •
                   we will say that Doulia, which you will haue to be giuen to images, is a more slauish & seruile worship, then that whiche you would haue vs to giue to God.
               But you will helpe your distinction, with the confusion of the commandementes, because God saith in the 1. precept, Thou shalt haue none other Gods but me, and then saith immediately, Thou shalt not make nor worworship images, but these cōmandementes are distinct or else you shall neuer make tenne. And whereas you alledge, that he saith immediatly after: I the Lord thy God, am a iealous God, that maketh cleane against you. For by those wordes, the Lorde declareth that he can no more abide the vse of images in his religion, then a iealous man can abide, any tokēs of an adulterer to be about his wife, therefore idolatrie in the scriptures is often called fornication. So the circumstances helpe you nothing, but is altogether against you. But what an horrible monster of idolatrie is this, that after you haue once confessed, that Gods incomprehensible nature cannot be represented by any artificiall image, you affirme that Christe by his incarnation hath taken away idolatrie, that we should not lacke some corporall trueth, wherein we might worship the Diuine substance? Whereas Christ himselfe telleth vs, that nowe the time is come, that God shall not be worshipped as before in bodily seruice at Ierusalem, or in the mountaine, but in spirite and trueth, Ioan. 4. The image of Christe you say is a similitude of an honourable trueth, whereas no idol doth represent a trueth. A worshipfull trueth, I promise you. Christe you say was man, but I say he is both God and man, a person consisting of those two natures. Your image representeth onely a person consisting of one nature, but suche a one is not Christe, therefore your image representeth

a falshoode, and is by your owne distinction an Idol.
               For the Diuine nature you confesse cannot be represented by an artificiall image. Againe, what an image is it of his humanitie? It can not expresse his soule, but his bodie onely. Last of all, why is it an image rather of Christ, then of an other man: Seeing in lineamentes and proportion of bodie, it hath no more similitude vnto Christes bodie, then to an other mans? But that it pleased the caruer to say, it is an image of Christ. O honourable blockes and stones.
               But Philo the Iewe was cited for a fauourer of this interpretation, that images are none otherwise forbidden to be made or worshipped, then to be made or worshipped as GODS. Howe vaine the authoritie of a Iewe is for a Christian man to leane vnto, I shall not neede to say, especially when it is well knowen, that the Iewes also not considering in whether table this commandement is placed, vnderstand by it, that all images generally are forbidden. And Philo saith nothing to helpe him. For first in Decal. he saith: when God had spoken of his owne substance and honour, order would that he should tell how his holy name was to be worshipped. And againe De eo quis haer. rer. Diuin. Vt solus Deus, &c. That God onely might be truely worshipped. What can be reasonably gathered of these wordes but that al honour is due to God, and therfore none to idols, which are forbidden to be made.
               If Philo a Iewe, will not serue, Augustine a Christian is alledged who Super Exod. 9.71. allowing that diuision of the tenne commandementes, by which three onely are saide to apperteine to God, saith: Et reuera, &c. And truely that which is saide. Thou shalt haue none other Gods but me, is more perfectly expounded, when forged things are forbidden to be worshipped. First for the diuision of the cōmandements, Aug. is not constant with him selfe. For In Quaesti. Nou. & Vet. Test. Quest. 7. he writeth thus. Non sint tibi Dij alij praeter me: primum verbum hoc

est: Es subiecit secundum: Non facies tibi vllam similitudineu
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   Thou shalt haue none other Gods but me: this is the first worde or commandement: and he addeth the second: Thou shalt not make to thy self any similitude. By which it is manifest yt to worship images, is not all one with hauing other Gods. But M. Sander will answer our obiection, that God forbiddeth all honour of images, thou shalt not fall downe to them nor worship them. Adoration saith he is a doubtfull worde. For Abraham adored the people of the lande Gen. 23. Very true, but with a ciuill worship, whereof we speake not nowe. He made obeysans to them, or as we say, he made courtesie to them. And the Angel refused to be adored, saying adore God. Therefore there is an adoration proper to God, for Angels sometime haue beene adored. Nay M. Sander, therefore all religious worshippe perteineth to God. For S. Iohn was not so madde to worship the Angel as God, but as the messenger of God, with a religious, and not a ciuill worshippe. And when you say Angels haue beene adored, as Gen. 18. and Iudicum 13. I answere in both places, they were adored with ciuill worship supposed by Abraham, and Manohah to be honourable men, and not to be Angels. But when you cite Augustine to fortifie your distinction of Latria, and Doulia, you hurt your cause by his iudgement, more then you further it by his authoritie. For whereas he in Exod. 94. saith that Latria is due to God as he is God, Doulia is due to God, as he is our Lorde, it followeth, yt that worship, which is called Doulia, as well as that which is called Latria, is due onely to God, who is our onely Lord, and wil not giue his glorie to grauen Images: Es. 42.8. 1. Cor. 8.6.
               Theodoret saying: that God calleth his people from the worshipping of diuels, euen as Saint Paule, 1. Cor. 10. sheweth that worshipping of images is the worshipping of diuels. And whereas Maister Sander saith, it can not possibly be saide, that Christes images is dedicated to the diuell, I say plainely with Theodoret and Paule, it is dedicated to the diuell, when it is worshipped.
               
                  For the Images of the Gentiles were not by the intente of the makers and worshippers dedicated to deuils, but to God and godly men and women: but when they were honored with religious honour, which appertaineth onely to God, the spirit of God saith, they were dedicated to deuils. And euen the same reason is of the Image of christ, of the Trinitie, of Peter, or any other, honoured with religious worshippe. Thus Augustine and Theodoret cited by him, are both against him. Well, yet he will disproue the comparison that M. Iewell maketh betweene Gods wordes, and M. Hardings.
               Iewell. God saith, thou shalt make to thy selfe no grauen Images. M. Hardinge saieth, thou shalt make to thy selfe grauen Images. But M. Sander saieth, neither God nor M. Harding say so, that is, they do not meane so: for God expounding his meaning, added, thou shalt not adore them, nor giue them the honor due to God aboue: therefore M. Iewell did euill to deuide Gods saying, and by that diuision, hee is sure that hee hath condemned his owne conscience. So that by M. Sanders interpretation to make Images, and to adore them, is all one. But M. Iewell, seeinge them to be distincte matters, to make and to worshippe, without condemning his conscience, did speak first of making, and then of worshippinge of Images. And although M. Sander, be either so blind, or so wilful, that he cannot see, or will not acknowledge, the distinction of the two tables of the Lawe, the matter of one being religion, the other charitie, yet M. Iewell did well inough consider, that the Queenes Maiesties Image grauen in her coyne, and such like pictures, as nothing at all concerned religion, nor nothinge at all forbidden, were made by a commandement of the first table.
               Now followeth another comparison. Iewell. God saith, thou shalt not fall downe to them, nor worshippe them. M. Harding saith, thou shalt fall downe to them, and worshippe them. But M. Sander answereth, that M. Harding defendeth, that another degree of honour incomparably inferiour to that which is due to God, may

be giuē to images, & not that which is due to God. Wel, then is M. Hard. & Sander to, contrary to other papists as great doctors as they. But yet M. Iewels comparison doth stand. For God forbiddeth al worship of Images, Master Hard. aloweth some worship of Images. Again, how wil you distinguish the falling downe to God, from falling downe to Images. And therfore M. Iewel is no wrangler: for meane Harding what he can meane, his saying and meaning is contradiction, to the saying and meaning of God. But you wil aff
                     •
                  rme (saith M. Sander) that al maner of honour is forbiddē to be giuen to any kind of Image. You haue against you ye opinion of the law of nature, the word of God, the iudgement of the ancient fathers, ye decrees of general councels, the practise of ye whole church, as hereafter shalbe declared. Verily M. Sander if you can bring al these authorities to vphold the worshipping of Images, you shal do more then any man was euer able to do before you, but hitherto you haue brought nothing worth the hearing. But in the meane time, you wil proue that there are two kindes of honour, the one due to God alone, the other to his creatures & so to Images. But you must proue, yt there be two kindes of religious honor, or els you proue nothing for your purpose. For ciuil honor wil not helpe you one iote for worshipping of Images, except you be of that minde as Boniface a gentleman about Stamford was, that would salute ye sacrament of the altar with curtesie & these words. God giue you good morrow good Lord. And what haue you to proue this your distinction? Nothing in the world, but a saying of Augustine, lib. 10. cap. 1. De ciuit. Dei. that Latria by a certaine consent of ecclesiasticall writers, hath bene taken for that seruice which is due to God: & that there is another seruice due to men, according to which the Apostle cōmandeth seruants to be subiect to their masters, which hath another name in Greek. This other name is Doulia whereof S. Paule saith in another place. Serue ye one another, by charity. I pray you M. Sander, if you be not turned into such an Image, (whole worship you defend) tell me simply

whether ye difference of these honors be not as great as the distinction of the two tables, religion and charitie? but how prooue you that Doulia which is here taken for a ciuil worshippe, may be applyed to Images, whom you honour with a religious worshippe? Yes mary, saye you, by this it is prooued, that we may serue Sainte Paule, In deede if you had liued when Sainte Paule liued, it had bene your dutie to haue honoured him with ciuill honor, or seruice of loue, but nowe he is dead, I say plainly, you ought not to serue him, nor worship him, with any religious honor. So saith Augustine, De vera religione cap. 55. Non sit nobis religio cultus hominum mortuorum. 
                  Let it not be our religion, the worshipping of deade men: and againe, Honoramus eos charitate non seruitute. We honour them with loue, not with seruice. Loe Master Sander, here is your Doulia or seruitus, denyed to Saintes that are dead.
               
               The foundation of your argument being thus ouerthrowen, we will suppose it doth stande, that Saint Paule is still to be serued, how prooue you that we must worshippe his Image? Forsothe we must thinke anye thinge that is his, to be aboue vs, at leaste in signification, for S. Paules owne excessiue honour. In deede Master Sander you doe well to call it an excessiue honour. But by this reason, I muste muche more worshippe all Gods creatures.
               For if I must thinke any thing of Sainte Paules to be aboue mee, and to worshippe it, then much more must I thinke any thinge of Gods to be aboue mee, and consequently I must worshippe it. Now the vilest creature in the worlde, yea, the deuill himselfe is more properly a thinge of Gods, then an Image is a thinge of Sainte Paules, therefore I muste thinke euerye one of Gods creatures to bee aboue mee, and worshippe it for his sake. O blockishe blindenesse of Idolatrous papists.
               But it vexeth you that Maister Iewell calleth your

worshippinge of Images Idolodoulia, because you will not haue it Idololatria, for the Images of Christ and S. Paule you saye be no Idoles, because Idoles are instrumentes to serue and honour the deuill withall. Verily such be your Images of Christ and Saint Paule, though not by your intention, yet by the holy ghostes determination.
               Last of al, M. Iewell himself is proued to be a seruer of Images, if not with Latria, yet with Doulia Papae. A strange matter: but howe is it prooued so to be? Marye sir, hee confesseth himselfe to honour the sacrament of Christes Supper, which he teacheth to be an Image of Christes bodye and blood, but he will not giue Gods owne honour to bread and wine, therefore it followeth inuincibly, that M. Iewell serueth, that is to say, he honoureth some Image. Ha ha he, M. Sander hath a pleasaunt witte, if he be in iest: but if he in earnest, as I am afraide he is, I will saye no more but that hee is a wrangler. If M. Iewel say the sacrament is an Image, doth he speake properly or figuratiuely? If figuratiuely, then the honouring of that which is not an Image properly, prooueth not, that he honoureth that which is an Image properly. Againe, when he speaketh of honouring doth he meane adoratiō, worshipping, kneeling to the sacrament, which he condemneth: or els reuerent esteeming of the mysteries of Christ? what hath this to doe with falling downe to stockes and stones? Finally doe we serue all thinges that wee honour (for M Sander maketh them all one) if wee doe, then men must serue their wiues whom they must honour, and men serue the weake partes of their body, which they honour most. These be the inuincible arguments for defence of Idolatrie.
            
            
               
                  Sander.THE VII. CHAP.
               
                  What an artificiall Image is. Of the naturall and artificiall Image. And how some honour may be giuen to artificiall Images. Also the obiection answered concerning that the Image of Christ is no liuing Image. Concerning the Image of the blessed Trinitie.

The abstracting of the image from the matter, and the ioyning of the same with the trueth. Master Iewell denyeth that the cognisances of the crosse, are images.
               
               This Chapter conteineth a metaphysicall discourse of images, naturall and artificiall.
                     Fulke.
                   The effecte whereof is this, that the nature of a thing cannot be expressed in an artificiall image, but by a naturall image onely, as the soone is the image of his father, expressing his fathers nature. But an artificiall image is the onely image of the person, or rather of the personall shape of him, that it representeth. And this being confessed, he sayeth it is an easie matter to aunswere the argument that is made, to proue the image of Christ to be a liuing image, because his Godhead cannot be represented in an image. For that image representeth such externall shape of Christ, as hee had in deede. But if he haue not forgotten him selfe, he sayed before, that an artificiall image is an image onely of the person or rather the personall shape of him whom it representeth. But neither the person, nor yet the personall shape of Christ is represented by such an image, therefore it is a lying image. For the externall shape of Christes bodie is not the personall shape of Christe. For as Christes person differeth from the person of euery other man, so his image must differ from the person of euery other man, or else it is a false image by Master Sanders owne groundes. But Master Sander sayeth, that as by his manhood the faithfull were ledd to his diuine nature when hee liued, so by his image wee are ledd to his humaine shape, from thence to his humanitie, and so vpwarde to his diuine nature. Here is an handsome ladder, but that the steppes stande too farre a sunder for any man to clymbe by it. For I denye that his disciples were ledd by his manhod to vnderstande or beleeue his Godhead, but onely by faith through his holy spirite inwardly, and outwardly by his doctrine and the workes of his Godhead. Yet sayeth he, if wee paint as much as his Apostles sawe, it is no lying sight.
               
                  What neede wee paint that which wee may more liuely see in our selues, and in any other liuing man, then in a deade image, namely the outwarde shape of a man?
               After this, he gathereth conclusions: firste, that it is neither possible nor lawfull to make an image, which may expresse the nature of God, of Angels, or of any other creature. Secondly it is possible and lawfull to make the image representing the personall propertie of any knowen creature. This is true in the second table of the lawe, but not in the first. Thirdly: The blessed Trinitie and infinite persons of Angels cannot properly▪ be expressed by any artificiall image. If this be true of the image of the Trinitie, why do you Papistes suffer and defende such horrible idols and monsters of a man with three faces, or with three bodies to expresse the blessed Trinitie? If Angels cannot bee represented by image, and if three persons be infinite, how doth your Idolatrous councell of Nice the seconde, not onely determine that their images may bee made, but also that they haue bodies, and be circumscriptible? Actione. 5. But you will not long holde this conclusion.
               Furthermore, I woulde knowe what diuinitie, yea, or Phylosophie this is, that you saye, the persons of Angels are infinite? I thought there had beene nothing actually infinite, but God onely, and that all creatures are definite, though they be spirituall, inuisible, and incircumscriptible. But to let you goe with that inconsiderate terme, and not to vrge it so farre, as to make you an vpholder of tenne thousands of Gods, your conclusion is, that visions which were of bodily formes may as well be paynted as preached, whether they were of the Trinitie or of Angels, as the three Angels that appeared to Abraham in the shape of men. The vision of Daniel 7. of the sonne of man, that came to him was auncient of dayes. The historie of the father speaking to Christe▪ and the holie Ghost appearing in the shape of a Doue. Admit that these visions may be painted▪ for so much as was seene, yet must they be painted as those visions

onely, and not otherwise: for if God to shewe the distinction of the persons in Trinitie, hath appeared in the shape of three men, yet is it not lawfull to paint the Trinitie so, and although the father in a vision appeared like an olde man, and the holie Ghoste like a Doue, yet is it not lawfull to paint God the father so alwayes, nor the holie Ghoste, much lesse to make such monsters as neuer appeared in any vision. And therefore God him selfe warned the people to remember that he did not appeare to them in the mounteyne, when he gaue the lawe, in any forme or shape, because they shoulde not bee deceiued to make an image thereafter to represent him withall Deuteronom. 4. vers. 15.
               Also Saint Paule preaching to the Athenienses, sayeth, that seeing wee are the generation of God, wee ought not to thinke, that the Godhead is like to golde, siluer, or stone, grauen by arte, and the inuention of man. Act. 17. vers. 29.
               And if you should paint the storie of the baptisme of Christe, howe woulde you paint the person of the father, which appeared not in any shape, but onely a voice from him was hearde? But knowing yt you haue to doe with wranglers, you say you would haue no image of ye Trinitie, but only to shewe that there bee three seuerall persons in one godhead, & this you thinke S. Augustine de fide & symbolo would beare. Ca. 7. but you shal heare his words. 
                     Non ideo tamen quasi humana forma circumscriptū &c. Yet must we not therefore thinke, that God yt father is circumscribed as it were with an humane shape, yt when we think of him, a right side or a left side shoulde come into our mind, or euen yt which is sayde, that the father doth sit, we must not thinke to be done with bowing of his legges, yt we fall not into that sacrilege wherewith the Apostle curseth them that haue changed the glorie of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of a corrupble man. For it is extreme wickednes, yt a Christian man shoulde place such an image for God in ye temple, much more is it wicked in his heart where ye temple of God is

in deede, if it be clensed from earthly desire and errour.
               
               This saying of Augustine woulde suffice any sober man to see, what is his iudgement, for such images of God, or the Trinitie, which yet Maister Sander, though not simply, yet in some respect wil defende. And the Angels (he sayeth) may be painted or grauen with wings, as they were made in the tabernacle, or as they appeared to the Prophets and the Apostles. And so you may paint the diuels in such shape as they haue appeared to men, but what is this to make images of them for any vse of religion, which God hath forbidden?
               But now followeth another metaphysicall abstraction of the image which is an accident, from the matter or substance thereof, being stone, wodde, &c. which is a hard lesson for the common people to learne, and when it is learned, it is not worth a strawe, for any helpe of religion. The grosse image of stone being made thus a subtile & fantasticall image by abstraction, is ioyned with the trueth, when the fantasie considereth whose image it is, and then it is not possible, but that it must partake some parte of the honour of that whereof it is a signe, being an honourable thing. To passe ouer this fond abstracting and ioyning, which is a toy to mocke with an ape, I will come to the conclusion of honour dewe to the signe. I pray you Maister Sander, what impossibilitie is this, that you talke of vs? Must euery signe of an honourable thing needes partake some of the honour dewe to the thing? The print of a mans foote in the snowe, is the signe of a man that hath trod there, which is an honourable thing, and perhaps was a King, is this signe worthie of any honour due to a King? Yea, the Kinges picture is on his coyne or else where to be seen, is that picture worthie of any parte of the Kings honour? You sayed before, you woulde not haue any parte of Gods honour giuen to his image, and howe agreeth that saying with this your principle, it is not possible, but euerie signe of an honorable thing, must partake some of the honour which is in it?
               
                  But you will shewe vs the order, howe the image commeth to be partaker of honour, but it were more necessarie, you should shew vs the reason why it should haue honour, then the order howe it commeth. But let vs see the order. The painting of Christes death moueth the eye, the eye aduertiseth our common-sense, our common sense informeth our fantasie, reason draweth out of fantasie this deepe consideration yt this image is true, and profitable to saluation, and worthie of all honour. This may well be an idolaters reason, but surely a Christian man faith is instructed by hearing, and not by seeing, blessed are they (saith Christ) which haue beleeued and not seene. Ioan. 20 A Christian man learneth of the Lord by his Prophet Abacuc, Cap. 2. vers. 18. & 19. that a grauen image is profitable for nothing, that it is a teacher of lyes, and curseth him that saith, an image shall teach him: and much more him that shall say, it is worthie of all honour. By which saying you may see the impudencie of idolaters, which though at the first they seeme modest in giuing but an other kinde of honour to images, and not that which is giuen to God, afterward they come to giue images some of that honour which is due to God, and last of all without all shame, to pronounce that an image of Christes death is worthie of all honour. And this must needes be (saith he) except Maister Iewell will say this image is not good, yea, no doubt but he would say, such an image as Maister Sander counteth worthie of all honour, is abhominable.
               M. Sander would haue ended this Chapter with this wholesome doctrine, but that M. Iewell after long disputation, concludeth that the cognisaunces of the crosse, are barres laid a crosse, and no images, which seemeth strange to him, bicause he tooke an image to be the resemblance of any thing quicke or dead. I had thought such a metaphysicall disputer of images, would haue added the intention of the image maker, to expresse such a thing necessarie to make it an image of that thing, for else as the tale goeth, he may haue a great number of crosses on a

threed bare coate of some man, that hath neuer a crosse in his purse. But if by the intent of ye makers, such crosses in flagges, banners, targets, and coynes, were made to the resemblance of Christes crosse, yet are they no images forbidden, bicause they be not in any vse of religion, and therefore this is a foolish quarell, not worth ten strawes laide a crosse.
            
            
               
                  Sander.THE VIII. OR VII. CHAP.
               
                  What an idoll is, and that our images be neither idolls, nor be vsed like idolls. Also the difference betweene an idoll and an image. Whereof idolatrie tooke his name. Howe the Gentiles did abus
                        •
                      their images. The obiection is aunswered concerning the abuses about the images of Christians.
               
               
                  
                     Fulk.
                  An idoll saith S. Paule, is nothing in the worlde, and I say not that an idoll is any thing. 1. Cor. 8. & 10. by which words he meaneth, that an image made to represent God, although it be in matter wood, stone, golde, siluer, yet in vse and signification it is nothing, but a vaine fantasie of men braines, bicause there is but one God which hath no shape or figure, and there is no profitable vse in images deuised by men vnto saluation, as S. Augustine saith, Lib. 18. contra Fa
                        •
                     st. Man. So Ambrose saith, in 1. Cor. 10, Simulachrum verò nihil est, quia image videtur re
                        •
                      morta
                        •
                     ae: An idoll or feigned image, is in deede nothing, bicause it seemeth to be an image of a dead thing. These places cited by M. Sander, fauour not his distinction, for both Augustine & Ambrose indifferently call the same an idoll, and an image. But Origen and Theodoret in deede make this difrence; that an idoll is of that thing that is not at all, nor euer was seene in the world, as a picture of a man with a dogges head, an image is of that thing that is or was, as an image of Cicero, of any other man that liueth. But that this distinction is false, it appeareth by the Cherubims, which being heads without bodies, and wings annexed to them, haue no resembrance to any thing that euer was seene in the world, yet are they called images

euen of the Papists thē selues, & not idols. Now he would proue that the images of the Gentiles were of things that neuer were, and therfore to be idolls, and the Popish images be of Christe, Peter, and Paule, &c. which were, therefore they be similitudes, but no idols. But what helpeth this distinction of the name, although it were receiued, when God by his cōmandement forbad the making and honoring of the one, as much as the other? So yt this difference is as much able to defend Popish images, as when a lawe is made against robbers and theeues, a theefe would labour tooth and nayle, to shewe the difference of robberie and theft, and then hauing proued him self to be no robber, would conclude he were no theefe. Yet seeing M. San. hath taken paines to gather the difference betweene heathenish idols and Popish images in tenne pointes, I will consider them in yt order. Some idols were feigned monsters, all Popish images haue that essentiall truth in the world which they represent. This reddition is false, for ye image of the Trinitie, like a man with three faces or thre bodies, hath no essentiall trueth. Likewise the image of a childe entering into the mouth of the Virgine Marie, in the storie of the Annunciation painted in diuers places, and namely in the cloyster or walking place of Alsoule Colledge in Oxenford, where I haue seene it, is an heretical falshood. And to omit the images of a thousand feigned miracles, as S. Francis preaching to the Geese, &c. The image of S. Christopher the Giant, of S. George with his monstruous dragon, of S. Sunday, of S. Vncoulber a she Saint with a beard, and such like, proue that al Popish images haue not that essentiall trueth which they represent.
               2 All their idolls were without trueth concerning to faith and religion, al Popish images containe such a truth as belongeth to Christes faith and religion. Beside the answere before confuteth this excuse the commaundement of God being against all similitudes in religion, proueth it vtterly false and abhominable.
               3 Sacrifice was offered to their idolles, whereof it was

called idolatrie, and they idolaters, but no sacrifice is offered to Popish idolls, but to God alone, I say, they offered no sacrifice to the stockes, but to the Gods whose images they were. So do your Papistes, offer vp the sacrifice of prayer and thankesgiuing, the only sacrifice of Christians, as Iustinus saith, Decal. cum Tryph. and pay your vowes to your images, & to the Saintes whose images you say they be, therefore by your owne definition you are idolaters.
               4 Their idolls belonged oftentimes to very wicked men▪ Popish images always to be blessed Saints. You shal haue much to doe to proue Francis, Dominike, Dunstane, Becket, and such like whose images you worshippe, to be blessed Saintes. Where also I note that Francis is painted with the print of Christes fiue woundes, which is an horrible blasphemie.
               5 Some of the Gentiles professed them selues to adore ye wood or stone, you neither professe nor teach any such thing, but the contrarie. To admit so many thousands of ignoraunt people, as honoured the very wood and stones of your images, euen you your selues allowe this verse, Lignun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      crucis venorabile adorant. They adore the venerable wood of the crosse, and in the next Chapter you alowe the peeces of a brasen image worthie of some honour.
               6 Some of the Gentiles thought some priuie godhead or power to be contained in their images, you teach they be only representations. So did they, but what mean some of you, to take so long pilgrimages to Walsingham, Ipswich, Boston, yea to Campostella in Spaine, and to Peter & Paul at Rome, if you thought not some power to be in those images, more then in the images of the same persons at home?
               7 The wisest of the Gentiles (say you) adored by their images, insensible creatures, and by them false Gods: you adore by your images no vnreasonable creature, but only blessed soules, and one God. First I say, you misreport the wisest of ye Gentiles, for they defended their idolatrie, by saying they worshipped in those images diuer
                     •
                   Gods, not meaning yt they were so, but yt they worshipped

diuers vertues of one God, as in Minerua the wisdome of God, in Mars the strength of God, in Ceres the liberalitie of God, &c. Augu. In Psal. 96. 
                     Sed existit nescio quis disputator, &c. But there is a certeine disputer I wot not who, which thought himselfe to be learned and saith: I doe not worship that stone, nor that image, which is without sense: for your prophet could not know that they haue eyes and see not, and to be ignorant that that image hath no life, yt yet neither seeth with eyes, nor heareth with eares. Therefore I doe not worship that, but I adore that which I see, and serue him whom I see not. Who is he? The God whiche being inuisible is president of that image. By this means yeelding a reason of their images, they seeme to themselues to be eloquent, because they worship not idols, and worship diuels. They answere, we worship not euill spirites, but euen the Angels whome you so call do we worship, the vertues of the great God, and the ministers of the great God. I would you would worship them, you should easily learne, of them not to worship them. Thus Augustine, in whiche saying, beside that he sheweth what defence the Heathen had for their idolatrie, he sheweth that the true worship of Angels is not to worship them by images or otherwise, but onely to learne of them not to worship them, but God alone. But howe can M. Sander say they adore no vnreasonable creature by their images, when they adore the image of the crosse, which was both an vnreasonable an insensible creature? And how doth he worship one God more then this Heathen man, whose feigned excuse S. Augustine reporteth?
               8 The diuels ruled the images of the Gentiles, giuing oracles out of them, &c. but the faith of Papistes whiche endeuouring to keepe Gods commandementes, do set vp images to a good end, so beautifieth their work and worship, that it is not possible for the diuel to abuse them. If we beleeue that the diuel gaue oracle out of the Heathnish idols, and not rather that they were feigned by the subtiltie of men: we may likewise thinke, that the diuell gaue answers out of Popish images, which are likewise

saide to haue spoken, as that Roode in Dunstones time to decide the controuersie for marriage of Priestes, & many other feigned in the Bookes of Popish miracles. Secondly, where heard the Papistes out of Gods wordes, this faith of setting vp Images? Thirdly how doe they indeuour to keepe Gods commaundement in setting vp of idols, when they breake a manifest commaundement of God, which forbiddeth images to be worshipped?
               9 The diuels coueted to mainteine their idols. The same couet to ouerthrowe Popish images. No verily, they loue Popish images, by which God is dishonoured, as wel as they did loue Heathenish images. As for ye tale of the diuels persuading Iulian the Apostata to breake ye image of Christ at Paneade, which is not like to haue continued vnto his dayes, if we receiue it, which was written by no writer of his time, nor an hundreth yeares after, it proueth no hatred that ye diuel had of images, but of Christ, & might be a subtile practise of his to bring the Christians with fonde emulation to esteeme such a thing more then it was worthie because their enemie hath defaced it.
               10 Their idols were dedicated to an Heathenish purpose, Popish images to a vertuous intent. But how can that be a vertuous intent, which is contrarie to Gods cōmandemēt?
               Last of all he will aunswere our obiection, that Popish images haue been abused in making their eyes to moue, and their lippes to wagge, &c. First he saith, these were but abuses of particular men, where ye Bishop was a sleep, but not allowed in the Church, yea, the Gospel hath been abused. Gods curse light of that comparison, which matcheth images with the Gospell. But were al Bishops high and low in your Church so sound a sleepe, that not one could see these horrible abuses to punish them? For what one exāple can be brought, of any one among so many, that hath beene punished by the Papists, for such detestable abuse? Secondly he answereth, these abuses are committed by men not yet euerlastingly condemned, & not by diuels, which haue their torments increased, when they aproch to such holy things as they haue no power of. As

though wicked men could worke such things, but by the diuels procurement, who wil no more be afraide to abuse an image, then to persuade a man to abuse it, which deserueth both one punishment. Thirdly if suche practisers of abuse liued in Luthers time, they commonly became runnagates, with the first, if any such haue repented and confesseth their wicked facts, it is to your shame, M. Sa. & not to ours, for they were yours, when they did suche things. To conclude, I wish the Reader to consider, howe vaine and foolish the whole scope of this Chapter of M. Sanders booke is, to shewe the difference of idols & images in the second commandement, when God wrote not the same in Greeke, out of which tong this supposed difference is deriued, but in Hebrue: & euen the common Latine translation, which the Papistes doe followe, calleth that which the Greekes terme 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   an idoll, by ye name of Sculptile a grauen image: and when he hath made his difference as farre a sunder as he can, all images are as well forbidden in that commaundement, as idols in any seruice of God or vse of religion.
            
            
               THE IX. OR VIII. CHAP.
               
                  That it is no idolatrie to giue conuenient worship to some creatures, & whether images be creatures or no. Also in one argument of M. Iewels 4. great faultes are found, that a creature may be set vp to be honoured. That an image is rather a workemanship then a creature. That the Kinges garment on his backe is honoured.
                        Sander.
                     
                  
               
               M. Harding had confessed, that images by a consequent might be worshipped, The Bish. of Sarum said,
                     Fulk.
                   An image is a creature and no God. And to honour a creature in that sorte (as it is set vp to the end to be worshipped although not specially to that end) is idolatrie, therefore by Maister Hardings owne confession, images are set vp to be vsed to idolatrie. This is the argument, that hath foure as great faultes in it, as there be knots in a rush. The first fault is, that he putteth Idolum in steede of Imago. The second that he putteth Doulia in steede of L
                        •
                     triae. The thirde faulte is, that he presupposeth,

that we may set vp no creature to the intent that it may be any wayes honoured. The last faulte, that he affirmeth an image to be a creature. The first and seconde faultes are falsly found, for he nameth neither Idolu
                        •
                     , nor Latria, but this compound worde idolatrie, and maketh this proposition. To honour a creature in that forte, &c. is idolatrie. Meaning whether the creature be an image, or no image, As to worship the Sunne, or ye Moone is idolatrie which be creatures, and so tearmed by all learned men, and euen by the Papistes themselues, which call the worshipping of an vnconsecrated host, idolatrie. The third fault is also a forged quarrell, for he doeth not presuppose, that we may set vp no creature to be worshipped, but he saith, to honour a creature in that sorte, that is, with religious worship as it is set vp to be worshipped is idolatrie. And therefore M. Sanders imagination of a king set vp in his throne, to be honoured, of certeine men that had rebelled against him, is foolishe and ridiculous. For the Bishop in his proposition, speaketh of religious worship which is proper onely to God, and not of ciuill honour. The fourth fault also, is a fonde quarrelling, or rather an vngodly denying of an image to be a creature. For by this meanes, he maketh a thirde thing existent in ye world. that is neither God the creator, nor a creature, but he saith it is a manufacture, and not a creature, like as he said before, that their worshipping of Images is not idolatrie but image douly, that is seruing of images, whiche is all one as if a man would say, a horse is a beast, therefore it is not a substance. So he may deny a man to be a creature because he is a geniture, that is a thing begotten. But perhaps he will allowe all thinges made of God or nature to be creatures, but nothing made of man, so yt a table, or chaire, a sword, &c. are no creatures, because they are made with mens handes. What then wil he cal a tree, that is graffed with mens handes, and groweth by nature also? Those he highe pointes of Diuinitie I promise you.
               But to ye purpose, there is neither substance nor forme of

any thing in the worlde but it is a creature, therefore both in respect of the matter and fashion, an Image is a creature, except you will say with the Master of the sentences. Lib. 3. dist. 37. that the forme of an Image in that it is set vp to be worshipped, is no creature, but a peruersion of a creature, as all sinne is. And least you shoulde take exceptions to my trāslating of Idolum for an Image, he speaketh of the forme of a man in Idolo, which is no faigned thing, but a thing of trueth.
               But to cut of all this vaine babling, that an Image is no creature, the Apostle S. Paule speaking of the Images of the Gentiles, by which they turned the glory of God into the similitude of ye Image of a mortal man &c. calleth Images creaturs, And they serued the creature more then the Creator, which is to be blessed for euer. Rom. 1. vers. 23. & 25.
               But hee faineth an obiection of M. Iewelles, that an Image is lesse then a creature, and therefore it deserueth lesse honour then a creature: Whereas M. Iewell said, an Image is a creature. But he answereth his owne obiection, that because an Image is able to stir vs vp to a vertuous and good remembraunce, and to prouoke vs to vertue, it is worthie of greater honour then a creature. As though we ought not by any immediate creature of god, to be stirred vp to good remembraunces, and prouoked to vertue, rather then by an vnprofitable, dead, and dumbe Image. And who will graunt him, that an Image is able to stirre vs vp to goodnesse, or to prouoke vs to vertue, whē an Image, (as the scripture saith) is good for nothing. Abacuc. 2. But admitte that men by the sight of an Image, take occasion of good remembraunce, the Image in this case is no agent, and therefore worthie of no honour. A man seeinge the gallowes, which is a signe of execution of Iustice, is mooued to remember Iustice, which is a good remembraunce, and is thereby prouoked to absteine from vice and to liue vertuously, is the gallowes therefore worthie of honour? I thinke not, because the gallowes is no agent or doer in those good

things, but onely the minde of man that taketh occasion of that he seeth. No more doeth an image, and therefore no more worthy of honor. But Augustine saith, De verb. Dom. Ser. 58 Si quis nostrum, &c. If anye of vs should finde the kings purple or crowne lying a side, woulde he go about to worship them? But when the king hath them on him, he runneth in danger of death, if any man contemne to worship them together with the king. So saieth M.S. the Image is to be honored in respect of the truth, whose similitude it beareth. A wise similitude. First he compareth ciuil worship with religious worshippe, as he doeth euery where. Secondly that which is reuerenced necessarily, because it is annexed with an honourable thinge, with yt which is not annexed, for God may be worshipped without images, the king cānot be worshipped with out his robes reseruing humane & naturall honestye. Thirdly, that which is accidentally worshipped, as the kings crowne, his purple, &c. Because the king wearinge them is worshipped, is alledged to prooue that a proper worship is due to images, distinct from the worship due to the paterne or sampler. But of religious worship, Augustine saith: Nihil omnino colendum est, totum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         abijciendum quicquid mortalibus 
                           •
                        culis cernitur, quicquid vllus sensus attingit. Nothing is to be worshipped at all, and all that is to be cast away, whatsoeuer is seene with mortall eyes, what soeuer any sense doth atteine. And to take away all cauilling, he addeth in his Retractatiōs, quicquid mortalis corporis vllus sensus attingit▪ est enim sensus & mensis. Whatsoeuer any sense of the mortall body doth atteine, for there is a sense of the minde, lib. Retr. 1. cap. I. 
                  Likewise that the signes are to bee worshipped, for that they signifie, he saith it is a madnesse, in ps. 101. Talis est enim dementia hominum quasi adorandum aliquid dicatur, cum decitur, Sol-Christum significa
                           •
                        . Adora ergo & petram quia Christum significat. Such is the madnesse of men, as though it were saide that any such thinge were to be worshipped when it is saide: The sunne signifieth Christ, then worshippe a rocke also because the rocke signifieth Christ. Last of all, M. Sander

                     
                        •
                     aith, supposinge an image to be lesse then a creature, the baser it is, the lesse daunger there is that it shoulde bee worshipped as God, as Chrysostome saith, therefore men are called in scripture the sonnes and Images of God, and not Angels, because there is lesse daunger in worshipping men for their basenes, thā Angels for their excellency. But he might conclude, the base
                     •
                   Images are, the more horrible sinne is the worshippinge of them. For the basenesse of men hath not kept them from being worshipped with religious honour, neither hath the vilenesse of Images defended them from being honoured with Gods honour. For the corruption and inclination of mans nature vnto Idolatrie is so great, that nothing is so vile or ridiculous, but it hath bene honoured as God. And therefore Augustine truely sayth in ps. 113, Ducit enim & affectu quodam infirmo rapit infirma corda mortalium formae similitudo, et membrorum imitata compago. For the similitude of shape, and the counterfetted composition of lymmes, doeth leade, and with a certaine weake and sicke affection doeth rauishe the weake heartes of mortall men. Againe, Quis autem ador
                           ••
                        , vel orat intuen
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        imulachrum, qui non sic afficitur vt ab eo se exandiri putet, ac ab eo sibi praestari quod desiderat speret? For who doeth worshippe or praye, beholdinge an Image, whiche is not so affected, that hee thinketh he is hearde of it, and hopeth that shall be performed by it whiche hee desireth. Examine your popishe worshippinge of Images by this sayinge of Augustine: Maister Sander, and either saye hee speaketh vntruely, or confesse that your Image-Douly is no better then Idolatrie. But Augustine proceedeth, aunsweringe the obiection, that they are turned to bee deade stockes, without sense. 
                     Plus valent simulachra ad curnandam infelicen
                           •
                         an
                           •
                        mam, quod as habent, quod oculos habent, nar
                           •
                        s habent, manus habent, pedes habent, quam ad corrigandam, qood non loquentur, non videbunt, non audient, non 
                           •
                        dorabunt, non contrectabunt, non ambulabunt. Images preuayle more to bowe downe or make crooked

the vnhappie soule, because they haue a mouthe, they haue eyes, they haue a nose, they haue handes, and they haue feete: then to refourme it, or make it streight, that they shall not speake, they shall not see, they shall not heare, they shall not smell, they shall not handle, they shall not walke. Go your wayes nowe M. Sander, and say that there is no daunger, lest Images should be abused to robbe God of his honour, because of the basenes of their forme which is lesse then a creature, and they be as it pleaseth you to call them manufactures.
            
            
               
                  Sander.THE X. OR IX. CHAP.
               
                  Master Iewelles iugling is detected concerning the antiquitie and inuention of images, and specially his manifest corrupting of Eusebius in that argument. Also an image set vp in the honour of Christ aboue fifteene hundreth yeres past. The images of Peter & Paule were seene of Eusebius. M. Iewell falsifieth Eusebius by leauing out, adding to false la
                        ••
                     ing & false englishing. The virginity of Nunner. The chaire of S. Iames had in reuerence in the premitiue churche. The pieces of Christes image whiche Iulianus the runnagate brake, were preserued of the Christians aboue 12. hundreth yeres past.
               
               
                  
                     Fulk.
                  Although God commanded the two Cherubes to be made and let in the Tabernacle, yet the inuention of Images is not to be ascribed to God, for as Epiphanius testifieth, There the father of Abraham beinge a worshipper of false gods, was a maker of Images long before. And because you trifle M. Sander, with your distinction of Idoles and Images, telling M. Iewel they are Idol
                     ••
                   or wanton pictures, and not the Images of holy men, whereof the booke of Wisdom, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Lactantius, and S. Athanatius do speake, when they saye the inuention of Idols or Images came of the diuel: may it please your learned wisdom to vnderstand, that Epiphanius speakinge of the Images of the blessed "virgin Mary, whom you cal your Lady saith: Vnde non est

simulachrisicum hoc studium & diabolicus conatus? Howe is not this desire of making images also a deuillishe purpose? prętextu enim iustitiae semper subient hominum mentem diabolus, mortalem naturam in hominum oculis deificans, stanias humanas imaginis pre se ferentei per artium varietatē expressit. Et mortus quidem sunt qui adorantur, ipsi verò imagines quae nun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         v
                           •
                        xerun
                           •
                        , neque enim mortuae esse possunt quae nun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vixerunt adorandas introducunt. Cont. Collyridianos H. 79. For the diuell alwayes entring into the minde of men vnder colour of righteousnesse, deifiing the mortall nature in the eyes of men, hath expressed by varietie of artes, images representing the similitude of men. And they truely which are worshipped are deade, but they bring in to be worshipped Images, which neuer lyued, for they cannot be dead which neuer lyued. The iudgement of other fathers shalbe added in places conuenient. But where as you cauill that euery image is not an idoll, because the sonne of God is the image of God, whom we woulde not call an Idoll, you shewe your frowardnesse rather, then defende your distinction. For although in the nature of the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   there be no such difference but it may be called truely an image, yet the horrible abuse of images to the dishonour of God, hath caused, that of Godly writers it is taken in the euil parte, whereas the worde is indifferent. Euen as 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   being ye same that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which is a King, which through crueltie of Kinges, came to be an odious name of a tyrant. So the names of Papa which sometime signified a bishop, and Missa the communion, for the wickednesse of the Pope of Rome, and of the Popishe Masse, are nowe abhorred of all true Christians. As for the images which Christ sent to Augarus or Algarus, and the Veronica of Rome, with the images made by Nicodemus, S. Luke, and shewed by Siluester to Constantinus, testified by Damascen, the counterfet Athanatius, Theodorus, the seconde Councell of Nice, Nicephorus and Metaphrastes, they are good stuffe for Legenda aurea, and as M. Sanders will not stay in them, because hee knoweth in his conscience they bee forged fables, so I

will let them passe also, and stande vppon the credite of their authors.
               But nowe we come to ye famous image of the woman which had the bloudie issue, and of Christ set vp on high before her doore, on a piller, with an herbe that grewe vnder it, which when it touched the hemme of the garment of the image of Christ, it healed all diseases.
               This M. Iewel wil not call a fable (saith he) but he himselfe addeth fables to that which is written of Eusebius, as first, that it was set vp by the woman, whiche is vnlike, that a poore womā which (as the Gospel teacheth) had wasted all her goods vppon phisitions Mark. 5. could be able to set vp such a costly image of Brasse vppon a piller. Secondly, it is not like, she woulde haue set vp her owne image. Thirdly Eusebius saith it was set vp by other men. And therefore the reporte of Theophylact which lyued a thousand yeres after, is of small credit. Secondly he saith that Eusebius sawe this image, which is not to be proued by any worde he speaketh, although he saith that he had seen other images of Christ, of Peter & of Paule. But nowe to examine these falsifications pretended. First he chargeth the bishop with false Latining and worse Englishing of this greeke following, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . The bishopps latine is: 
                     Hoc mirum est veteres Ethnicos beneficio affectos a seruatore nostro, ista fecisse, his english this: It is no meruaile that the Heathens receiuing such benifites of our Sauiour, did these thinges. Here saith hee 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Olim, in times past, is left out in the latine, which is false, for it is included in the word veteres. In deede in the english by the printers fault it is omitted. M. Sander woulde iustifie the bolde and false translation of Ruffinus, which turneth these wordes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , qui ex Gentilibus crediderant: Such of the Gentiles as had beleeued. Where he manifestly addeth the worde crediderant which is not in Eusebius.
               
                  Wherein you may see the equitie of Maister Sanders, which findeth faulte with Maister Iewell for leauing out that which he doth not omitte, and iustifieth Ruffinus which doth openly adde to the text. But for all his trifling about wordes, hee sheweth him selfe ignorant of the phrase: for when hee hath wrangled as much as hee can, the Latine of the Greeke, worde for worde is this: 
                     Nec mirum est eos ex Gentibus qui olim beneficio affecti sunt a seruatore nostro ista fecisse. And it is no marueile that those of the Gentiles which of olde time were benefited by our Sauiour Christe, haue done these thinges.
               
               Now Maister Sander like a falsifier, rendeth these wordes asunder, and will haue all that matter to stande in these wordes: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which hee sayeth must needes signifie those which in times past had beene Gentiles, but after had beleeued, which wordes if he wring vntill the bloud come foorth, yet can hee not make such a signification of them. For if Eusebius had meant so, hee woulde haue added 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or some wordes of like effecte. Secondly, hee would rather haue sayde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   then 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , those that sometime were Gentiles, then those that of olde time were Gentiles, but that in the worde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , of olde time, he had relation vnto the time of Christe. Thirdly as maister Sander himselfe afterwarde striuing for the Aduerbe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , vnchaungeablye, to be ioyned with the Participle sheweth himselfe a good Grammarian: So here diuiding the Aduerbe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , from the Participle 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and ioyning it with nothing, sheweth himselfe to be a malicious wrangler, and a shamelesse falsifier.
               Nowe where hee sayeth, it is not like to bee true, that Christe bestowed anye greate cure vppon those, who shoulde haue tarryed still Heathens, because hee more willingly cured the soule then the bodie: I aunswere, the chiefe ende of his cures, was not

for the priuate benefite of them that were cured, but to shewe himselfe to all men, to be the sonne of God, the true phisition of body and soule. But M. Sander replieth, though some were vnkind, as the 9. Lepers Luke. 17. yea, some were carelesse of him, as the man that had lyen 38. yeares in the porche, and the blinde man, vntill he instucted them by his worde, Iohn. 5. & 9. yet those which did set vp images in his honour, were not vnkind. I aunswere, they thought to satisfye them selues with a vaine, superstitious, and heathenishe kinde of remuneration.
               Thirdly hee sayeth, with Theophylact a late writer, that this woman which was faithfull did set vp this image, but that I haue proued before to bee neither true, nor like to be true.
               
                  But this is not all Master Iewels falshod (sayeth hee) for hee sayeth moreouer: Nam & Apostolorum Pauli & Petri, & ipsius Christi imagines coloribus ductas & seruatas vidimus. For wee haue seene the images of Paule and Peter, and of Christe drawen in coulours and preserued. Here first beside the lacke of eius, his, which he confesseth to be of no importance, he misseth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   et, which he wil needes haue to signifie also. What quarrelling merchant is this? here is et thrise, yet none of them wil serue his turne, because the firste is not translated, also, that it might be thought that Eusebius had seene the former image of brasse. But seeing et is twise put, once before Apostolorum, and then before ipsius Christi, by iudgement of all English Grammarians it may truely be translated thus: For wee haue seene the images drawen in colours and preserued, both of his Apostles Paule and Peter, and also of Christ him selfe. Againe, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   may be translated euen of his Apostles Paule and Peter.
               What Empyre hath Master Sander in Grammer, that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   may signifye nothing but also: when it hath three significations beside, and, both, euen. But it pleaseth Master Sander, that Eusebius which liued about three hundreth yeares after Christe, sawe painted images of

Christ himselfe & of his Apostles, yea, but in the hands of Heathen men, or men of Heathenish superstition, or else perhaps among the Gnostikes & Carpocratites heretikes. For what one worde of commendation doth he bestowe vpon them? He sawe them in deede, but if they had bene profitable for Christianitie, why did he not make the like, or cause them to be made in his church of Caesarea? What cause haue you hitherto (M. Sander) to cry out, O the deceit of M. Iewell? seeing for any thing you haue shewed, it is true which he saith: The Phaeniciens being Heathens, made these images in the honour of Christe, and of his Apostles, onely of their heathenish and vaine superstition. But you will shewe a further falshoode in M. Iewell, and that still in one storie, for he proceedeth: 
                     Et credibile est, priscos illos homines nondum relicta auita superstition
                           •
                        
                        ▪ adhunc modum consueuisse colere illos ethnica consuetudine tanquam seruatores. And it may well be thought, that men in olde times being not yet remoued from the superstitiō of their fathers, vsed after this sort to worship them by an heathenish custome as their sauiours. That M. Iewell meant no fraud in, this translation, it is manifest by that which M. Sander confesseth, that he set the Greeke wordes by the side of his booke, which are these, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . that is, as it is like, that those auncient men vnchangably after this maner were accustomed to honour them as Sauiours by an heathenish custome vsed among them. This I haue translated worde for worde, and what difference is there in sense from M. Iewels translatiō, but that nothing of his can please M. San. for first he maketh one quarell, yt 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      signifieth vnchangably, or without change, which M. Iewel hath turned, not yet being remoued from the superstition of their fathers. But Ruffinus also translateth it, ex gentili consuetudine indifferenter, of an heathenish custome indifferently, and M. San. himself afterward confesseth, that it is an heathenish custome to honour men with setting vp their images. And if it was superstitious in the heathen, therefore it was superstitious in these Christians

which folowed the heathenish custome, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   without any change. Secondly he saith, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , is spightfully Englished, their sauiours. And why so, I pray you▪ What other thing doth the worde signifie, but a Sauiour of whole or part, of body or soule. Except you will say, that among the Heathen, Castor & Pollux were called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in the plural number, but it was for that they were supposed to be sauiours or preseruers of Mariners, which declareth in what sense Eusebius saith, these men worshipped them without chaunge, by an heathenish custome 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   euen as they worshippe sauiours for example, such and so as they called Castor and Pollux. I will not therefore sticke with you, but that those men of whome Eusebius speaketh in this last sentence, were such as professed some l
                     •
                  ue of Christe and Christianitie, but yet after an heathenish maner. Alexander the Emperour worshipped the image of Christe in his Chappell among his other idols. Carpocrates the heretique made the images of Iesus and Paul, Homer and Pythagoras, & did cense them with incense, and worship them. Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 2. in prefat. The Gnostike heretiques had euen such images of Christe painted in colours as Eusebius speaketh of, euen as they had the images of Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle. Epher. 27. which heretiques answere directly to the wordes of Eusebius, that they made and worshipped the images of Christe and his Apostles, without chaunge, euen as they made the images of Heathen men, whome they had in estimation. Againe, S. August. 
                     De moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae cap. 34. speaketh of such worshippers of reliques and pictures euen in his time, which yet the Catholique Church did not allowe. Nolite mihi colligere professores nominis Christiani, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         professionis suae vim aut scientes aut exhibentes. Nolite consectari turbas imperitorum, qui vel in ipsa vera religione superstitiosi sunt vel ita libidinibus dediti, vt obliti sint quid promisserint Deo. Noui multos esse sepulchrorum & picturarum adoratores: noui multos esse qui luxuriosissimè super mortuos bibant, & epulas 
                           〈◊〉
                         laueribus exhibentes, super sepultos seipsos sepeliant, & voracitates ebrietates
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         suas deputent religioni. Gather not me together

such professours of ye Christian name, as either know, not or shewe not the vertue of their profession. Seeke not vp the multitude of vnskilfull men, which euen in true religion it selfe are superstitious, or else so giuen to filthie lustes, that they haue forgotten what they haue promised to God. I knowe there be many worshippers of tombs and pictures: I know there be many which most riotously drinke ouer the dead, & making banquets for the dead bodies, burie them selues vpon the buried bodies, and account their gluttonies and dronkennesse to be religion. Such Christians they might be, of whome Eusebius speaketh. But M. San. confessing this maner of honouring by images, to be an heathenish custom, doth also affirme, that it was a laudable custome, saying, that it was but pusillanimitie, & scrupulositie in the Iewes, that they durst make no images. So that to obey the commandement of God, is counted of him for a vice, and it is a great vertue of magnanimitie, to be bolde to do that which God hath forbidden. But what reason hath he? Forsooth, all things that the heathens vsed, were not euill. Sacrifice was not euill, though the heathen did offer sacrifice to diuels. Virginitie of Nuns, for so it pleaseth him to translate Sanctiomonialium in Augustine, although there were no Popish names in his time, is not euill, bicause the heathen had their vestall Virgines. So that by his Logike, there is one reason of things good and lawfull, if they be well vsed, as sacrifice and virginitie, and things simply forbidden, as making and worshipping of images in religion.
               But nowe we are come to S. Iames Chapter, which not heathen men, but the brethren at Hierusalem, and as Ruffinus translateth it, the Bishops in succession did preserue and had in estimation, his words folowing imediately after the sentence last intreated of, are these. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                  For the brethren there by succession hauing in estimation the Chaire of Iames the Apostle that is kept vnto this time (which Iames was the first that receiued ye charge of the Church of Hierusalem of our Sauiour him self, and of the Apostles, whome also the holy scriptures do shewe to haue bene called the brother of Christ) doe euidently shewe vnto all men, in what manner both those that were in the old time, and those that be euen till our days, haue maintained, & yet do maintaine a worthie reuerence and worshippe of holy men for their godlinesse sake. Here M. Sander scoffeth, rayleth, braggeth, and all about the Moone shine in the water. Knowe you not Maister Iewel (saith he) that this worde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , For, giueth a reason of that which went before? What was that? That olde men tarrying in superstition, did set vp images, whereof the reason followeth, bicause the brethren at Hierusalem do honour the chaire of S. Iames. Then he cryeth out, O cursed lying spirit, &c. At length he concludeth, that it is manifest, that Eusebius alloweth and stoutly defendeth the honour that is giuen to Saints by their images and reliques. See what a stout champion Maister Sander wil make Eusebius to be for images and reliques. But to returne to your 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , for, Maister Sander, is there no remendie but either images must be allowed, or this connexion be foolish? May 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , for, giue a reason of nothing but as you wil haue it? Why may it not rather giue a reason? why hee counteth that an heathenish custome of honoring Christ & his Apostles by making their images, bicause the faithfull brethren at Hierusalem, euen from the time of Saint Iames, not making an image of him, but keeping his chaire, that he vsed to sit in, as a monument, declare euidently, what maner of reuerence hath bene giuen by true Christians from the beginning to this day, vnto holy mē? that is, to haue them in remembrance without superstition and idolatrie, but not by making of their images. For except this Antithesis be vnderstood, it were in deed a folish connexion, & as euil an argument, to proue that they which made images of Christ & his apostles after ye heathnish

custome, did wel, because the Christians at Ierusalem kept the chaire of S. Iames, and had it in estimation. So that the matter beeing well considered the coniunction is wiser then Maister S. can vnderstande for all his outcries and amplifications.
               To that which the Bishop saith this image beeing in the streete, proueth not the setting vppe of Images in the Churche, he aunswereth, there were other images whiche Eusebius sawe, and where should he see them, but in the Churche in Constantine his time? I haue shewed before where he might see them, among the Heathens and Heretikes. And that he sawe none in the Church, appeareth in the Panaegynt ad Paulin. Tyr. Epū, Lib. 10. Cap. 4. where a godly Church is described in euerie small parte and ornament of it, yet no image at all spoken of, which should not haue beene omitted if it had beene seene there, especially beeing such necessarie ornamentes of Churches as the Papistes account them.
               But Iulianus ye runnagate (saith he) out of the tripertite historie. Lib. 6. Cap. 41. brake that Image, and the Christians afterwarde gathered vp the peeces and laide them in a Churche. If this be not giuing of honour to Christes images, he cannot tell what is honouring of Images. Yes M. Sander, to set candels before them, to kneele to them, to pray to them, to kisse them, to offer to them, to make vowes to them, to ascribe health to them, &c. These are honouring of images vsed of Papistes, other maner of honouring then those Christians are saide to haue vsed. For if it be credible, that the peeces of brasse lay in the streete vntill Iulianus was dead, that they might be gathered vp of the Christians, and were not molten to none other vse by the Paganes, yet why did not the Christians rather melt them & make them a new image, then lay them vp in the Church? But M. Iewell is charged to speake if he dare, what he would do, if he chaunced to come into the same Church, where the image of Christ were kept, whether he would follow Iulianus in breaking it, rather then the Christians in reseruing it.
               
                  He is now at rest with God, hauing fought a good fight, fulfilled his course, and kept the faith, wayting for the crowne of righteousnes which shalbe giuen him by God the righteous iudge in that day, so that he can make M. Sander none answer, but thus I thinke he would haue resolued his question, when he liued in this world. He wold neither followe the spightfull malice of Iulian, nor the superstitious emulation of those Christians, but do with it as it became a Christian man according to Gods commandement, and his calling. And for my parte, M. Sander I dare speake vnto you what I thinke. I am one which esteeme monuments, as much as any one poore man of my degree. In so muche yt a wise man perhaps might say vnto me. Insanis veteres statuas Damasippus emendè. And therfore if I had in my priuate possessiō such images of Christ, Peter and Paul, as Eusebius did see, and that I were assured they were the true counterfets of their bodies or countenances as those which he did see were supposed to be. I would so esteeme them, as I do the Images of Caesar, Pompeius, Tulla, and such like, and peraduenture for the rarenesse, much more, but not a pinne the more in respect of religion. For I do so honour auncient images, that I make as great account of a peece of Nero, or Heliogabalus, as I do of Constantius, and Theodosius. But if I had authority of a Church, in which were an image of pure gold representing the whole stature, countenance, & apparell of Christ as he walked vpon the earth, which were abused to idolatrie, as your Popish images haue beene, and are in some places vnto this day, I would rather breake it in peeces by the example of Ezechias, & cast it into the deepe sea, then either I would suffer idolatrie to be committed vnto it, or preserue it to be a snare to them that liued after me to runne a whoring after it. But as for your euill fauoured blockes and stones, which haue none other shape or name but such as the idol of the workemans brayne hath giuen them, and being set vp to be worshipped, I would no more esteeme them, then the myre in the streete, or that

whiche is more vile, although you crie vntill you be hoarse, they are the holy images of Christe, of the blessed Trinitie, of Saint Peter, and S. Paule. For to a Christian man they are abhomination.
            
            
               THE XI. or X. CHAP.
               
                  That by the lawe of nature, honour is due to the images and monuments of honourable personages. And by what meanes that may be knowen. Also that the law of nature standeth always immutable, how the law of nature may be known. Seuen causes of honoring artificial images. God preferred images before only sounds of words. The art of making images is good. All nations honored Images that were worthie of honour. The image breakers are ashamed to confesse that they breake Christes images. The doctrine of the Catholikes concerning Images. Maister Iewels contrarie doctrine to the same.
                        Sander.
                     
                  
               
               The holie Ghoste by Saint Paule,
                     Fulk.
                   hath well giuen vs warning: saying: Take heede that no man spoyle you through philosophie, and vaine deceipt, according to the tradition of men, and not according to Iesus Christ. Col. 2. ver. 8. and by the same sentence he hath also taught vs, how we should esteeme all that doctrine that is commended vnto vs without the worde of God, vnder what glorious and plausible title so euer, namely for vaine deceitfulnesse. By which rule when we examine this Chapter of Maister Sanders booke, swelling with suche a proude title, of the Lawe of nature, we doe plainely perceiue, that it is nothing else but a deceiptful vanitie: with vaine sounde of wordes and friuolous reasons, to goe about to make vs thinke, that God hath written one law in nature, and a cleane contrarie to that, in his worde and holie scriptures.
               The honouring of images in case of religion, beeing expressely forbidden by the lawe of God written, and the same an hundreth times repeated by the Prophetes and Apostles, is the eternall wil of God, and hath nothing

in nature vncorrupted, which is the ordinaunce of God contrarie vnto it. And therefore I maruell what nature is, in Maister Sanders iudgement, whose lawe he defendeth to be neuer changed, although God hath ruled his people in diuers manners, sometime by inspiration, somtime by outward voice, custome and tradition, sometime by written letter of the Lawe, last of all by writing his own lawe of grace and spirite in their hearts. I passe ouer that he calleth the last, Gods owne lawe, as though the rest were but borrowed, but what is that vnchaungeable law of nature, but Gods eternall lawe: if that be not changed by the lawe written in letters, then surely the lawe of nature abhorreth worshipping of images in religion, which the lawe written forbiddeth. Thus his first exposition ouerthroweth all the purpose of his Chapter. Now to the second. He hath two speciall grounds to helpe vs to finde out what the lawe of nature is in any case. The one is the iudgement of right and sound reason, the other is ye practise of all nations. But where shall we finde sound reason in any natural man? When the light shineth in darknesse and the darkenesse comprehendeth it not Ioan. 1. and the natural man vnderstandeth not those things that be of the spirite of God. 1. Cor. 2. ver. 14. and where shal we finde the practise of all nations according to the lawe of nature, when they haue all declined and gone astray, there is not one that doth good, no not one. Ro. 3. Psal. 13. Wherefore there are other two most certeine infallible rules, wherby the law of nature in any case may be found out and knowen, namely the word of God, and the spirite of God, whiche giue mutuall testimonie one to the other, the worde and spirite of God beeing contrarie to the worshipping of Images: The Lord saying in the first table of religion, Thou shalt not fall downe to them nor worship them: it is manifest, that worshipping of images, is contrarie to the Lawe of nature. So that you see the foundation of this building already subuerted, by which you may coniecture, how long it is possible for the house to stande after it.
               
                  For what soeuer he iangleth of the internall conceptions of the minde, vnproperly and metaphorically called images, and comparing artificiall images vnto them, it is nothing els, but vain deceiptfulnesse to be contemned and hissed out, not onely of all Christian Churches of euery faithfull man, but also out of all schooles of Diuinitie, by all them that are learned as well in the scriptures of God, as in humaine phylosophie. But that you may see what soundnesse there is in his doctrine, thus he weaueth his copwebbe. One telleth him that Christ died onely to saue man from euerlastinge paines: he hearing and beleeuing this, straight conceiueth Christ dying for him, and is mooued to loue him. Secondly he is much delighted with the Image which he conceiued in his minde of Christ dying for him, and loueth that also. Thirdly, he loueth and honoureth him that tolde him this matter, as a bringer of good tydinges. So here bee three kindes of honour, the cheefe to Christe the thinge it selfe, the second to the inward conception or Image of him in his minde, the last is to the reporter.
               And here you haue a paterne of popishe prophane diuinitie, for here is no loue nor honour due to the spirite of God, who onely must open his heart, to receiue suche tydings profitably: nor to the worde of God, which must be the warrant of this tydinges to be true: nor to fayth, which applying these tydinges to his owne saluation, is the roote of all vertuous obedience, loue, honour and thankefulnesse in him. But euen as he considereth of any prophane report, so doeth he consider of this glad tydings of the gospell and not otherwise. But to proceede of this wise distribution of three fold honour, hee inferreth seuen causes of honouring artificiall Images. The first is, that it beareth the office of a reporter, and therefore it must needes haue a rewarde of honour. A slowe messenger, & a dumbe reporter, which can neither go of this errande, nor tell his tale. But what skilleth it (saieth Master Sander) whether I learne by hearing or by seeing? For Basill sayeth, yt both eloquent orators and cunninge

paynters, the one with their tongue, the other with thei
                     •
                   pensil, haue set forth valiant acts done in warre, and stirred vp many to fortitude. Hom. in 40. martyr. But it skilleth vs to learne by hearing of Gods word, because faith cōmeth by hearing, Rom. 10. vers. 17. and they are blessed which beleeue without seeing, Ioh. 20. vers. 29. Howsoeuer it skilleth papists, & howsoeuer all other things except religiō & faith may be learned. As for ye reporter of the glad tydings of ye gospel, he is in deed worthy of honor, if he do his message truly, willingly & diligētly, but it is honor of the second table & not of the first, that perteineth to him. And except there be in him loue to God & his neighbor, he is worthy of no honor, althogh he do the message. Therefore if the Image were as a reporter▪ he could haue but honor of the second table, which is of charity & not of religion. But seeing there is in an image neither loue, will, diligence, truth, for which causes a reporter is loued & cherished, neither is an image cause of anye thinge, there is no loue honour or worshippe due 
                     •
                  nto it.
               The second cause of honoring artificial images is, for that it doth speedily, and most cōueniently informe our inward imagination, and therefore is more to be honored, thē any orator. For the eye being the principal sense, is most ready to instruct the minde, and therfore a painted image is a more easie and liuely way to enstruct vs, then any orator. In deed if faith were a register of visible things, as it is of inuisible thinges, Heb. 11. vers. 1.7. the sense of seing, were a more easie, speedy & cōuenient way of instructing, then by hearing, but yet images were no more to be honored, then the sound of words is nowe to be worshipped, when we heare the gospell preached. But God (saith he) hath ioyned visible signes to his worde, as in the proclaiming of the lawe, yea sir, but God shewed not there the image of any thing, to teach them thereby, but expressely forbad the vse of them, in his religion and seruice. But if God gaue visible wordes, as he doeth his sacramentes, it is not therefore lawfull for men to

make images, as visible teachers, which God hath forefended. There is therefore hitherto no naturall cause of the honouring of images.
               The thirde cause of honouring of Images, is, because they be naturally knit and ioyned to the trueth, concerning their shape and representation: as the reporter, if he be an Ethnike or Iewe, he is ioyned to Christ in morall honestie and naturall loue of trueth: if he be baptized, much more as a member of Christ: if he be a bishop, &c. as a minister of Gods worde: if he be a Prophete, by a more special grace: if an Apostle, as one nerest to Christ: if it be Christ himselfe, as the chiefe and God himselfe. So Images as they be neerer to Christ, they are more to be honoured, and Christs Image most of all, which speaketh alwayes (and yet saith neuer a worde) to them that haue spirituall eares of vnderstanding: Nay carnall eyes of blinded and hardened heartes. But this difference he maketh, the former reporters deserue honour, beeing reasonable creatures, freely and voluntarily reportinge the trueth, but letters and Images deserue no honour, and yet it is due to them, whiche is a straunge matter: a due without desert, yea necessarily due to them in respect of that whose image it beareth. But admitte that the image were a true reporter, as he is nothing but a false & dumb stocke without any action, yet seeinge he compareth an image to the written letters of the gospell, which be figures of that trueth which is represented and learned by them, I pray you what honour is due to the written letters of the Byble, more then to the written letters of any other booke, and yet they are necessary for the preseruation of the doctrine thereof, yea they are true & natural figures of the sense that is contained in the booke, if no man be so madde, as to put of his cap to those letters, or to that booke, or to set it vp to kneele to it, to sense it, &c?
               What monstruous madnesse is it, to defende the worshippinge of Images, which if they were graunted to be

lawfull meanes to bring men to spirituall knowledge, yet were they nothing comparable to the written letter and sillables of the scriptures?
               The fourth cause of honouring of Images is, that all nations haue honoured them in respect of their vertue whose Images they are.
               I haue shewed before in a worde, that this prooueth it not to be a lawe of nature, that Images are to be honoured, because all nations haue bene ignorant of God, haue committed Idolatrie, haue committed whoredome, &c. And although the art of making of Images be good, yet it prooueth not that all Images may be made, or anye worshipped. The art of making swordes is good, yet it neither proueth that all swordes are well vsed, nor that any is to be worshipped. But Master Sander saith, seeinge that all nations haue made and worshipped Images, it is against the lawe of all nations, and of nature, to forbid the worshippe of them. For he would better like of that lawe, which forbadde Images of Christ to be made, then of that which forbiddeth them to be worshipped, which he calleth a filthie decree, and yet it was a decree of Pope Gregorie the first to the bishoppe of Massilia, as we haue shewed before.
               But concerning the example of all nations, thus I answere briefely, what Images they made out of religion, and how they worshipped them, it toucheth our controuersie nothing in the worlde. But such as they made and worshipped in religion were abhominable Idoles, and contrarie to the lawe of nature. For Sainte Paule in the first to the Romaines, and in the 17. of the Actes, reproueth the Gentiles for making and worshipping of Images by the lawe of nature.
               But whereas he saith the Iewes worshipped the Images of the Cherubins which Salomon had made to garnish the walles of the temple, with the figures of palme trees, and other flowers, quoting, 3. Reg. 6. & 2. Par. 3. he is a most impudēt & shameful liar. For there is no word in those chapters, nor in all the Bible sounding that way.
               
                  Neither doth Hieronyme ad Marcellam say, they worshipped the holy place, but they reuerenced it in respecte of the great mysterie thereof, as they did the temple it selfe. For all reuerent estimation of a thing, is not honouring or worshipping of it, as Master Sander alwayes dreameth.
               Of the image in Pauende, made (as he sayeth (by the woman, and preserued by Christians vntill the dayes of Iulian, wee haue sayed ynough in the Chapter nexte before this. Hitherto the wicked custome of all nations, contrarie to the worde of God, proueth not the worshipping of images to bee necessarily good by the lawe of nature.
               The fifth cause is, that the relation of honour is so necessarily betweene the image and the thing meant to bee honoured by it, that if the image be not honoured, the thing cannot be honoured thereby. Nay by your leaue Master Sander, the relation of honour is between them that meant to giue honour, and the thing meant to bee honoured, inter honorantem & honoran
                        •••
                     
                   and not between the image and the thing meant to bee honoured by an image, so that if the image be not honoured, his foolish meaning is disapointed, that meant to honour a thing by an image. But admit it were as you say, what inconuenience is in the conclusion? If the image be not honoured, the thing cannot bee honoured by the image. For if the thing be worthie honour, it needeth not the vaine honour of an image. But you saye, it is the lawe of nature and right reason, that if an image be made of an honourable personage, it may also be honoured, that is, honourably regarded and esteemed, according to the vertue of the man more or lesse. As if it be the image of Cato, you thinke his worldly wisedome well worthie of an image, but you wil not think it to be an holie image, as you thinke the image of Christ or his mother to bee, But if you thinke the image of a holie person to bee a holie image, why do you not by the same reason thinke the image of Cato a wise man to be a wise image? and

the image of Socrates a vertuous man to bee a vertuous image, and the image of Cicero an eloquent man to bee an eloquent image, if the images of these men bee not wise, vertuous, nor eloquent, no more be the images of Christ, his mother, or his Apostles, diuine, holy or honorable. And if it be the lawe of nature that the image of an honourable person shoulde be made and honoured as his vertue is more or lesse, then by the contrary, the image of a wicked man shoulde be made and dishonoured as his wickednesse is more or lesse. So that as we must haue a religion of images of good men made and honored to stirre vs vnto vertue, so wee must haue a religion of making and dishonouring the images of wicked men to diswade vs from wickednes. If this later be a fond immagination: so vndoubtedly is the former.
               The sixt cause is because the name of Christ is communicated to his image, for it is called Christ, so the honour due to his name is in the same degree to be communicated to his image also. For the name of God is to be blessed, and the name of his sainctes shall liue in honour for euer. Yea sir, but as ye name of Christ is falsely, wickedly, and blasphemously communicated to a deade image, so is his honour falsely, wickedly and blasphemously communicated to the same.
               And where as hee saith, wee are ashamed to confesse that we breake the images of Christ, he lyeth falsely & impudently. For if we sawe the true images of the countenance of Christ abused to idolatrie, wee woulde no more doubt or feare to breake them, then Ezechias did to breake the Brasen serpent, which was a figure of Christe, and commaunded by God himselfe to be made. But as for their ridiculous images, which are no more the images of Christ, then of Iudas Iscarioth, but that it please
                     •
                  h them to call them so, wee may iustly denye them to bee the images of Christ, which haue no proper resemblance vnto his bodie, more then to any other man.
               The last reason is, that if it be a contumelye to the Prince to haue his image broken, and an honour to haue

it regarded, the like must needes come to passe in Christ. And here M. Iewell is bidden to breake if he dare the Image of the Queenes maiestie, or the armes of the realm, or any noble mans banner. But if the prince had as precisely forbidden any image of her to be made, and commaunded the same to bee broken if it were made, as Christ hath forbiddē images to be made & honoured in any religious worship, and commaunded such as were so made and worshipped to be broken, Maister Iewell durst execute his princes commandement. And maister Sander sheweth himselfe a wise man to compare a thing permitted, with a thing forbidden, a thing of one nature that is ciuil, with a thing of an other nature that is religious. And these be the seuen wise reasons of one man, not so wise as the seuen wise men of Greece. But yet to knitte vp the matter, we must haue a comparison of the doctrine of the Catholikes with maister Iewels doctrine cō
                  cerning images.
               1 Christ is as worthy to haue an image as any noble man.
               To this maister Iewell must aunswere, this is no good faith, therefore this is his doctrine, Christ is lesse honorable then Iulius Caesar. A wittie conclusion, Christe refuseth a vaine heathenish honour & forbidden by God, therefore hee is lesse honourable then Iulius Caesar: Nay maister Sander the honour of Christe and Iulius Cęsar are not meete to bee matched together, the one the sonne of GOD, the other a dampned spirite.
               2 Christes image, is set vp in the Church that wee might remember him, loue him, and followe him. This ende being good maketh the acte of setting vp the Image good. Maister Iewell must say it is not well done to set vp such remembrance and to honour it. And so I warrant you he sayeth because God hath forbidden it, for if your reason be good, the good ende maketh the acte to be good, the acte of them that killed the Apostles was good, because they thought to do God good seruice

therein, as our sauiour Christe him selfe witnesseth, Ioan. 16. vers. 2.
               
                  
                     Sander.
                  3 Item, wee adore Christe so perfectly, that wee suffer not so much as his image to be vnhonoured: Master Iewell must saye, Christe is not worthie of so much honour, that for his sake his image should be honoured of vs, but in deede he would say, as Saint Augustine sayth to them which affirmed they honoured the Angels for Gods sake. I would you woulde honour Christe as hee hath appointed you, then should you learne not to honour images for his sake, which he abhorreth.
               
                  
                     Sander.
                  4 Item, wee beleeue it to bee a contumely done to Christ, if his image be broken: Master Iewel must saye: It is well done to breake Christs images. Yea, such images as are worshipped to the contumely of Christ, & in contempt of his lawe.
               5 Item, it is a contumely to a Prince, to breake his image.
                     Sander.
                   Master Iewell must say, it is no contumely to a Prince to haue his image broken. But why must hee say so? what hath he to doe with Princes images, or armes, which are matters of ciuile honour? If you make the comparison to Christes image, it is a foolish tautologie, for you sayed the same immediatly before, and the comparison is vnfit betweene God and man, where the one forbidding, the other allowing: betweene diuine, religious, spirituall, and true worship, and ciuile, worldly, vaine, and transitorie honour. Therefore, though Princes armes and images may be set vp to the aduauncement of their worldly honour, yet the glorie of Christe and his worship requireth no such thinges, but vtterly forbiddeth them.
            
            
               
                  Sander.THE XII. or XI. CHAP.
               
                  It is proued out of the worde of God, that the images of honorable things ought to be honoured. Also that M. Iewell vnderstandeth not the places of scripture alledged by the fathers of the 7. general councel. What proportion is betweene a saint & his image. Iacob

adoring the top of Iosephes rod, shewed that a creature without sense may be adored for his sake which hath reason and vertue. The signe of the crosse shall appeare at the day of iudgement, to the confusion of those which haue nowe throwne it downe.
               
               Pope Adrian writing to the Emperour concerning the second Nicen Councel,
                     Fulk. Con. Nic. 2. Act. 2. alledgeth for the making and honoring of images, that saying of Genesis: God made man according to his owne image and similitude: which he expoundeth to consist in free wil, and in calling all creatures by their proper names. M. Iewel not vnderstanding how these places of scripture cited in that Councel, ought to be applied to making and honouring of images, mocketh at all those Fathers learning &c. And so he might right well, being a companie of vnlearned asses and flattering parasites, who to currie fauour with that idolatrous Empresse Irene, abused the scriptures most shamefully and absurdly, to the maintenance of the making and worshipping of images. But Maister Sander hath chosen a fewe of those places, thinking to wring out some fore matter of them, leauing out the rest (which hee was ashamed to name) for breuities sake. And first he bringeth in the authoritie of Damascene, a worshipfull Doctour, aboue seuen hundreth yeares past, which bringeth many of the same places for the same purpose, making a comparison betweene him and Maister Iewell, and both their books. Well, let the iudgement be among learned men. But Damascene. De Ortho. fid. cap. 17. frameth an argument thus. GOD made man to his owne image. For whose cause therefore doe wee worship one an other, but bicause we are made after the image of GOD? Alledging Basil, which faith, The honour of the image is transferred into the honour of the paterne.
               Cyrillus likewise reasoneth in Cat. 12. The woodden image of an earthly King is honoured, howe much more the reasonable image of GOD. But these reasons, that serue for the honouring and reuerencing of man, which is Gods true image, for Gods sake serue nothing in the

worlde for honouring of false images artificiall, which containe nothing in them of that which is to be worshipped or honoured in the patterne. And therefore Maister Iewel may well mocke such a bald reason, as hath no good consequence in it. Man being the true image of God, made by God him selfe, and hauing in him a true similitude of those things which are honourable in God, as wisdome, holinesse, righteousnesse, &c. is to be honoured for Gods sake: therefore a stocke which is a false or counterfet image of Christe made by a cursed man, and hath no true resemblance in it of those things that are honourable in Christ, is to be honored for Christes sake. For what wit, sense, or shame hath he, that maketh such an argument? But (saith he) we must marke the proportion betwene the image and the thing whereof it is an image, to see the weight of this reason. But what proportion is there betweene truth and falshood? euen such there is betwene man the image of God, and a blocke the image of man. But it beareth mans shape, & also his name (saith he) but it beareth it falsely say I. For mans shape is not a dead or insensible shape, no more then a dead carcase is a man, and much lesse it deserueth the name of a man. Yet continuing this proportion, hee saith: Among all men, none is so truely honourable, as those who continued to the end of their life according to that image of GOD wherevnto they were first made, such are all the Saintes. Setting the question of images aside, see howe he honoureth the Saintes with the dishonour of the redemption of Christ, which was needlesse to them, if they continued in the image of God, in which they were first made. The Apostle witnesseth, that by Christe we are restored vnto the image of God, from whom by sinne we are fallen Coll. 3. ver. 10. For to say, that any man hath cō
                  tinued according to the image of God to his liues end, is to say that he neuer sinned.
               Furthermore he saith, their images are made in ye faith of Gods church. A wholsome faith, which is cōtrarie to Gods word, yea, he concludeth there is no doubt, but by the

force of Gods word we are bound to honour Saints images, bicause thei are made according to the shape of them in that behalfe as they were most like vnto God. First, where is yt worde of God (M. San) by whose force we are bound? You seeme to be an anthropomorphite, when you say that Saintes images are made according to the shape of them in that behalfe, as they were most like vnto God. For the images of Saints, when they are best made, are made but according to the shape of their bodies. And were the Saints most like to God in ye shape of their bodies? O brutish heretique! But let vs see an other conclusion in this Popish proportion. Our Ladies image approcheth neerer to hir in nature, then she doth approch to God, therefore her image must be more honored for her sake, then she her selfe for Gods sake. By ye former proposition we must learne, that ye man which made our Ladies image is able to make a truer image thē God, who made our Ladie to his image. For to compare the substances of the images, is nothing to the purpose, to shew ye excellencie of the images, as you your selfe (M. San.) in your Metaphysicall abstractions haue taught vs. For an image of stone being like to a man, is a better image then one of golde being not like to him. I say a better image, & not a better matter. And will you now compare the matter of our Ladies image (for so you cal her) as liker in nature to her substance, then her substance is to God, to proue her image in it more to be honoured, then the image of God in her? Truly if you be so insensible, that you see not that grosnesse of this falshod, I am ashamed in respect of that Vniuersitie which gaue you the title of a Doctour, not worthie with these arguments to step out of ye schooles of ye sophisters. Last of al you reason thus, the image of God in vs may be dimned & darkned, insomuch yt men haue ben worshipped, as Gods, but our Ladies artificial image being onely knowne or called by the name of her shape and image, can neuer be principally worshipped as our Lady her selfe. You play the sophister too foolishly, for no more can a man so long as hee is knowne and

called by the name of the image & similitude of God, b
                     •
                   principally worshipped as God him selfe. But that name forgotten, man hath bene worshipped as God, so hath the image of our Ladie bearing the name of our Ladie, bene worshipped, as her selfe, or rather as GOd him selfe, neither hath the insensiblenesse of images, defended them from daunger of being worshipped as God.
               An other testimonie of scripture yt Pope Adrian citeth, is Gen. 28. of the stone which Iacob set vp right, for a monument or standing image (saith M. San.) and powred oyle vpon it, and called the name of the place Bethel, that is, the house of God. Therefore we may set vp images, and honour them: a substantial reason. For make as mysticall interpretations as you can, of the stone to signifie Christe, & the oyle ye spirituall vnction of the holy Ghost: yet was it no image, but a signe or monument erected in remembrance of the vision, by a speciall instinct of Gods spirite, which when the Israelites would drawe into an example of wilworship, erecting a temple there, and setting vp an image thereon, the place was called of the Prophetes Bethauen, that is, the house of vanitie, and not Bethel, the house of God. O see the 4.5. &. 10. Chapter.
               And whereas Augustine noteth, that although he called the stone,
                     Quest. in Her. 8. Gods house, yet hee worshipped not the stone, neither sacrificed to the stone, nor called it God: You thinke to escape by aunswering, that no more doe you adore images of stone with godly honour, or with any honour for the stones sake. But Augustine denyeth yt he resorted afterward to it, yt he adored the stone with any honor at al, or in any respect, or that he did any thing like to idolatrie, but you adore the image of Christ & cal it Christe, and goe a pilgrimage to it, therefore Iacobs example can not shrowd you from idolatrie. For although the annoynting of the stone were a consecration of it to be a holy monument by a speciall direction of Gods spirite, yet it followeth not, that it was any adoration of the stone, or that euery man may set vp, and annoynt stones after that manner, which hath no such warrant

of Gods worde or his spirite. And that God chose one place aboue another for his honour, it proueth not, that men may choose one stocke aboue another to make an idoll thereof or an image to worship, as you had rather call it.
               The thirde text of scripture is, that Iacob adored the toppe of Iosephs rodde, or scepter: Heb. 11. Which Sedulius saith did mystically betoken the kingdome of Christ, to be honoured in the end of the worlde, as he adored the rodde or scepter of his sonne. Yet is there here no image honoured. Nay here is not the toppe of Iosephe
                     •
                   scepter honoured out of the scripture. For the Hebrue text is, He worshipped toward the bedshead. Gene. 47. vers. 31. And the Greeke text. Heb. 11. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and he worshipped toward the end of his staffe, or leaning vppon the end of his staffe, So that neither in the Hebrue, nor Greeke, there is any worshipping of the staffe or scepter of Ioseph.
               The 4. text of scripture: God appearing to Moses bad him pull off his shooes, for the place where he stoode was holy ground. The presence of God made the ground-holie. What then? Therefore, an image appointed to bring vs to the remembraunce of holie thinges may be holy & honoured. I denie the argument, where is the presence of God in the image, to make it holie?
               The 5. Dauid honoured the Arke and daunced before it. The Arke was a holie sacrament ordeined by God, therefore hath he nothing to do with images forbidden of God.
               The 6. God cōmandeth the brasen serpent to be made Nu. 21. Shewe the like speciall commaundement to dispense with the general lawe. Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image, for the making of your Popishe image and the day is yours.
               The 7. the tribes of Ruben, and Gad, and ye halfe tribe of Manasses, made an image of an altar. Ios. 22. Nay they made an altar in deed for a memoriall, & yet their facte was not cōmēdable, though it was in some sort excusable.
               
                  The 8. God commanded two cherubims to be made ouer the mercie seate Exod. 25. those were grauen Angels (saith M. Sander) of the highest degree in heauen saue one. O vaine presumptuous hypocrite, that wil take vpon him to knowe the degrees of Angels, which the scripture hath neuer reuealed. To this I aunswere as to the brasen serpent, shewe the worde of God dispensing with the generall lawe for any images in religion. The rending of the vaile a sunder, sheweth vs not the images of Cherubims, as on the Arke he saith, much lesse other newe Images which were neuer there, but the glorie of Christ with vncouered face, while we our selues are transformed into the same image. 2. Cor. 3. ver. 18.
               The 9. the temple was an image of Christes body, therefore the Iewes had an image of Christ openly set vp before their eyes. The temple was a figure of Christes bodie, so was euerie sacrifice that was offered, but no image.
               The 10. the Temple was honoured by the Iewes, yea, & Daniel prayed toward Ierusalem when the Temple was destroied, you might as wel say, they honored Ierusalem. No doubt but the temple was reuerently esteemed of the godly, as a place erected by Gods commandement, which seeing images doe lacke, there passeth no consequence from the honouring of the Temple, to the honouring of images.
               The 11. ye law had a shadow of good things to come, & not the self image of things He. 10. therfore if the dumb shadowes of the lawe were to be worshipped, much more the expressed image of his bodie, of those who will perfourme that in the new Testament, which was prefigured in the lawe? Who can beare these blasphemies? Did the shadowes of the lawe prefigure the worshipping of images, or our redemption by Christe? Are your dombe stockes and stones that selfe image or patterne of those shadowes which the Apostle speaketh of, or was Christe himselfe? O brasen forehead and blasphemous mouth!
               The 12. Gods honour is giuen to the fleshe of

Christ in respect of the vnitie in person with the Godhead, therefore the image may be honoured in an other respect. But euerie respect (thou blundering idolater) cannot make a cause of honour, but onely the vnitie in person, which seeing it is not in thy blockes with the paterne, thine argument proueth nothing.
               The 13. the image of Caesar in his coyne, proueth, that it may be giuen to Cęsar, so doth euerie image leade vs to that truth whereof it is an image. No Maister Sander, the image of Caesar on his coyne proueth that the Iewes were subiect to Caesar, and therefore tribute was due vnto him. So your argument hath no deduction from Caesars image.
               The 14. the signe of the crosse is to be worshipped, for Amelech was ouerthrowen by that signe, which Moses made when he prayed with his handes lifted vp and spred abroade. Exod. 17. Therefore we may and must honour the signe of the crosse, in what matter or stuffe so euer it be made. Vanitie of vanities, and nothing but vanitie, where is there any one title in that Chapter, of the signe of a crosse, yea or of the spreading of his handes abroade whiche shoulde make a crosse, with his lifting vppe?
               The 15. the signe of Thau, that is to say of the crosse, was marked in the forehead of suche as hated idolatrie. Ezech. 9. and they were not slaine corporally, no more shall they be slaine euerlastingly which now imbrace it. An easie way to escape euerlasting death. But where finde you that the signe of Thau was the signe of the crosse? Or that the print of the letter Thau was set on their forheades? For this worde Thau is as much to say, as a marke or signe, and not a speciall figure or marke, although the vulgar translation doeth not translate it, but setteth it in the Hebrue worde as he found it.
               The 16. the signe of the sonne of man shall appeare at the day of iudgement Mat. 24. which is the signe of the crosse. Howe proue you that Maister Sander? Or if you

could proue it, what is that to worshipping of images▪ You say it shalbe to the confusion of them which haue throwen downe that signe, but you onely say it, and then we force not. Yea say you, a thousand times, what say I, a thousand? Euerlastingly accursed is he that hateth or destroyeth any one iote belonging to Christ, be it neuer so farre distant from his holy flesh and person. Then how many times accursed are they, that haue destroyed so many bibles, in which was not ten thousand iots belonging to Christ, but his whole doctrine perfectly conteined?
               The 17. the people Act. 5. coueted to lie onely within the compasse of S. Peters shadowe, the woman desired to touche but the hemme of Christes garment. Why, because any thing of his is worthie of estimation? Verily the image of Christ is somewhat of his, or else it were not his image. No verily M. San. the image of Christ is nothing of his truly, but falsely, nothing to his honour, but to his dishonor. The enimies of Christ are none of his, & yet we say these be his enimies. But you say: if a man had that faith, as to beleeue, that if he might touche, or onely see his image, he should be safe, I see no reason why that faith may not make him safe. O blinde beast, or rather blocke that seest no reason, why that faith which was neuer heard out of Gods worde, should not saue a man. But the heretikes you say tye all thinges to his person, and nothing to his other instrumentes. The word of God teacheth vs to tie al things to Christ, and to acknowledge none other instrumentes, then he hath prouided and appointed for vs. For images be the instruments of the Diuel, and not of Christe to worke by.
               The last. All that euer Isai Cap. 2. Ieremie, Cap. 50. Ezechiel Cap. 30. Micheas, Cap. 1. Sophonias, Cap. 2. Zacharie, Cap. 13. or King Dauid In Psal. 9. say of the destruction of Idols in ye time of grace, is vterly void & of none effect, if it be not lawful to worship, or adore images. Do you not maruel what is ye reason of this monstrous assertion? Verily euen as monstrous a lie, yt the whole Church of Christ in all Temples, & Chappels, always & especially since the

time of Constantine the great, hath set vp and vsed reuerently the Images of Christ and of his Saints. What answere shall I make to this? Let him haue the whetstone as big as a mountaine.
            
            
               THE XIII. OR XII. CHAP.
               
                  That the signe of the healthfull crosse was honoured in the first sixe hundred yeares, and of those two grosse ignoraunces in M. Iewell, thinking the signe of the crosse not to be an image, or that to haue the signe of the crosse, in great regarde for Christes sake, is not to worship the same signe, and consequently to worship an Image. Also the materiall word of Christes crosse is holy, as a signe and as a relique. A miracle wrought by the woode of Christes crosse. The bishop of Ierusalem brought forth the crosse to be adored euerye Easter. The Emperours Theodosius and Valentinian made a lawe in the honour of the crosse. By M. Iewels confession the signe of the crosse was had in great regarde among the Christians. S. Stephens image painted and hanged before his sepulchre with a crosse on his shoulder. Probianus was accompted no perfect Christian, because he would not adore the holy crosse of Christ. M. Iewell is conuinced by words of his owne alledging. The writers of hymnes. S. Chrysostome did set forth some parcell of Christs crosse to be adored and kissed.
                        Sander.
                     
                  
               
               Maister Sander telleth vs that when he speaketh of the worshipping of the crosse,
                     Fulke.
                   he meaneth either the materiall crosse whereon Christ suffred, or els the signe and image thereof. The material crosse, he saith is not onely holy, as ye signe of him yt died on it, but also as sanctified with the blood of Christ. As though the blood of Christ was a sanctification vnto an vnsensible blocke of wood. It was the aulter whereon the sacrifice of our redemption was offred. Although it be sometimes so called vnproperly, because it seemed so in the eyes of men, yet our Sauiour Christ himselfe, was both the priest and the sacrifice, the temple & ye altar of our redemption, whereof Augustine saith, De fide ad Petrum Dia. ca. 2. Iste igitur est, qui in se vno totum exhibuit quod esse necessarium ad redemptionis

nostrae sciebat effectum, idem scilicet sacerdos &. sacrificium, idem Deus & templum. This is he that in himselfe onely exhibited all whatsoeuer he knewe to be necessarie for the effecte of our redemption, the same being both the prieste and the sacrifice, the same beeinge God and his temple. But a temple he could not be, except an altar were within him, and not without him. Christ is therefore the holy altar, and not the cursed crosse. But he addeth that it is an holy relique and not onely an Image, If there were so great holinesse in that materiall crosse, it is maruaile none of the Apostles made any acounte of it, nor any of the faithfull, not Ioseph and Nicodemus, which with muche lesse suite might haue obteyned it of Pilate, then the body of Iesus. Nor the church by the space of three hundreth yeares, vntill the time that Helena is saide to haue founde it with the two crosses of the two theeues: whiche I take to bee but a fable and an imposture of some that after Helena was dead, forged a crosse & nailes, affirminge that they were founde by Helena.
               For it soundeth like no trueth, that Eusebius whiche knewe the same Helena the mother of Constantine the great, and writeth of her deuotion and of her doinges in the holy lande, woulde haue omitted suche a noble inuention of the crosse, with so manie miracles about the same, eyther in his storie, or in the life of Constantine.
               I knowe there is a shorte note of it in his Chronicles, but that seemeth to be added by some other since his time, whiche he would not haue omitted to declare at large in his storie, where hee setteth out in many words, matter of muche lesse importaunce then that supposed inuention was. Againe they that in latter times write of it, as Ambrose, Ruffinus, Socrates, Theodoretus, and Sosomenus seeme to haue receyued that matter onely of reporte and of no written monument, for scarce one of them agreeth with another. For to omitte how incredible it is, that the Iewes woulde haue buried that crosse

to keepe it from the Christians; whiche they more safely might haue burned. Wherefore should they burie with it the two other crosses of the theeues? And admitte there were suche holinesse in Christes crosse, that it coulde not corrupt, yet howe were not the other two crosses rotten in three hundreth yeares lyinge in the earth?
               But admitting that storie to be true (as I promise you, it is no article of my beliefe) what meaneth M. Sander to saye the materiall crosse is not onely an Image, by which he meaneth that it is an Image? whereof I praye you shoulde it bee an Image? Will you nowe confounde the thinge with the image thereof, as you doe offer the Image with the thing? 
                     •
                  f that materiall crosse were an image, then the images thereof be images of an Image, which is nothinge of it selfe, and then by your owne rule they be Idoles. But you saye it was an instrument of our redemption and therefore holy. If that be a good reason, Pilate, Annas, Cayphas, Iudas, the souldiers which crucified Christ, were holy, for they were instruments of our redemption. But Ambrose, De obitu Theodosi
                        •
                     ; calleth it the standerde of saluation, the worde of trueth, yea life it selfe.
               I praye you giue Ambrose in his eloquente oration leaue to vse rethoricall figures of amplification, and let him expounde him selfe in the same. 
                     Habeat Helena quae legat, vnde crucem domini recognoscat; inuenit ergo titulum, regem adorauit non lignum vtique, quia hic gentilis est error & vanitas impiorum, sed adorauit illum qui pependit in lig
                        
                           •
                        o. Let Helena haue somewhat that shee may reade, whereby she may know the lordes crosse. Therefore she founde the title, shee worshipped the kinge, not the wood verilye, for this is an heathnishe errour, and a vanitie of vngodly men, but shee worshipped him that hath hanged on the wood.
               
               Thus Ambrose although he credited this inuention, yet he affirmeth it is an heathnishe errour, and a vanitye of wicked menne to woorshippe the tree that

Christ dyed on, much more the signe or Image thereof, seeing al worshippe belongeth to God. But Master Sander replyeth, that he saieth, Non insolentia ista sed pietas est, cum defertur sacrae redemptioni: this is no insolencie but godlinesse, when honour is giuen to the holy redemption. Speakinge of honour due to the woode in respect
                     •
                   that it belongeth to Christ. But Ambrose speaketh not one worde of honour due to the wood of the crosse, but defendeth the estimation of the crosse of Christ, which i
                     •
                   our redemption. For speaking of the nayle which Helena caused to bee forged into the diademe of her sonne the Emperour, he saith: Sapienter Helenę egis quae crucem in capite regum leuauit, & locauit, vt crux Christi in regibus adoretur. Non insolentia ista, &c. Helena did wisely, that lifted vp the crosse in the heade of kinges and so placed it, that the crosse of Christ might be worshipped in the kinges. This is no insolencie, &c. as aboue. So that he speaketh not of the woode of the crosse, but of the iron of the nayle.
               Beside we see a great difference betweene the reuerent offering of a thing, and the honouring or worshipping thereof, which yet Master Sander euery where confoundeth. But Ambrose speaketh further in the person of the Iewes. Ecce & clauus in honore est. Beholde euen the nayle is in estimation, and that which we knocked in to death, is a remedy of health, and with a certaine inuisible power tormenteth the deuils: Kinges are bowed to the iron of his feete. Here saith Master Sander, we haue the adoration of iron. Is this like that Ambrose, who before condemned the adoration of the wood for an heathnish error, doeth now commende the bowinge to iron? why Master Sander, doe you not confesse, that the Iewes spake this and not Ambrose, or Ambrose spake this in the person of the Iewes? And who knoweth not in such fictions of persons speaking, the Orator must frame his talke as they, whome he supposeth to speake are like to say. The Iewes then in sport do say, kings bow down to a piece of iron: meaning to the Emperour, in whose creste this iron

nayle was, is it then the iudgement of Ambrose to allow the bowing to yron in any respect? O vaine & friuolous argumentes of the Papistes, that must borrowe their authority of the complaint of the perfidious Iewes. But you may knowe what honour was done to ye yron, yt as ye one nayle was placed in an honourable place, namely in the Emperours Diademe, so an other was placed in his horse mouth, for so saith Ambrose De vno clauo frenos fieri precepis: she commaunded his bridle to be made of one nayle. This was no great honouring of that holy yron, to put it to bee champed and slaboured in an horse mouth, although Ambrose make a misterie of it. And the thirde nayle other writers say, was cast into the Sea to staye a tempest. All three being thus bestowed by auncient testimonie, ye Papists haue fourteene more in diuers places of Fraunce, Italy & Germany, beside ye fifteenth that was shewed at Paules crosse by maister Iewell since the Queenes reigne.
               But Ruffinus calleth it blessed. And Cyrillus healthfull, and precious, because it leadeth vs to the memory of Christs death. So woulde an image of Iudas Iscarioth doe. It was the best reason those auncient writers had to defende that supersticious estimation, which they had of the signe of the crosse.
               As for the report of Paulinus, that the same crosse had a Church and a secreate place made at Ierusalem where it might be honourably reserued, which ye Bishop brought forth at Easter to be worshipped of the people, if it be true, yet proueth it not the worshiping of images, for the crosse was no image.
               But that it is not like that any church was erected to the Crosse, Saint Augustine sheweth, that it was counted sacriledge in his time to make a Church vnto any creature. 
                     Contra. Maximin. lib. 1. titu. 11. Nonne si Templum alicui sācto angelo excelentissimo de signis & lapidibus faceremus anathematizaremur a veritate Christi, & ab ecclesia dei, quoniam creaturae exhiberemus eam seruitutem, quae vni tantum deb
                           •
                        
                        
                        
                           ••
                        r deo? si ergo sacrilegi essemus faciendo templum cuicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         creaturae,

quomodo non est Deus verus, cui non templum facimus, sed nos ipsi templum sumus? If we made a temple vnto any holy and most excellent Angel of woode and stones, shoulde we not be accursed from the trueth of Christ, and from the Church of God, because we shoulde giue that seruice to a creature which is due onely to God? If therefore wee shoulde be sacrilegious in making a temple to any creature whatsoeuer, how is not he a true God, to whom we make no temple, but we our selues are his temple? Except M. Sander will say the crosse was no creature, wee must say with Augustine, it ought to haue no temple. What superstition and Idolatrie hath done, is not the question, but what should be done and what is wel done, is all the controuersie.
               The feastes of the inuention of the crosse which hee maketh of 1200. yeares olde, and the exaltation of nine hundreth, (beside that the antiquitie of the inuenting is not proued,) yet argue not any worshippe of the crosse, more then the feastes of the Apostles and martirs. which were kept onely in remembrance of them, and not to adore or worship them.
               That maister Iewell graunteth the signe of the crosse to haue beene had in great regard among the Christians, what helpeth it your cause, seeing hee alloweth not the superstitious abuse thereof? But you say, if it be a thing vsed in the whole primitiue Church, it must not be called a supersticious abuse, for maister Iewel hath submitted himselfe to the first sixe hundreth yeares. A man may easely perceiue, with what cōscience maister Sander handeleth this cause, yt so impudētly affirmeth so manifest an vntruth: For who euer heard maister Iewell submit himselfe to the first sixe hundreth yeares in all matters of controuersie? Where did he euer take vpon him to discharge the first sixe hundreth yeares of all error and supersticion? Although for certeine questiōs vttered in his sermon, he made challeng of 600. yeares, yet did he neuer allowe of all thinges that were done or taught in the church for 600. years. But I pray you let vs see how substancially

M. Sander proueth the signe of the crosse to haue ben in estimation with ye whole primitiue church.
               His first authour is Tertulian, almost 200. yeares from Christ. And from him he descēdeth to Cyprian, Basill, Augustine, Chrisostome, &c. Tertulian sheweth only the sining of mens foreheades therewith, whethersoeuer they went. The later age brought in that signe into baptisme, confirmation, the Lords supper, and almost in to euery ceremony. So superstition crepeth like a ringworme, at the first as a tollerable indifferent matter, then as a holye thing, nexte as a necessarie thing, and last of all into open and grosse Idolatrie, as in the times following those six hundreth years.
               But before all those whom M. Sander nameth, Irenaeus lib. 1. testifieth that the Valētiniane heretiks brought the signe of the crosse in great estimation, calling it Oron confirmatiuam crucem the limit and terme of all things, & the confirming crosse, abusing euen the same testimonies of scripture for the proofe thereof, which the Papists doe, and namely maister Sander in this Chapter. 
                     Paulum autem apostolum & ipsum reminisci huius crucis dicunt: Verbum crucis &c. Mihi autem non eueniat gloriari nisi in cruce Christi: And they say that euen Paule the Apostle himselfe doth remember this crosse: The worde of the crosse &c. GOD forbid that I should boast in any thing, but in ye crosse of Christ. Seeing therefore so auncient a writer as Ireneus, testifieth, that the first estimation thereof came from so horrible heritikes, howsoeuer the later ages haue abused it, it cannot be proued a thing vsed in the whole primitiue church, that it might be no supersticious abuse.
               
               Next to this he citeth Chrisostome Or. 1. De adorat. cru
                     
                        •
                     is. that not onely the Crosse it selfe whereon Christe dyed, but also the signe and shape of it, ought to be worshiped and adored.
               And againe he citeth afterward in this Chapter either ye same or such an other. Hom. de adoratione crucis. But in all Chrisostomes workes there is no book, oration, homily, sermon or treatise of any such title. There be in

ye second tome two homilies de cruce & latrone, and a third de cruce dominica, but in none of them is any such words as he citeth, eius figuram & effigiem coledam adorandam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                  : or any thing to such purpose. Wherefore I can not otherwise thinke, but this is some blinde forgerie vnder the name of Chrisostome, which is not extant in all his authenticall writings.
               But Chrisostome in deede calleth the crosse whereon Christ dyed, which was so much esteemed, and whereof euery man desired to haue a peece, inclosed it in golde, hanged it about their neckes &c. lignum condemnationis the woode of condemnation: and the signe thereof so much vsed and esteemed Simbolum mortis the signe of death: in demost, ad gent. quod Chr. sit Deus. But M. Sander will proue the worshipping of the signe of the crosse by lawe, if it will not stande with diuinitie hee citeth Cod. Iust. tit. 11. tom l. Vnica. but it is Cod. Iust. lib. 1. tit. 8. le nemini licere &c. The Emperours Theodosius and Valentinianus made a law in these words: 
                     Cum sit nobis cura diligens per omnia superni numinda religionem tueri: signum Saluatoris Christi nemini licere vel in solo, vel in silice, vel in marmoribus (humi positis) insculpere, vel pingere, sed quocun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         reperitur tolli, granissima paena mulctandis▪ si qui contrarium statutis nostris tentauerint, specialiter imperamus.
                   Where as we haue diligent care to defend the religion of the highest God in all thinges, wee specially commaunde that it shalbe lawfull for no man to graue or paint the signe of our sauiour Christ either in ye ground, or in flint, or marble stones (lying on ye ground) but whersouer it is found (to be taken away) vnder a most greuous forfet to be paid of thē yt attempt yt which is contrary to our statuts. Cod. Iust. Ti. 11. vnica. This was a kinde of honoring the signe of the Crosse (saith he) when it was forbidden to be grauen on the ground, least it should be dishonored, if it were troden on, euen as Helena, S. Ambrose witnessing feared to tread vpon the crosse of Christ, which he calleth the sacrament of saluation. Of Helena we heard before yt shee worshipped not the crosse, howe much soeuer she made thereof.
               
                  And if this lawe were to be vnderstood as M. San. would haue it, yet here is no worshipping of the crosse spoken of. But touching the vnderstanding of this lawe, M. Iewel is reproued, first in citing it out of Petrus Crinitus, who leaueth out these wordes, humi positis, lying on the ground, which Iustinians Code addeth, then in false translation, wherof he wil speake afterward. But concerning the first, for as much as Petrus Crinitus was a learned man, about that time when bookes beganne to be printed, before this cōtrouersie of images was moued, his report is more to bee credited then the Printers presse, for the auncient reading of this lawe, how so euer M. Sander fondly compareth him with Iustinian corrupted. Moreouer, to proue this corruption probable, those wordes humi positis, are altogether superfluous, for when he had saide before in solo on the ground▪ what neede he add afterward lying on the ground? Also the disiunctiue, vel, or, set before these words in solo, (which M. Sander hath cleane left out in his translation) doth sufficiently declare, that the Emperours meaning was, to prohibite all grauing and painting of the signe of Christe, whether it were of the crosse or of the image of Christ, either on the ground, or else where, bicause it is against the religion of the high God, to make any images or signes of him to any purpose. As for the daunger of treading vpon the signe of the crosse, is not in any one word of this lawe touched. Neither was it a thing regarded in the deepest dungeon of Poperie, for crosses & images of Christ and of the Trinitie, are yet to be seene of their making, vpon a great number of graue stones in England to this day, which argue, that either the Papistes did against this lawe, or else that this lawe had no such meaning as M. Sander feigneth it to haue.
               But M. Iewell confesseth, that the signe of the crosse was had in great regard among the Christians, for that most worthie price that was offered vpon it: and yet hee confesseth not, that either they worshipped the signe of the crosse, or that their regard was no greater thē it ought to haue bene. For if any such regard had bene due to the

signe of the crosse by Gods ordinaunce, the Apostles that deliuered to vs all the counsell of God, would not haue omited it in their writings. Eph. 20. vers. 20. & 27. And M. Sander him selfe, after he hath iangled a while confusely, of regarding and worshipping, at length confesseth, that euery regard is not commonly taken for a worshipping, but some is, as the couetous mans regarding of money. So that his argument and his conclusion is nothing else, but a sophisticall conuersion of particulars, which nothing toucheth the matter in controuersie: Some worshipping is a regarding, therefore some regarding is worshipping. Both these are true, and yet the regarding of the signe of the crosse, is not thereby proued a worshipping thereof. And yet he is not ashamed to proceede, as though he had proued all regarding to be worshipping. For hee saith, If M. Iewell had a piece of that crosse that Christe dyed on, he would preferre it before golde and siluer &c. and this regard should be a worshipping or honouring of it. I beleeue if M. Iewell had a piece that had bene worshipped, hee would haue burned it, and so would I. And yet if I had but a pibble stone, that came out of the land of promise, I would keepe it, and make much of it, so would I doe of the crosse, if it were free from idolatrie, but I would worshippe the one, no more then the other. How long will this sophisticall Doctour walke vnder a cloud of ambiguitie of words? Let him either proue such honoring & worshipping as the Papistes vse vnto ye crosse or signe therof (which is the thing we impugne) to haue bene vsed in the eldest Primitiue Church, or else let him striue about termes and words among sophisters & children. But if M. Iewel should take the crosse for no better then a common piece of wood, hee should (saith hee) be blasphemous against the death of Christ. O grieuous accusation. Ezechias tooke the brasen Serpent for no better then a piece of brasse, which was a figure of Christe, and yet he was not blasphemous against the death of Christe. But heare his reason, Christe vouchsafed to segregate it from other wood, to make it the instrumēt of his passion.

Where find you that Christ did choose his crosse? I thinke it was rather appointed to him by the Iews, then prouided by him selfe: if you say, he did segregate it in his secret determination, I answere, yt so he did segregate Iudas, Annas, Caiphas, Pilate, the Iewes and souldiers, to be instruments of his passion. And yet none of them therefore to be regarded or worshipped, except of those detestable heretikes that thinke they were profitable instruments of our redemption. But O holy swords & axes of tyrants, and tormentours, that were embrued with the bloud of the Martyres, O holy fire that burned them, O holy water that drowned them, O holy gallowes and ropes that hanged them! For why should not these also haue their regard and worship according to the proportion of their deserts, whose eternal felicity they were instruments to procure?
               Yet once againe M. Iewell is challenged, for denying the cognisances of the crosse, in flags, banners, or targets, to be images. Also the letter that Ezechiel sawe in vision, the crosse that Constantine sawe in the ayre, the marks in mens garments, and the mysticall letters in the temple of Serapis. First touching the mark which Ezechiel saw, it is not described of what figure it was, onely that a marke was set, for Tau, signifieth a marke, and not onely the name of a letter, which in that time perhaps it had not, & so did S. Cyprian read it, Contra Demetrianum, transi mediam Ierusalem & notabis signum super frontes virorum. Go through the middest of Hierusalem, and thou shalt marke a signe vpon the foreheads of the men. The signe that Constantine sawe, was the character of the name of Christ, in two letters X & P after this maner, as both Euseb. witnesseth, and his coynes yet remaining do shew. ☧ Eu. de vit. Con. lib. 1. and therefore no crosse nor signe therof. The marks that haue appeared in mens garments, perhaps were imagined rather thē images, as children imagine dragons, & Gryphons in the clouds. The mystical letters in ye temple of the idol Serapis, could haue no relation to the crosse of Christ, which ye idolaters knew not. Therefore ye follie of those ecclesiastical writers is bewraied, yt thoght christianitie

much helped by such heathenish & superstitious fantasies: as for the rest, I answere as M. Iewell, that they are but barres laide one ouer an other, and no images. Yet M. San. maruelleth what blind ignoraunce this is, so to say. But to make the matter more plaine on his side, hee maketh the shape of Christe hanging with his armes abroad, all one with these signes or characters aforesaid, which is no blinde ignorance, but wilfull abusing of his readers, wtout all shame or shape of honestie. And yet, he will baffull vs with a doutie definitiō of an image (as he saith out of Gregorie Nazianzen) that euery similitude, likenesse, or shape of one thing taken out according to the samplar of an other thing, is an image, & then he runneth out into his old cōmon place of inward imaginations. But I pray you syr, who euer in those days or in ours, sawe the crosse that Christ dyed on, to make an image thereof according to the samplar? If none, but ye painter or grauer hath imagined it, then is it an image of an imagination, which is the samplar thereof, and not of the crosse of Christ, and so it is counterfet, and consequently by your own distinction an idoll. And in very deed, so many diuers figures and formes therof as we see to be made, argue that there is no certaine truth knowne vnto men, of what forme or figure it was: for some make it headlesse, thus ✚ some draw one barre through the other thus ✚ some drawe this barre at the vpper end, some through the middest, some make circles, some squares, some triangles at the foure endes, some make them blunt, some make them sharp, &c. some make the crosse ragged, some euen, so that there is no certentie, and if al these be images of Christes crosse, it skilleth not what proportion be kept in making of images according to the paterne. Hitherto therfore M. San. fond argument to proue worshipping of images by M. Iewels confession, hath no force to enter into any reasonable mans credite, bicause hee hath neither proued these signes of the crosse to be images, nor such regard as M. Iewel confesseth, to haue bene a worshipping of them, in that sense that the controuersie is betweene vs for worshipping of images.
               
                  But whearas maister Iewell saith, the same crosses were not set vp in any Temple, maister Sander confesseth not the same, but other such as they were, for proofe wherof he citeth a new found old Doctor called Euodius Bishop of Vzal in Affrike, writing about S. August. time, a book of the miracles of S. Stephen, in which he saith, S. Stephens image was painted with a crosse on his shoulder &c: this old Doctor was firste painted at Louan anno, 1564. but he cometh too late, to claime his antiquitie after so many hundred yeares, in which neither he nor his writing was euer harde off.
               That the people were taught to kneele down to crosses, which Maister Iewel denieth, he proueth by the example of Probianus,
                     Lib. 2. Cap. 19. of whom Sozomenus in ye tripartite historie doth write: That being somtimes a pagane, but afterwarde made a christian, he did in some parte follow the doctrine of the Christians. But he wolde not adore the cause of all our health, that is, the moste holy crosse. Hee beeing of this minde, the diuine power apeared to him, and shewed him the signe of the crosse set on the aulter of that church. And did manifestly declare that since Christ was crucified, all thinges that were done for the vtilitie of mankinde, had not been done by any meanes without ye vertue of the reuerend crosse, neither of holy Angels nor of godly men.
               Here saith maister Sander, it is euident, that the signe of the crosse was set vpon ye alter of S. Michaels church in Constantinople. Yea sir in that vision if it were true. But it is small euidence to proue that it stoode in the churche in deede. For if it had stoode on the alter in such honorable estimation, Probianus wolde not haue contemned it before. But where you say, he was compted no perfect Christian, because he wolde not adore the holy crosse of Christ: you walke still vnder your cloude of ambiguitie. For how proue you that ye adoration here spoken of, is yt kneeling to the crosse, which the Bishop denieth to haue been taught? it seemeth that Probianus newly conuerted from paganisme, had not yet that honorable estimation

of the reprochefull signe of the crosse, which the Christians of that time had. But whereas M. Iewell vpbraideth them with that blasphemous prayer, which they make to the crosse, kneeling on their knees, O crux aue, spes vnica, Alhaile O crosse, our onely hope, M. Sander saith, those wordes doe so conuince his blasphemous doctrine, that he shall neuer be able to auoide the argument, whiche is grounded vpon them. You haue need M. Sa. to set a good face on those wordes, euen of the same metall that your crosse to whom you speak is oftentimes made. But what Herculian argument I pray you do you bring forth? Forsooth S. Paul vsed the same phrase, when he said, God forbid that I should glorie but only in the crosse of Christe. But good sir, S. Paul speaketh neither to ye wodden crosse, nor of the signe thereof, but of the death of Christ. And you would make men beleeue, that you do so. Namely, that you say not those wordes to the crosse, but to Christ crucified. Thus you would couer your shame with impudencie. But you cannot so escape: for Thomas Aquinas a great Saint and Doctour of your Church. 3. Sen. di. 9.91. ar. 2 q. 4. affirmeth that the crosse of Christ is to be worshipped with the s
                     •
                  me Latria or Diuine worshippe, that Christ crucified is to be worshipped, & that euen vnto the crosse you speake, when you say all hayle O crosse, our onely hope.
               And if you will say this was but one Doctours opinion, yet the very wordes of that hymne and the rubrike thereof, shall conuince you, that you speake to the crosse, and not to Christ Beata cuius brachijs preci
                        •
                     on pependit sęculi, flatera facta est corpori, prędam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tulit Tartari. Blessed is that crosse on whose armes the price of the worlde did hang, it was made a beame to weigh his bodie, & tooke the pray away from hell. Immediately after these words the rubrike biddeth the quire turne to the altar where the crosse standeth, as M. Sander saith, and then follow these wordes. All hayle O crosse our onely hope, in this time of passion, increase rightehusnesse to godly men, & giue pardon to guiltie persons, By these it is plaine, that

this prayer is made to the crosse, and not to Christ, neither is it any thing like to the phrase which S. Paule vseth, of glorying in the crosse of Christ. And that Maister Sander neede not to make the matter so straunge of their speaking to the crosse: this hymne sung on the exaltation day and so often repeated in Anthemes and Versicles, doth sufficiently declare, Crux fidelis inter omnes arbor vna nobilis, nulla silua talem prosert frōde, flore, germine, dulce lignum, dulces clauos, dulce pondus sustinens, Sola digna tu fuisti ferre precium saeculi, atque portum preparare nauta mundo naufrago, quem facer cruor perunxit fusus agni Corpore. O faithfull crosse the onely noble tree among all, no groue bringeth foorth such a tree in leafe, in flower, in budde, bearing that sweet wodde, those sweete nayles, that sweete weight. Thou onely hast beene worthie to beare the price of the world, and beeing a mariner to prepare a hauen for the worlde that made shipwracke, whiche the holie bloud shed out of the lambes bodie hath annointed. What insensible blockes are they that prate thus to, and of an insensible stocke?
               
               But to iustifie the former blasphemous hymne, Maister Sander will proue that it was made of olde time, either of Hilarie, Ambrose, Fortunatus, Sedulius, Prudentius, or Gregorie, or else he cannot tell of whom, or when. But what is his reason trow you? Marie, because it doeth concerne the holy time of Lent, and is receiued not onely in England, but also in Italie, Fraunce, and Spaine. O inuincible reasons, it was not for naught that he bragged, that Maister Iewell should neuer be able to auoide the argument, that is grounded on these wordes.
               The last writer cited for the worshippe of the crosse is Chrysostome Hom. de adorat cruc. saying, Hodiernus dies pre
                     
                        •
                     iosae crucis venerationi constitutus est. This day is appointed to the worshipping of the precious crosse. Admodum beati ij qui castis labijs sancto
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ore eam vt amplexantur, exeunt. Very blessed are they that go forth with chaste lippes and holie mouth to kisse it.
               But what a mockerie is this, that those wordes whiche

this author speaketh allegorically of the spiritual crosse, yt is to say, of the death and redemption of Christ (which no man doubteth, but with all honor it is to bee imbraced) should be drawn to a wooden image of I cannot tel what crosse, to be worshipped, licked and kissed. For it followeth immediatly Re enim vera illud domini verbum implent: Si quis me sequi velit seipsum abneges, tollatquecrucem suam et me sequatur. For they doe in verie deede fulfill that saying of our Lord: if any man will follow me, let him deny him selfe, & take vp his crosse & follow me. And expounding what crosse he meaneth, he saith: An vt lignum vnusquis quae nostrum ferat? certè non. Que enim hęc virtus est? Sed vt ad pericula instructi simus, & sanguinē in animis nostris suum ferentes, ad cędem et mortem quotidie parati ita omnia faciamus vt si ad vesperum nos victuros esse non speraremus. What, doth he commande euery on of vs to bear a peece of wood? No surely. For what vertue is that? but that we shoulde bee furnished against daungers, and carying about his blood in our minds, we should be ready to be slaine & to die and so do all thinges as if we hoped not to liue vntill the euening. Chrysostome also in many other places speaketh magnifically of the crosse but then he meaneth the death and passion of CHRIST, he commendeth also the figure of the crosse, but yet with out any adoration of it: of the crosse he saith in epist. ad Colloss. Hom. 3. Deo reconciliauit per seipsum, per mortem, per crucem. Papè quomodo illa rursus commiscuit, etenim ne putares vnum esse, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      crucem aliquid esse iuxta seipsam, per seipsum dicit. He hath reconciled vs to God, by him selfe, by his death, by his crosse: good lorde how he hath againe ioyned these together, for that thou shouldest not thinke that they are one, nor that the crosse is any thing by it selfe, he saith by himselfe. The signe of the crosse he calleth ye signe of death, to put the people in remēbrance not only of ye death of Christ, but also of their own suffring & patience. So farre he was of from setting vp the signe of the crosse to be adored or kneeled vnto, that grosse idolatrie had not preuailed in his time, nor long after.
            
            
               
               THE XIIII. OR XIII. CHAP.
               
                  That other holy images both might be adored profitably, and without Iewish bondage by S. Augustines owne doctrine,
                        Sander.
                      and also were adored within the first sixe hundreth yeares after Christe, with a defence of S. Chrisostomes liturgie against M. Iewell. Also that the generall doctrine of S. Augustine concerninge figures is applyed to Images. Images were made without all scruple in the primitiue Church. Bowing to the image of Christ in S. Chrisostoms 
                        •
                     ime. His liturgie is defended. Seuerus painted the images of S. Martine and Paulinus in a holy place. S. Gregorie laye prostrate before an holy Image.
               
               Saint Augustine is cited, De doct. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 9. Qui aut operatur aut veneratur, &c.
                  
                     Fulke.
                   
                  He that worketh or reuerenceth (M. Sander translateth worshippeth) a profitable signe, instituted by gods authority, whose strength and signification he vnderstandeth, doeth not reuerence (or worshippe) that which he seeth and passeth away, but rather that thing, whereunto all suche thinges are to be referred. First I note the corruptiō of Master Sanders translation, that turneth Veneratur worshippeth, after the popishe meaninge. For God did neuer institute any signe to be worshipped, in that sense which Master Sander defendeth worshippinge of Images. But all signes instituted of God are to be reuerently esteemed & regarded, as baptisme, which we do reuerently esteeme, & yet we worship not either the water, or the action of baptizing.
               Secondly we haue to consider, how Master Sander can proue images to be profitable signes instituted by gods authoritie. They be profitable (saith hee) because they bring vs in remembraunce of good thinges. I denie this argument, because nothing is profitable in religion but that which is instituted by God, for otherwise we might bring the gallowes into the Church, whiche bringeth vs in remembraunce of Gods Iustice, &c. as I haue shewed before. Likewise the Prophet Abacuc vtterly denyeth Images to be profitable: Cap. 2. vers. 18. But let vs see how he proueth popishe images to be instituted by Gods authoritie

which is al in al, for if that be proued we wil not doubt of the profitablenesse of them. First he alledgeth the imitation of nature, and of nations, the institution of some images in the law of Moses, last of all, the tradition left to his Church freely to make images of good things.
               The former reasons are answered before in their proper chapters, namely the lawe of nature and nations, cap. 11. the making of some images in Moyses lawe, cap 12. also the example of practise of this supposed tradition out of Eusebius cap. 10. And they are all three wiped away with the expresse commaundement of God in his lawe of religion: Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image, or the likenesse of any thing, &c. Neuerthelesse let vs see how by tradition left to the Churche, images are prooued to be instituted by God. We reade (saith hee) in S. Augustine as well of the Ethnikes, as of the Christians. There is first one falshood, for Augustine in the place by him cited speaketh onely of Ethnikes. De consen. Euang. lib. 1. cap. 10. which because they had seene Christes image pictured with Peter and Paule, imagined that Christ had written bookes to Peter and Paule. Secondly he citeth the wordes thus. Pluribus locis simul Petrum et Paulum cū Christo pictos viderunt, quiae merita Petri & Pauli etiam propter cundem passionis diem celebrius ac solemniter Roma commendat. They sawe in verie many places Peter & Paule painted together with Christ, because Rome doeth set foorth the merites of Peter and Paule the more famously and solemnly, euen for that they suffered both vppon one day. In this allegation, hee addeth wordes that are not in Augustine. Although not contrary to his meaning, yet shewing thereby that he borrowed this place, as manye of our Englishe papistes doe commonly, of some other mans noting, rather then of his owne reading. But the greatest fault of all is, that he doth deceiptfully suppresse the words following immediatly, which declare howe profitable Sainte Augustine esteemed the doctrine of Images to be. His whole

sentence is this: 
                     Credo quod pluribus locis simul eos cum illo pictos viderunt, quia merita Petri & Pauli etiam propter cundem passionis diem celebrius & solemniter Roma commendat. Sic omnino errare meruerunt, qui Christum & Apostolos eius, non in sanctis codicibus sed in pictis parietibus quaesierunt. I beleeue that they haue seene them painted with him in manye places, because Rome doeth more notably and solemnely set foorth the worthinesse of Peter and Paule, euen because of the same day of their suffering. So they were altogether worthy to be deceiued, whiche haue sought Christ and his Apostles not in the holy bookes, but in painted walles.
               
               Now see with what honestie, Master Sander hath alledged this place of Augustine to prooue that images are of Gods institution. But you will saye perhappes, this place doeth prooue, that Images of Christe and his Apostles were then made by Christians, I graunte, but not in the Churches, for then the Ethnikes coulde not haue seene them, because they were neuer suffered to enter into the Churches of the Christians.
               But Gregorie Nyssen in his Oration De Theod. martyr. laud. testyfieth, that the paynter had set foorth the whole storie of Theodorus the martyr in his Churche. And yet the Image of the martyr was none otherwise painted, then the fierce and cruell formes of the tyrauntes, neyther otherwise on the walles, then on the pauemente. For he saith, Capillorum item concinnator, historiae par opu
                        •
                      in pauimento quod pedibus calcatur, effecit.
               
               Also the pauier hath made the lyke woorke of historie vppon the pauemente, whiche is trodden vnder feete.
               These deuises of painters and pauiers Master Sander is faine to take holde of, in steede of the holy scriptures and aunciente writers. But if hee saye that Gregorius doeth also allowe these, I answere as ornamentes of the Churche, not as matter of Gods religion and worshippe, whiche yet he shoulde rather haue defaced with

Epiphanius, then suffred or allowed for inconuenienc
                     •
                   that folowed.
               This report of Gregorie sheweth the errour of that time, rather then prooueth images to be instituted by God. That Paulinus caused images to bee painted on the Church walles, as it is confessed to be done, so it is denied to be well done. The like I say of the images painted in Saint Martins Church in Towers in Fraunce, witnessed by Gregorius Turonensis, although it was long after the time of Paulinus, in which Satan beganne to lay the platforme for his Idolatrie, whiche afterwarde he brought into the worlde. And these be all the arguments, that he hath to prooue that images are profitable signes instituted by Gods authoritie. Except he meane the text of Paul to the Galat. 5. to be an argument, whiche he citeth to prooue that we are made free in Christ, both to knowe our signes and images to be images and signes, and also to knowe whereof they are signes, which the Iewes (saith he) did not. So that the libertie of Christ is by M. Sanders doctrine, not from a yoke of bondage and seruitude vnto ceremonies, but from ignorance and want of knowledge of the vse of them. And whereas by the lawe we are vtterly discharged of Images, this mans freedome is to binde vs to the seruice of Images. O blasphemous & absurde doctrine! Againe, howe falsely doeth he affirme yt the godly Iewes knewe not whereunto their signes were referred, as though Messias was not preached to them by those signes. Likewise as vntruely he saith, that the signes of the Gentiles ended in the onely honour of the creature, and not of God, when they did neuer honour any creature, but their finall ende was thereby to honour God, and not a creature.
               Againe, what beastly doctrine is this, that he affirmeth yt ye signes of ye Iewes are not vtterly abolished, but changed into ye sacraments directly instituted by Christ, but also into signes made with faithfull mens handes, as Altars, vestments, Chalices, lightes and images, whereby he maketh Christian liberty but a chaunge from one bondage

into an other, and yet worse then that of the Iewes, because they were subiect to the yoke of God, wee must be vnder the yoke of mens institutions and traditions.
               But hee procedeth and will proue that images may be profitably and freely worshipped, and that in practise it was so done within the first sixe hundreth yeares, by the testimony of Chrisostome, Paulinus, and Gregorie.
               Chrisostome is alledged in his Liturgie, where it is said that the priest turning to the image of Christ, betweene the two doores, bowing his heade, saith a prayer.
               But because this liturgie is proued to be false, & counterfet by maister Iewell, for that therein is conteined a prayer for Pope Nicholas which lyued not 500. yeares after Chrisostome, and for the Emperour Alexius which liued neere 700. yeares after Chrisostome, maister Sander taketh vppon him the defense of it to bee written by Chrisostome, which was written seuen hundreth yeares after his death. His first reason is, that it beareth his name, which is a good reason to proue all forgeries to bee true writings. Secondly other Grecians which haue written since that time, do make mention of it, as Proclus, Cabaselas Methenencis, and M. Ephesius. But of these, some onely make mention that Chrisostome did write a liturgie, they doe not iustifie that this which is nowe seene is that, the other being of late dayes, are not to bee credited. Thirdly he saith yt Greeke church doth allow it for Chrisostomes, as yt latine doth those Psalmes Quicun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vult to be written by Athanasius, and Te deum by Ambrose and Augustine. And yet the best learned in these dayes, cannot be perswaded of those authors although the Psalmes be good and Godly. Fourthly hee woulde faine disproue M. Iewells reason, touching those prayers for Pope Nicolas and the Emperour Alexius, saying that in all publike seruice & formes of prayers there are certeine cōmon places, which must be left voide for names according to the times and persons.
               But these places are not left voide, but filled with the

names of the princes and prelats of that time, in which it was first written, as the publike seruice in king Henries dayes, in king Edwardes time, yea prayers made in Queene Maries time, and in Queene Elizabeths time, do proue and shewe in what time they were first made. But in some copyes (saith he) the places are left voide. Hee must proue those copies to be auncienter then the time of Alexius, or else they helpe not his cause. But seeing there is no copie that hath any other names but these, it is manifest that this liturgie was first composed in the dayes of the Emperour Alexius, and Pope Nicholas. And where as maister Sander vseth many wordes and reasons to proue, that this Pope Nicholas was not Bishoppe of Rome, as maister Iewell saith, but Patriarch of Constantinople in the reigne of Alexius, I yeelde vnto him: for thereby it is more certeine yt this liturgie was made in ye time of Alexius, then if it had beene Nicholas of Rome, which was neere 200. yeares before Alexius. Last of all where as Claudius de Sanctis that brauling Sorbonist, woulde proue by conferring it with diuerse places taken out of Chrisostomes owne works, the saide liturgie to be his, hee hath laboured in vaine. For as it may be graunted, that diuerse things in this liturgie are taken out of that, which perhaps Chrisostome did write, yet it followeth not that the whole forme thereof is his, but that the same was corrupted and altered, with additions and detractions in the dayes of Alexius, and especially in this matter of the images, which I proue by two reasons. First among so many counterfet and falsified authorities as were alledged out of old writers in the idolatours counsell of Nice the second for the vse and worship of images, this liturgie was neuer alledged, though other testimony of Chrisostome was cited which could not haue beene omitted seeing nothing is so notorius as the publike seruice of the Church. Whereby it is manifest that the liturgie which went vnder the name of Chrisostome in that time, had in it no mention of images or the worshipping

of them.
               My seconde reason is, that Chrisostome himselfe in his owne vndoubted writings, coumpteth the art of painting to be altogether superfluous, and such as might well be spared out of the worlde, which he would not haue done, if he had appointed in the publike seruice of the Church, the vse of an image as necessarie or profitable. For thus he writeth in Math Hom. 50. 
                     Ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         pingendi ariem aut nunimulariam, artes ego nominarim, quippe cum nihil conserant necessariarum rerum, quibus vita nostra continetur. Neither would I call the art of painting or of exchaunging monyes by the name of artes, seeing that they yeelde nothing off those necessarye thinges, in whiche our life is conteyned.
               
               Nowe as concerning the image of S. Martine painted in the Baptistery by Seuerus, and allowed by Paulinus bishop of Nola, I haue aunswered before, that his errour proueth not Gods institution. But whereas he citeth his verse to proue the worshipping of images, he doth him wronge. Martinum veneranda viri testatur imago. The reuerende image of the man doth shew forth Martin: for pocres haue euer had licence of all figures in their verses, wherefore he doth none otherwise call the image reuerende, or to be reuerenced, then Virgill calleth the image of his father Anchises troubled: Admonet in somnis & turbida terret imago: Meaning not that the image, but that Anchises was troubled, so doth Paulinus meane that S. Martine, and not his image was to be reuerenced.
               Finally where as maister Iewell saith that Gregorie speaketh not one worde of the adoration of images, maister Sander obiecteth this saying lib. 7. Ep. 53. Non quasi ante diuinitatem, ante illam imaginem prosternimur: whiche he englisheth thus, we ly prostrate before ye image, not as before god. And then he triumpheth like a crow in a gutter, saying, is not lying flat downe before an image, one word spoken of adoration of images? yea, it is cleere yt it

was the vse in Saint Gregories time, to lye prostrate or to fall downe before holy images. What say you maister Sander will you abide by it? Haue you either forgotten the grammer you taught vs before of ioyning the aduerbe with the verbe, or thinke you that we haue learned so little either grammer or logike, that wee cannot see a difference betweene a proposition affirmatiue and negatiue? If a boy should construe Gregories latine as you haue englished it, hee were worthie of a dosen strips, though he had gon to grāmer schoole but two or three yeres. Non quasi ante diuinitatē, ante illam imaginē prosternimur. We fall not downe before that image as before ye diuinitie: thus would I english it & conster it if it were for my life. And that which you make affirmatiue, I must make negatiue, for I haue learned fiue or sixe & twentie yeare agoe, that it is a negatiue proposition, when the principall Verbe is denyed. But perhaps you will gather that though he fell not downe before an image, as before God, yet he fell downe before it, as before an image.
               Howe certeine this collection is, you may see by an hundreth examples if you list to consider them. If I saye, Non quasi ante diuinitatem, ante diabolum prosternimur: woulde you translate it we fall downe before the deuill, but not as before God, or rather thus, we fal not down before the diuell as we do before God.
               
                  Non quasi panem, lapides commedimus, would you turne it thus? we eate stones, but not as bread: or rather we eate not stones as we eate breade.
               
                  Non quasi ante regem, ante mendicum prosternimur, woulde you translate it thus? we fall downe before a begger but not as before a king, or else wee fall not downe before a begger as before a King. Such examples might bee multiplied infinitely, by which you may see, what pith there is in maister Sanders argument, to proue that Saint Gregory lay prostrate before an image, where as contrariwise he denyeth it, and maketh such prostration and falling downe with affection of religion to be dewe onely to GOD, euen as the Angell infinitly more excellent

then all the images that euer were made, refusing that honour offered to him by Saint Iohn, willed him to giue it to God. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , fall downe to God. Apoc. 22.9.
            
            
               THE XV. or XIIII. CHAP.
               
                  That the seuenth general councell was a true councell, and ought to be obeyed, and Maister Iewels slaunders be aunswered concerning the same. Where also it is briefly shewed, that miracles might and haue bene wrought by holy images. Also Maister Iewels vaine arguments against the seuenth generall councell, and Irene the Empresse, that Maister Iewell committeth three faultes about fiue Latine words, that the shadowe of Peter was accounted of vertue and power to heale men. That they were and are in possession of honouring images, who defended the honouring of them. The cause why the seuenth generall councell was called. The seuenth generall councell is conferred with the first. What Bishops recanted in the seuenth councell.
                        Sander.
                     
                  
               
               The Bishop of Salisburie reiecting the authoritie of this Councell of Nice the second, saith,
                     Fulk.
                   it was holden wel neere eight hundreth yeares after Christe, and therefore was out of the compasse of those sixe hundred yeares, of which he made his challenge. Maister Sander answereth, it was seuen hundreth yeares before Maister Iewell, as though the controuersie were of antiquitie of the men, and not of the doctrine.
               The Bishop saide, it would require a long treatise, to open the whole follie and fondnesse of that Councell. M. Sander answereth, it is more like, that M. Iewell is a fond foole, then 350. Bishops of such wit, vertue, and learning: as though their multitude could proue their wit, vertue, and learning, when their words and deeds plainly declare their follie, ignorance, and vngodlinesse.
               The B. saide, Irene the Empresse which gathered this Councell, was a wicked woman. M. Sander citing diuers writers to and fro in the end concludeth, that by repentance she was made a good woman, and her zeale towards holy images did make her the better, so he bringeth that

for an argument, which is the matter in controuersie.
               The Bishop said. She was the kings daughter of Tartaria, an Heathen borne. So was Constantine the great, saith M. Sander, yet was she Christened before she procured that Councell, whereas hee doubteth whether Maister Iewell thinke that Constantine was baptized, when hee gathered and confirmed the first Councell of Nice. The Bishop doth not for that cause onely reiect the second Councel at Nice, bicause Irene was an Heathen borne, but thereby sheweth, that she sauoured of Gentilitie, in being earnest to set forward idolatrie. And whereas Maister Sander doubteth, whether Maister Iewell thinke Constantine were baptized before he gathered the Councel, he neede not at al, seeing Eusebius which knewe Constantine very well, affirmeth that he was not baptized, but euen imediatly before his death. Contrarie to that fond fable, which among other is auouched by Pope Adrian in this Councell, that Constantine was cured of a leapresie, & baptized by Siluester Bishop of Rome. And whereas he thinketh it a daungerous matter, to take the authorizing of that Councel from Siluester, and to ascribe it to one that was not baptized, there is no perill at all in it, for Constantine did then beleeue in Christ, and was certainly determined to be baptized in Iordan, if he had not bene preuented by death. Yea, although hee had beene an Heathen man, seeing he gaue no sentence, but assented to the sentence of the Bishoppes, it had beene none inconuenience at all.
               The Bishop saide. She caused that Councell to be summoned in despight of the Councell of Constantinople, that had decreed against images. Maister Sander, although he confesse there was such a Councell, yet bicause the whole processe of the actes thereof is not extant, being defaced by the idolaters, he quarelleth that it was an obscure Councell, and asketh by what Emperour it was gathered: as though it were not testified that it was gathered by Leo the third, but it lacked (saith he) the Bishop of Romes authoritie, and therefore was no general Councell,

so did the Chalcedonense, and the sixt of Constantinople in some partes, and yet it went forward with the decree, which had bene in vaine if the Romish Bishop had a negatiue voyce in all Councels.
               The Bishop sayde. She tooke her owne sonne Constantinus and pulled out his eyes. The Councell is not therefore naught, saith Maister Sander. But she is thereby proued to bee a cruell woman, which was the Bishops meaning.
               The Bishop saith, She did it onely, bycause he would not consent to the idolatrous hauing of images. Maister Sander denyeth this, but proofe hee bringeth none, sauing that hee sheweth there was an other cause why shee might doe it, namely bicause hee deposed her of her gouernement, wherein hee did well, after the example of Asa, which is commended in the scripture, for that hee did put downe his mother Maachah from her estate, bycause she had made an idoll in a groue, and destroyed her idolles, and burned them by the brooke Elledron. 1. Reg. 15. verse. 13. But Maister Sander will defend her title of succession, bicause she was elder then her sonne, and to bee honoured of him. O cunning Lawyer, that will make the wife inheritour to her husband, and that in the Empire before her sonne begotten by her husband, which had the Empire by discent. Concerning the diuorcement of Constantinus from his first wife Marie, and marrying of an other, as I knowe not the cause, so I will not take vpon me the defence.
               The Bishop saide: the Bishops and Doctours of that Councell manifestly corrupted the Scriptures. Maister Sander sayth, it is not so, as hee hath proued in parte, what he hath proued you may reade in the twefth Chapter: but bicause he is so impudent to defend those corruptions and deprauations, I will set downe some of them. Theodosius Amorij citeth this text for images, What thinges so eueer are written, they are written for our learning.
               
               
                  Ioannes Legate of ye East citeth this, Shew me thy face, for"

it is beautifull. Theodorus alledgeth this saying, God is maruellous in his Saintes. An other, to proue that images must be set on the altar, vseth this text. No man lighteth a candle and putteth it vnder a bushell &c. An other this text to proue images necessarie to knowe God by them. As wee haue heard, so wee haue seene, in the citie of our God. These are not the one halfe of those beastly applications of the scripture vsed in that blasphemous Councel, but these are sufficient to shewe, what learned bewclearks they were in the holy word of God, and the interpretation thereof.
               The B. saide, They falsified the holy Fathers without shame. Maister Sander saith nothing, but that hee doeth belye them. What shall we say of the falsifying of Basil in Oratione 40. Martyres: for the worshipping of images, which Oration is extant, and no such matter found in it? Shall we beleeue the forged Oration in the name of Athanasius, of the image of Christe in Beritus, which being stricken by a Iewe, bloud issued out of the side of it? Howe impudently doe they deny the authoritie and writings of Epiphanius, Amphilochius, Theodotus, Eusebius, which were brought against the irreligious vse and honouring of images, by the Councels of Constantinople and Ephesus, slaundering also Eusebius of Arrianisme.
               The B. saide, They sayde Imago melior est quàm oratio. An image is better then a prayer. Here are three faultes found in citing fiue wordes. Great faultes I warrant you. The first, he writeth they saide: which one onely Bishop did say, but in ye end of that fourth action all the Bishops and Legates subscribed and allowed all that had bene saide in defence of images, and no man reclamed, therefore hee might well write: they saide. The second fault is, he said not melior est imago, but maior est imago, greater i
                     •
                   an image, for a thing may bee greater which is not better. This is no great fault, but an ouersight, and the sense is not altered, for in this case he meaneth by greater, better.
               
                  The thirde fault that he translateth Oratio for prayer, which signifieth an oration or speech. Yet doeth it signifie a prayer also. But if the circumstance of this place would haue it to be taken for speeche or an oration, or sermon, the absurditie is nothing lesse to say, there is greater force to teache in an image, then in a sermon, oration, or speeche.
               But seeing you finde so many faultes in the citing of that saying to excuse it from absurditie, I pray you see if you can finde as many in this, which I cite, spoken by Ioannes the Monke, Priest and deputie or vicar of the East, to defend it from blasphemie. 
                     Nisi fuissent necessariae imagines, eas propter stabilitionem factorum non fuissent osculati, vt etiam meo iuditio cum sanctis Euangelijs & veneranda cruce aequivaleant. Except images had bene necessarie, he would not haue kissed them for the establishing of deeds, so that in my iudgement they are of equall worthines with the holie Gospels and the reuerend crosse. Act. 4.
               
               The B. said: And againe whosoeuer wil not adore the godly images, accursed be he. This M. Sander confesseth to be written in deed, and to be true, sauing that he cauilleth at the translation of Diuinas imagines, into godly images, which he saith should be diuine images. But how liketh he the saying of Constantine Bishop of Constantia in Cypres? which affirmeth that he will worship images with that honour which is due to the blessed Trinitie, & accurseth him that, refuseth with the Manichees and Marcionites, vnto which sentence al the rest agree. Where is nowe the distinction of Doulia and Latria, when they will worship the image of Christ, with the same honour that is due to the Trinitie? What saith he to the zeale of Ihon the deputie of the East, which affirmeth that it is better to admitte all stewes of whores and brothels into the citie, then to deny the worshipping of images? If these be not beastly and blasphemous absurdities, worse then childish sayinges, whiche he can not abide the Bishop to tearme them, let the world iudge.
               Hitherto M. Sander hath made no defence for this idolatrous

rablement, which he calleth the seuenth generall councell. But he will answere all the Bishops arguments against it with these 4. reasons. First he saith, there is no impietie or falshoode approued or decreed in that councel. A substantial reason, which concludeth vpon that whiche is in controuersie. But yet to lay open his shamelesse impudencie, I will proue that to haue beene decreed and approued in that councell, which he him selfe will not denie to be impietie and falshood. Action. 5. We read thus, out of the booke of one Ihon Bishop of Thessalonica. De 
                  
                     Angelis, & Archangelis & eorum potestatibus, quibus & nostras animas adiungo, ipsa Catholica Ecclesia sic sentis, esse quidem intelligibiles sed non omnino corporis expertes & inuisibiles, vt vos gentiles dicitis, verum tenui corpore preditos, & aereo siue igneo, vt scriptum est: Qui facit Angelos suos spiritus, & ministros eius, ignem vrentem, &c. Of Angels & Archangels and of their powers, vnto which also I adioyne our soules, the Catholike Churche doth so thinke, that they are in deede intelligible, but not altogether voide of body and inuisible as you Gentiles say, but that they haue a thinne body & that either of ayer or of fire, as it is writen: which maketh his Agels spirites, and his ministers a burning fire, &c.
               
               Herevpon Thorasius the Patriarke saide: 
                     Ostendit autem pater quod & Angelos pingere oporteat, quādo circumscribi possunt, & vt & homines apparnerunt. Sacra synodus dixit, etiā Domine. This father hath shewed that we ought to paint the Angels also, seing they may be circūscribed, & haue appeared as men. The holie synode said, Yea forsoth my Lord. Here is an open falshood decreed and approued that Angels and soules of men haue bodies of ayer or fire and be circumscriptible. But if M. Sander will stand in the defence of it, because it is so decreed by this general councel: at least let him heare the greatest councell for multitude, that is read of, namely. The Laterane Cap. 1. 
                     Vnus est Deus indiuisus in essentia & discretus in personis, creator omnium, &c: is ab initio temporis vtram
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         de nihilo condidit creaturam, corporalem & spiritualem, Angelicam scilices & mundanam. Dęinde humanam quasi cōmunem ex spiritu & corpore constitutā.
                     
There is one God vndiuided in essence, & distinct in persons, the creator of all thinges, &c. He in the beginning of time created both the creatures of nothing, the bodily creature and the spirituall, namely the Angels and the world. Afterward the humane creature as common, consisting both of a spirite and of a bodie. Now let M. Sander aduise himselfe, whether he will iustifie the Nicene councel with condemning the Laterane, for their decrees be directly contrarie one to ye other. For impietie beside that which we haue already shewed, Iohn deputie of the East to whome al the synode agreed vttered these wordes out of Sophionius. 
                     Praestat iurantem peierare, quam planè iuramentum in destructionem venerandarum imaginum seruare. It is beter for him that sweareth to be forsworne, then in deed to keep his oth to the destruction of reuerend images. If this also may be excused from impietie, what say you to that conclusion? 
                     Gaudeant & exultant qui Christi habentes imaginem, sacrificium illi offerunt. Let them reioyce and be glad which hauing the image of Christ doe offer sacrifice to it. In this conclusion, sacrifice whiche is the honor properly due to GOD alone euen by the Papistes confession, is giuen to an image. If none of al these be impietie, yet to condemne the Pope of Rome for an heretike, (I answere with M. Sander) is counted great impietie, and a pernicious errour. But Honorius sometime Pope of Rome, was in this councell condemned for an heretike Action. 6. To. 2. and Actione. 7. in the definition.
               His second reason in defence of this councel is, that euerie word vttered by any father, is not the determination of the whole councel, no more then the voyce of euerie burgesse, is an act of Parleament. This granted, we haue shewed the consent of the synode to moste of the speeches we haue recited which maketh a full determination.
               His third reason is, that the scriptures are better applied for honouring of images, then they are impugned by Maister Iewell, as he hath partely shewed. What he hath shewed, and how wel he hath applied them, we haue seene already.
               
                  His fourth reason is, that the miracles there tolde are not against the faith, and therefore not to be derided, but credited. If all that be against the faith, whiche is against the worde of God, those miracles that are brought to confirme the worshipping of images, must needes bee againste the faith. That I speake not of so many dreames, as be there alledged to proue the same. But M. Sander thinketh images might as wel worke miracles, as the shadowe of Peter did heale diseases, Saint Paules girdle or napkins did heale diseases, and driue out diuels. But Peter him selfe confesseth, that not he himselfe, much lesse his shadowe, or any vertue in him did heale diseases, but onely Iesus Christ. Ye men of Israel saith he, why maruel you at this, or why look ye vpon vs, as though by our owne power & godlines we had made this man to walke? If Peters owne person may not be looked vnto to haue any prayse of the miracle, muche lesse his shadowe, or Paules girdle and napkins, and least of all his image: for God vsed those as meanes by whiche he wrought, but their images he neuer vsed. Againe, no man was so madde to worship Peters shadowe, or Paules napkins, or Elizaeus staffe, for that he hath vp also, although it wrought no miracle. As for the hearbe which was reported to grow vnder ye image in Paneade, it tooke no vertue of the image, if any such hearbe were, but of God. Although in that point, Eusebius as I thinke was more credulous then a wise man shold haue ben, to write such a strange matter vpon reporte, which he might haue seene himselfe, within a fewe dayes iourney.
               After these generall answers, he promiseth to bring a most euident reason, why euerie man ought to beleeue & obey the same generall councel, vnder paine of euerlasting damnation. And what is that I pray you? Forsooth, they that defended honouring of images, were in possession of honouring of images, because it had beene impossible that images had beene ouerthrowen, if they had not beene first set vppe and honoured. A lawlike reason in deede.
               
                  Why Master Sander, will you defende a possession without a title. The setting vp and worshipping of Images, when it first entered into the Churche, was but a Disseisure of the true and spirituall worshippe of God, & therefore by diuers assises holden at Constantinople & Ephesus was dispossessed, and the true worshippe of God restored, vntill this packed Iurie of Nice, put her out of possession againe. And where you reiect the councels of Constantinople and Ephesus, as priuate conuenticles, as holden in the darke, & hating the light, because the whole processe of their calling and actes, is by your false Idolatrous Councell of Nice defaced, you shewe your selfe both voide of reason and honestie. Of reason, because many councels were helde, and thinges in them decreed & obserued, although the recordes of them are not to be found at large. Of honesty, because you would take aduauntage of your owne wronge, who haue burned the recordes, and then vrge your aduersarie to shew them.
               You say they folowed in this councell the vse of their forefathers. The councell of Constantinople also folowed the vse of their elder fathers, whose writings they alledged against images. As Epiphanius: 
                     Estote memores dilecti filij ne in ecclesiam imagines inferatis, nec in sanctorum cęmiterijs eas statuite, sed perpetuò circumferte deum in cordibus vestris. Quia etiam nec in domo communi tolerentur. Non enim fas est Christianum per oculos suspensum teneri, sed per occupationem mentis. Be mindefull beloued children, that you bring no images into the Churche, neither set ye them vp in the buriall places of the saintes, but alwayes carye about God in your heartes. But neither in a common house let them be tollerated. For it is not lawfull for a Christian man to be held in suspense by the eyes, but by occupying of the minde.
               
               Againe they cited Chrisostomes, saying. Nos perscripta sanctorum fruimur presentia, non sanè corporum ipsorum, sed animarum imagines habentes. Non quae ab ipsis dicta sunt, animorum illorum imagines sunt. Wee enioye the presence of the

saintes by their writinges, verilye not hauing the images of their bodies, but of their mindes. For those thinges whiche are saide by them, are the images of their mindes.
               
                  Likewise they cited the saying of Amphilochus sometime bishoppe of Iconium. Non enim nobis sanctorum corporales vultus in tabulis, coloribus effigiare curae est, quoniam hijs opus non habemus, sed politicè illorum virtutum memores esse debemus. We haue no regarde to counterfet the corporall faces of the saintes in tables with coloures, because we haue no need of them, but we ought to be wisely mindfull of their vertues.
               
               Moreouer they rehearsed the sayinge of Theodotus bishop of Ancyn. 
                     Sanctorum formas & species ex materialibus coloribus formari minimè decorum putamus: horum cutem virtutes quae per scripta traditae sunt, veluti viuas quasdam imagines reficere subinde oportet. Ex hijs enim ad similem imitationem & zelum peruenire possumus. Dicant enim nobis qui illas erigunt, quaenam vtilitas ex illis ad se redit? an quòd qualiscun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         recordatio eos habeat ex tali specie & contemplatione? sed manifestum est, quòd vana sit eiuscemodi cogitatio, & diabolicae deceptionis inuentum. We thinke it nothing at al seemely, that the formes and shapes of the saintes shoulde be fashioned in materiall collours: but their vertues whiche are deliuered by their writings as certain liuing images, we ought often times to renue. For by them we may come to the like imitation and zeale. For let those which set vp images tell vs, what profite commeth vnto them by them? is it that a certaine remembrance come to them by such shape and sight? But it is manifest, that such cogitation is vaine, and an inuention of diuelishe deceipte. What shall here rehearse the testimony of Eusebius, who whē the Empresse Constantia required to haue an image of Christ, answered that no such images were to be made? with many other sayings of Basil, Gregorie, Athanasius, and other, cited in that Councell, which M.S. maketh so obscure, as though they had mett by candle light, and

whispered in corners, that they durst not be a knowne of. But if it deserued not the credit of a councell, what needed Irene to haue gathered this worshipfull councel of Nice against it? And where M.S. for further allowance of it, saith it was confirmed & registred for a knowne lawful general councel throughout al christendom, he speaketh out of al compasse of the trueth. For the Emperour Charles the great would not receiue it, but write, or at the leastwise cōmanded Albinus or Alcuinus his teacher to write a booke against it in his name, which booke is yet extant. How it was receiued in Britaine, Matheus Westm. testifieth in these words. Eodem anno Carolus rex Francorum, &c.
                  
               
               
                  The same yeare Charles the king of Fraunce sent a synodall booke into Britane, in whiche manye thinges were founde contrary to the true faith, and especially this, that it was defined by the consent of almost all the doctors of the East, that images ought to be worshipped, which doctrine the Catholike Church doeth altogether accurse. Against which Albinus wrote an Epistle, beinge marueilously well indighted by the authoritie of holy scriptures, and the fame brought vnto the Frenche king, with that synodall booke in the presence of the bishops and noble men.
               
               These thinges considered, the conference that he maketh betweene this councell and the first helde at the same place, is chyldishe and ridiculous, for though they were both helde in one place, called by Emperours or Popes, equall in number, disputation in both, 4. Patriarks in both, custome obserued, the decree put in execution, &c. yet they disagreed in that which is the onely authority of councels. The first decreed according to the word of God, the later cleane contrary to it. The first confirmed the Catholike faith which alwayes was held, the later a newe heresie of Idolatrie, of which the Churche was cleare more then sixe hundreth yeares. And therefore what soeuer hee talketh of the authoritie of

general councels is vaine & wicked, for a general councel of Angels is not to be beleeued against the holy scriptures, & what is more plaine in the scriptures, then the forbidding of Idolatrie and worshippinge of Images?
               The great prerogatiue that Master Sander findeth in this councell, that so many bishops recanted in it, as in none other, is a fonde matter to authorize it. Rather it sheweth what turne coates they were, which changed as euerie prince was affected.
               Finally the nomber of names, that he rehearseth of them that beleeued, as this councell decreed, maketh it not of sufficient credit, beside that he is not able to proue it of many, whom he nameth, as Beda, Theophylacte, Euthymius, &c. It were an easie matter to proue as many mo of more antiquitie, which beleeued the contrary. As Clemens Alexandrinus, Origines, Irenaeus, Iustinus, Cyprianus, Lactantius, Epiphanius, Arnobius, Tertulianus, Augustinus, Chrysostomus, Hieronymus, Ambrosus, Athanasius, Basilius, Gregorius Naza. Eusebius, Osius and 18. bishoppes with him in the councel of Eliberis. Theodosus and 21. bishoppes with him in the councell of Laodicea. Aurelius and 71. bishops with him in the councell of Carth. 5. Amphylochius Iconiensis, Theodorus, Ancyramus, Serenus Massiliensis, Claudius Taurinensis, Albinus, Carolus magnus, yea Gregorie 1, of Rome, and Ionas of Orleance against the worshipping of Images. If I woulde descende to later times as Master Sander doth, I might add a great number more, as Waldo, Masilus, Henricus de Gandauo, Iohn Wiclef, Iohn Hus, Hierome of Praga, and many other. So that there remaineth in recorde foure to one, that M. Sander can name for the vse and worshippinge of images, against either one or both. And the greatest part more ancient then the second councell of Nice, which he woulde maintaine by rehearsing so many names of men that allowed it, the most part were since it was holden, & scarse two or three before it was helde.
            
            
               
               THE XVI. OR XV. CHAP.
               
                  That M. Iewell himselfe bringeth such reasons for worshipping breade and wine in the sacrament of the Alter, because he saith; they are the image of Christs bodie and bloude, as may right well serue for the worshipping of all holy images. It is proued by maister Iewells owne words, that the image of an holy thing may be worshipped, with what intent an image it made. Maister Iewell hath filthie and vnhonest images in his owne booke.
                        Sander.
                     
                  
               
               This Chapter conteineth nothing else but a shameles cauilling and quarrelling vppon maister Iewels words,
                     Fulke.
                   with little wit, lesse learning, and least of all of honestie.
               The bishoppe writeth thus: The olde fathers in their writings commonly cal the sacrament a representation, a remembrance, a memory, an image, a likenesse, a samplar, a token, a signe, a figure. And in an other place he writeth thus: Neither do we onely adore Christ as verye God, but also worship and reuerence ye sacrament & holy mistery of Christes bodie. Here vppon maister Sander reasoneth thus. If the sacrament being an image, a signe &c, of Christs bodie & not his owne bodie, may be worshipped and reuerenced, therefore it doth follow, that an image of an holy thing being absent, as of Christ or saint Laurence, may be worshipped of the newe Gospellers. Who will say the Papistes lacke learning, that make such wittie arguments? An image or signe instituted by God may be reuerenced, therefore an image forbidden by God may be honoured. That which is vnproperlye called an image may be worshiped, ergo that which is properly called so, may be worshiped. Christ is the image of his father, Christ is God, therfore euery image is God. A signe or sacrament of Christs institution ought to be reuerently esteemed, therefore a stocke or a stone in fashion of an image, ought to be senced, kneeled too, kissed, prayed to &c.
               But maister Iewell proceedeth further saying, we worship the worde of God according to this counsell of Anastasius.

Dominica verbae attentè audiant & fideliter adorent.
               
               Let them diligently heare and faithfully worship the worde of God. Briefely we worship other thinges in such religious wise vnto Christ belonging. Of these wordes, Maister Sander argueth thus. But Christs owne image belongeth to him, in a religious wise instructing the eye, the more worthy sence, better then the worde doth the eare, therefore Christs image is to be worshipped by the force of master Iewels doctrine. I deny that your image belongeth to Christ, which he abhorreth, or that faith is to be instructed by the eye, but onely by the hearing of the worde. Rom. 10.
               Further maister Iewell saith, doubtlesse it is our duetie to adore the body of Christ in the worde of God, in the Sacrament of baptisme, in the misteries of Christs bodye and bloude, and wheresoeuer we see any steppe or token of it. Hereof maister Sander resoneth thus, a steppe is only a token of the foote, an image of the whole bodilie shape, a step must be adored, ergo, much more an image. I deny that an image is any steppe of the body of Christ, but a false, lying, and deceiptfull counterfet: beside that it is a wise reason that is drawne from a Metaphore, to a proper speach.
               Moreouer maister Iewell saith in an other place: the sacraments in this sort are the flesh of Christ, and are so vnderstanded and beleued, and adored. But the whole honor resteth not in them, but is passed ouer from them, to the things that be signified.
               Here saith maister Sander, he giueth to the sacraments the honor due to an image, and as he worshipeth the sacrament without daunger of idolatrie, so do we honour holy images without feare of committing idolatrie. A sounde conclusion. The sacramentes are to be reuerenced, as signes ordeined of God to represent the body of Christ without idolatrie, therefore images forbidden by God, may be worshipped without daūger of idolatrie.
               And yet againe maister Iewell saith: The very names of the old fathers are worthie of much honour. M. Sander

addeth, ye names of ye old godly fathers are attributed to the images. For the images of S. Augustin & S. Hierome are called S. Austen and Ieronime, therefore their images are by M. Iewels owne confession, worthie of much honour. Shal I say a doctor hath framed this argument, or a goose hath hissed it? In effect it is this, the olde doctours names are falsely attributed to images, therfore the images are to be honoured. But (saith he) these names be not giuen them by chaunce, but of purpose. Verily of such purpose, as the Poet Horace saith of the image of Priapus.
               
                  Olim truncu
                        •
                      eram ficulnus, inutile lignum,
                  Cum faber incertus scamnum faceretne, Priapum,
                  Maluit esse deum.
               
               Sometime I was a stocke of a figtree, an vnprofitable peece of woode, when the carpenter being doubtfull whether hee shoulde make of me a stoole, or Priapus, chose rather that I should be a God.
               Againe he saith, these names are not giuen them without cause for the lyknesse of the shape, that is in them. A worthie cause if there were any liknesse in Saint Augustines image more to him, then to any other man.
               But leauing maister Iewels wordes, we must come to his deeds. What shall we say, if euen in that reply against Harding touching grauen images, maister Iewell hath oftentimes grauen images, yea besides Gorgons and antiques heades, which are Idolles? There is a filthie image of a desperate naked boye, set forth in such sort, that an honest man woulde go backwarde, and couer it with his cloake. I am sory the printer hath troubled your chaste eyes with such a picture, but why is maister Iewell charged with the printers, or grauers fault? Forsooth you say, hee had the ouersight and correction of his booke, paraduenture you are deceiued. But what if he had, howe proue you that this picture was pressed when that leafe came to correction? for commonly such superfluous vinites (I trowe they call them) bee not set to, vntill they presse the whole leafe.
               
                  But what if it were pressed, and he not regarded it? you say if it had beene the picture of the Crucifixe, he would haue espied it at the first, and caused the printer to haue corrected it. Peraduenture he woulde not haue regarded it, perhaps he shoulde not haue espied it. But seeing you are such a narrowe vewer of such idle pictures maister Sander, I meruaile you coulde not see a dronkerd bibbing in the first letter of your owne booke of images, nor euen such an impudent naked boye as you speake of in the first letter of your Epistle before your booke of the rocke of the church, and the same againe in the rocke of the church. Nowe see whereto your lewde hipocriticall outcries do tend: O the iudgements of God, is it so heinous a matter in maister Iewell which toke no heede to such toyes, and yet M. Sander so exacte a reformer of all abuses, in images, cannot avoide it in his owne bookes?
               Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
               It is a shame for a teacher when the crime returneth vpon his owne heade.
            
            
               
                  SanderTHE XVII. OR XVI. CHAP.
               
                  Whether it be profitable or no, to haue Images set vp in Churches and to permit them to be worshipped. Also that maister Iewell hath Englished tolli, to be taken downe, where as it signifieth to be taken vp. Images are not so much permitted to Christians for their weakenes as for their strength. The commodities that come to vs by images.
               
               This discourse is needelesse to them that denye any setting vp or worshiping of images in churches to be lawfull.
                     Fulk.
                   Neither hath Maister Sander one text of scripture, or any one sentence of any one doctour to proue it profitable, to permit images to bee worshipped. But first hee setteth downe the iudgement of M. Iewell in these wordes.
               The best remedie in this behalfe and most agreeable with Gods worde, is vtterly to abolish the cause of ye euil.

So Ezechias brake in pieces the brasen Serpent, Epiphanius rent in sunder the painted-vaile, Theodosius commanded the image of our sauiour to be taken downe, where so euer it should be found.
               This sentence of M. Iewels he will confute. And first concerning the examples of Ezechias and Epiphanius, he will not say one word more, then he hath said before cap. 3. & cap. 4. Sauing that hee affirmeth Ezechias brake downe but one image that was abused, and left the Cherubims, the altar, & the temple, which were obscure images of Christ. And therfore he thinketh, if som one image of theirs, that hath chanced to be abused, were broken by this example, yet all the rest should stand. But if it please his wisedome to read the historie better, he shall find that Ezechias destroyed all images that were forbidden of God. As for the Cherubims were made by Gods appointment, the altar and the temple were no images. Finally, what image is there in the Popish Church, but it hath bene abused to grosse idolatrie?
               To the lawe of Theodosius he saith, it is both misreported and misse Englished. Misreported, bicause the Emperour ment such honour to the crosse, that he would not haue it lye on the ground, whereof how true or likely it is, we haue spoken before in the 13. Chapter, whither also M. Sander referreth vs.
               It is misse Englished (he saith) in translating tolli to be taken downe, which signifieth to be taken vp. I haue answered before, that tolli signifieth generally to be taken away, without respect of vp or downe. And yet bicause M. Sander and his fellowe Papistes, thinke they haue taken Maister Iewell in such a great fault for Englishing tolli to be taken downe, they shewe I can not tell whether more spightfull malice, or grosse ignorance, or ridiculous captiousnesse. For tolli doth signifie as wel to be taken downe as to be taken vp. For else howe shall we English these words in the nineteene of Saint Iohns Gospel? Rogauerunt Pilatum vt frangerentur eorum crura & tollerentur. They desired Pilate, that their legges might bee broken, and that

they might be taken downe. Likewise Ioseph desired Pilate Vt tolleres corpus Iesu, that hee might take downe the body of Iesus.
               But the 73. Canon of the sixt Councell of Constantinople, doth confirme this interpretation of M. Sander, as he supposeth, and the reading of this lawe in Iustinian
                     •
                   Code. Which Canon, bicause he not onely choppeth into three pieces, but also displaceth euery one of them, omitting that which sheweth the true sense of the Canon, I will set it downe word for word as it is. Cum crux viuifica illud salutare nobis ostenderit, nos omne studium adhibere oportet, vt 
                           •
                        iper quam ab antiquo lapsu saluari sumus, cum qui par est honorem hebeamus. Vnde & mente & sermone & sensu, adorationē ei tribuentes, crucis figuras quae & nonnullis, in solo ac pauimento fuent, c
                           ••
                        nino deleri iubemus. N
                           •
                         incedentium conculcatione victoriae nobis tropeaeuns iniuria afficiatur. Qui secus secerit excommunic
                           ••
                        i decernimus. For as much as the quickening crosse hath shewed vnto vs that sauing health, it behoueth vs to vse all diligence, that to it by which we are saued from the olde fall, we giue that honour which is due. Wherefore giuing reuerence vnto it both in minde, in worde, and in sense, we commaund that the figures of the crosse, which of some men are made in the ground and pauement, be vtterly put out or taken away, least the trophee of our victorie by treading vpon of them that walke about, be iniuried. He that shall doe otherwise, we decree that he be excommunicated.
               
               Concerning the authoritie of this 73. Canon, first I must say the trueth, that it was not made by the sixt Councell, which either made but nine Canons or none at all. The second Councell of Nice liking some of these 102. Canons saith, they met againe foure or fiue yeare after, in the time of Iustinian, and made these Canons. But how so euer it was, it was not of that Councel, nor of that authoritie, but of a later time, when imagerie beganne to be more esteemed. Nowe to the purpose. I say this Canon doth not helpe the vnderstanding of that auncient lawe, which was made almost three hundreth yeares before,

to be meant of crosses on the ground only, which needed not to haue bene forbidden in this Canon, if the former lawe of Theodosius, and afterward registred by Iustinian, had bene made onely against crosses on the ground, but the execution of that lawe might haue beene required. Nowe touching the sense of this Canon, it is this: they did so much honour the death of Christe, which they call the quickening crosse, that they would not haue the figure of the woodden crosse to be troden vnder foote. This was their iudgement about 700. yeares after Christ. The later age was more superstitious, and brake out into open idolatrie.
               And whereas M. Sander cauelleth at M. Iewels translation of Signum saluatoris, for the image of our Sauiour, which saith he, is the signe of the crosse, he affecteth too great a tyrannie in the Latine tong, that wil haue no mans translation stand but his owne. I am sure signum is often taken for an image, and in this place none but a froward quareller would take it otherwise, and for the signe of the crosse there is no probable coniecture, that it should be so taken in this place.
               Hee misliketh not the order taken by the Councell of Mentz, that images abused should be altered or taken away: but he will haue the question generall, whether it be expedient to permit images to be honoured or no, in which question the daunger of idolatrie must be compared with the profite of images, the daunger hee counteth small, the profite great. And considering the question at this day, hee counteth there is no daunger at all, neither was there euer any great daunger, and this he will proue by nine reasons.
               The first, the newe Gospellers haue preuailed so much with their doctrine of images, that it is not lightly possible they should be honoured too much. The diuell yet confesseth, that the doctrine of the Gospell, hath chased away idolatrie in most places, I would to GOD it had in all.
               The 2. in the most Popish times the people seeing the

Sextan sweepe copwebs from the images, and putting th
                     •
                   crosse so homely vnder his cloake, might see a great difference betweene the reuerence giuen to images, and the honour giuen, and due to the sacrament of the altar. As though the Priest also, did not sometimes carrie the Pixe in his bosome, with the consecrated cake in it, and sometime they might as well see him burne his breaden Gods, as the Sextan sweeping copwebs from the golden idolls, and yet none of these were euer able to keepe the people from idolatrie.
               3 It is lesse euill to suffer some one to doe amisse, then to falsifie the whole lawe, and right it selfe. And here againe he opposeth the lawe of idolatrous nations against the lawe of God, which forbiddeth worshipping of any image or similitude of any thing.
               4 When the faith and intent of him that worshippeth the image is good, as to worship one God and his Saintes, what so euer is done with this mind (so that sacrifice be not made to images) it can be no idolatrie. What faith is that, which is contrarie to Gods commaundement? And what call you sacrifice, if prayers, thanksgiuing, and prayses bee none, which are offered by the people to images? namely to our Ladie of Walsingham, of Ipswich, &c. which can bee none other but those idols that bee set vp in those places, wee haue also shewed before, that the Councel of Nice 2. wil haue sacrifice offered to the image of Christ.
               5 Christians must not be considered as weake & fraile like the Iewes and Paynims, but strong and full of knowledge, according to the prophesies and promises: They shall all knowe me &c. Iere. 31. and he doth them wrong that iudgeth Gods people proue to idolatrie, for images were forbidden the Iewes, but as the libell of diuorcement was winked at in them. O monstruous impudencie that maketh one of the tenne commandements, that hath such a seuere threatening annexed vnto it, that the Lorde will punish the transgressours of it vnto the thirde and fourth g
                     ••
                  eration, like a permission of that, whereof

there was no commaundement! But what so euer was promised of the knowledge and faith of Christe, perteyneth not to all that vnworthily beare the name of Christe, but onely to perfect and well instructed Christians.
               6 If the people be weake and apt to idolatrie, yet it is the best way to keep them from it, to suffer them to haue, and honour conueniently the images of honourable persons, as God permitted the Iewes to offer▪ Oxen, Calues, &c. because they would needes offer some external sacrifice. As though God learned of them to make his lawes of sacrifices, or if that had ben the best way, he would not rather haue permitted images, then forbidden them.
               7 Because the people haue not so many sacrifices as the Iewes, therfore it is good they haue the remembrances of the martyrs in images, whiche sacrificed their owne bodies. It is great maruell the Apostles coulde not finde suche a profitable supplie of the Iewish sacrifices, by images, but onely the sacrifice of Christes death, and the spirituall sacrifices of our selues, which if we offer diligently, we shall finde matter inough to keepe vs exercised, that we neede not spend our time in gaping vpon idols.
               8 Images are not so much permitted to Christians for their weaknesse, as for their strength, that they may now haue them & worship them without committing spiritual fornication, as in times past: for to haue none, is pusil lanimity. In deed it is a Popish magnanimity to contemn the cōmandement of God, and it were belike no daunger of fornicatiō, to haue a whore to kisse her, to lie with her, for Popish Christians are strong ynough.
               9 The text of Iohn. 4. that the true worshippers must worship God in spirite and veritie, must not be applyed against worshipping of God by images, but against idols and bondage of praying after one corporall fashion, for godly images leade vs to spirituall deuotion. The Diuel they doe. But if they did, yet not more then the ceremonies of the olde law; the abolishing of which our Sauiour

Christe in that sentence doeth promise: not to set vppō a spirituall worship in spirite and trueth, (but as Maister Sander would beare vs in hand,) to chaunge the shadowes and ceremonies from such as were instituted by God, to as many other ordeined by men, and moreouer to worshipping by images, which before was altogether forbidden. Note also that he calleth them godly images, which terme he reproued in Maister Iewell. As for the Votaries he carpeth, which can abide to see their concubynes after their vowe of chastetie, and yet cannot abide to see popish images, let them aunswere for themselues if any such keep harlots, as for them that are married, they shal better defend their marrying, out of the scriptures, then ye Popish Votaries their filthie & abhominable liues, vnder the hypocriticall title of chastitie.
               Now followeth 12. commodities yt come by images.
               1 We learne something by them that we knewe not before. The Prophet Abacuc faith, an image can teach nothing but lies. Cap. 2. vers. 18.
               2 They bring vs in remembrance of the thinges that we know. Theodotus of Ancira saith, such cogitation is vaine, and the deceitfull inuention of the deuil.
               3 They bring vs in remembrance, not as by reading, and repeating, but by the most speedie twinckling of an eye. But faith without the which it is impossible to please God, commeth by hearing of Gods word. Rom. 8.
               4 By seeing and knowing we are prouoked to become like them whose images we worship. Nay rather we are made like them whom we worship, that is, without, sense and vnderstanding. Psal. 115.
               5 We are confirmed in our faith, perceiuing those things that are painted, be so true, that they are euerie where set forth and honored. Pictoribus atque poetis quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas. Because Painters and Poets haue alwaies had libertie to setforth what they list. Let this be a confirmation of Popish faith: it shalbe none of mine.
               6 We are kept wel occupied and deliuered from occasion

to imagine idle things of our owne fantasie, which might cause idolatrie. If they be wel occupied, that worship God contrarie to his commandement, according to their owne idle fantasie.
               7 We tarie more willingly in the house of God which is so adorned with godly histories. The same reason Durande alleadgeth for hanging of Oistriches egges in the churches. Dauid desired to dwel in the house of the Lord al ye daies of his life, whē there was neuer an image in it.
               8 We consider the companie of heauen, how maruelous it is, for as the holy of holies which did signifie heauen, was decked with the images of Angels, (he meaneth the Cherubims) so must our Churches be decked with images of Angels & Saintes, to be a figure of euerlasting glorie. By the same reason I wil proue that ye people must neuer come into the Church, for the people neuer came into the holy of holies, but the Priest only, and that but once a yere. And seeing Christ is entred into heauen indeede, there must be no more figures of heauen, whereof actuall possession is all ready taken.
               9 We pray to Christ and the Saints at the sight of their images. You cal vpon them in whom you do not beleeue, and therefore you are Infidels and idolaters, or if you beleeue in men you are accursed of God. Cursed be he that putteth his trust in man. Ier. 17. vers. 5.
               10 We honour God in his saintes, and in the signes and monumentes of them. You worship you knowe not what, but as you list, which is will worship, condemned by God. Col. 3. vers. 23.
               11 We glorifie God in that we are so free and strong in our faith, that we neede not to be kept from conuenient worshipping of lawdable images, as the weake Iewes were. Nay you impudently and moste arrogantly contemne GOD, and his lawe, and moste blasphemously affirme, that GOD kept the Iewes from conuenient worshipping of lawdable images, whiche haue so many commodities, or else you lie moste damnablye.
               
                  12 We professe the trueth of the Gospell, and of the lawe of nature, which requireth conuenient honour to be giuen to the images of honorable personages. Because you professe another Gospell, then that we haue receiued out of the worde of God, if Nicholas Sander were as great as Michael the archangell, Gods great curse light on him. Anathema to a new Manachee, that maketh the truth of the Gospell and the lawe of nature, contrarie to the trueth of the lawe of God giuen by Moses. Yea Anathema, Maranatha be he that defendeth that to bee good, whiche God so manifestly condemneth for abhominable. You haue heard what authorities he bringeth to proue the honouring and worshipping of images conuenient, Videlicet neuer a one. Now shal you heare some sentences of the auncient writers to the contrarie.
               Augustine Ad Deogratias Epi. 49. 
                     Et idola quidem omnè sensu carere quis dubitat? Veruntamen cum his locantur sedibus honorabili sublimitate, vt a precantibus atque immolantibus attendantur, ipsa similitudine animatorum membrorum atque sensuum, quamuis insensata atque exanima, afficiunt infirmos animos, vt viuere ac spirare videantur, accedente praesertim veneratione multitudinis, quae tantus eis Dei cultus impenditur. And who doubteth but that idolles are voide of all sense? Yet when they are sette vppe in those places, in honorable height, so that they bee looked vppon by them that pray and sacrifice, by the very similitude of the members and senses of liuing creatures, although they be insensible and without life, they affecte the weak mindes of men, so that they seeme to liue and breathe, especially when the worshipping of the multitude commeth to them, by which so great honor of God is bestowed vpon them.
               
               
                  The same Augustine in Leuit. Qu. 68. writeth thus. Nam quid isto praecepto absolutius, non mentiemini. Sic enim dictum est quomodo non facies tibi idolum: quod factum non potest aliquando iuctum esse, & quomodo dictum est non maechaberis. For what can be more absolute then this commaundement: You shall not lye. For it is euen so saide as that:

Thou shalt not make to thy self any grauē image, which fact can neuer bee righteous, and euen as it is saide, Thou shalt not commit adulterie. If M. Sander cauill at the worde Idoll, yet the commandement is generall, for all images and similitudes to be made by mans deuise, as he himselfe confesseth. Therefore it is as, lawfull to haue images in religion, as to lye, or to commit adulterie, by Saint Augustines iudgement. Other places of Augustine in psal. 96. & 113. which I haue cited before, I omitte. Yet this one short sentence I will adde, to shewe how farre S. Augustins iudgement was from M. Sanders assertion, that in worshippinge of images is small or no danger of idolatrie at all, in psal. 113.
               
                  
                     Quis autem adorat vel orat intuens simulachrum, qui non sic affuitur, vt ab eo se exaudiri putet, ac ab eo sibi prestari quod desiderat, speret. For who doeth worshippe or pray beholding an image, which is not so affected, that he thinketh himselfe to be hearde of it, and hopeth that that thing shalbe performed of it, which he desireth.
               
               Hierome in Ezechiell lib. 4. cap. 16. hath these wordes. 
                     Nos autem vnum habemus virum, & vnam veneramur imaginem, quae est imago inuisibilis & omnipotentis Dei. We (saith he of the Christians) haue but one husbande, and worship but one image, which is the image of the inuisible and Almightie God. Meaning Christ, and speakinge against the image worshippers and spirituall fornicators of the Gentiles, Iewes and heretikes.
               
               Likewise vpon Daniel, lib. 1. cap. 3. 
                     Siue statuā vt Symmachus, sue imaginem auream vt caeteri transtulerunt, voluerimus legere, cultores Dei eam adorare non debent. Ergo Iudices & principes saeculi, qui imperatorum statuas adorant & imagines: hoc se facere intelligant, quòd tres pueri facere nolentes placuerint Deo. Et notanda proprietas, Deos coli, imaginem adorari dicunt, quod vtrun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         seruis Dei non conuenit. Whether we will reade it, a standing image as Symmachus, or a golden image as the rest haue translated, the worshippers of God ought not to adore it. Therefore the Iudges and Princes of the worlde, which worship the statues and images of the Emperours,

let them vnderstand that they do that which the three children would not doe, and pleased God. And that the propertie of speech is to be marked, they cal the worshippinge of the image, the worshippinge of God: both which is vnmeete for the seruauntes of God. If Hierome will not allowe the worshipping of the Emperours Image, which is but ciuill, much lesse the worshippinge of the image of Christ or his saintes, which is religious. Chrysostom. in Math. Hom. 51. counteth it a meere mockery of God and the saints, to set vp their image in golde or siluer, and to suffer the true images and their members to dye for famine or colde, as they doe in all places where Idols are hanged with chaines and brooches. 
                     Quid porro si frigore congeluum hominem aspiceres, nec vestem aliquam ei preparares? si aureas statuas ad laudē eius erigeres nonne contemnere videreris? What if thou shouldest see a man frozen with colde, and didst not prepare him any garment? but didst set vp golden images to his praise, shuldest thou not seeme to dispise him? And ye God reiecteth al such honour as is imagined to be done to him by images or other inuentions of men, he saith, Qui honoratur, eo maxime honore laetatur quem ipse vult, non quem optamus. He whiche is honoured, delighteth chiefly in that honour which he himselfe will haue, not which we wishe to him.
               
               "Ambrose Ep. 31. derideth them Qui Deum loquntur simulachrum adorant, which speake of God, and worshippe an image.
               
                  In Rom. cap. 9. he saith that Christ would not suffer him selfe to be worshipped, but that he is God. Nec Dominus vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      se adorari pateretur, nisi quia Deus.
               
               After the councell of Eliberis that forbad all pictures in the Church, the councell of Carth. 5. willed such altars as were set vp in the countrie, and high wayes: as memories of the martyrs, should be abolished & ouerthrowen, although they were pretended to be set vp by reuelations or visions: woulde they then haue permitted images in memorie of the martyrs? When also they decreed to intreate the Emperour that all reliques and monumentes

of idolatrie might be destroyed.
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII. OR XVII.
               
                  Whether the same degree of honour be due to the Images of Christ, or of his Saintes, which is due to Christ and to the Saintes themselues. Three things are to be considered in an artificial image. M. Iewels forging is detected. Doulia onely cōmeth to Christ by his image. M. Iewell alledgeth wordes out of a booke which is forged. The Churche honoureth not the image for his owne sake.Sande
                           •
                        
                     
                  
               
               M.S. confesseth this pointe to be in controuersie betweene the Catholikes themselues.
                     Fulk.
                   But yet he saith it is a question of phylosophie rather then of diuinitie, which ye church hath not determined. As though the churche had any thing to do to determine questions of phylosophie: or as though a question about the true worship of God, were not a question of diuinitie. His sophisticall reasons on both sides are superfluous to repeat, seeinge we take neither of both parts, but denie that any kinde of religious honour is to be giuen to images, yet briefely I will runne ouer the contentes of the chapter. Three things (he saith) are to be considered in an artificial image, the matter, the forme, and the representation. The two former deserue no honour in religion, but the representation onely. The image as a representation, is considered either as a part from the trueth, and then it hath a lesse honour thē the trueth, or els together with the trueth, and then it must haue all one honour with the trueth.
               And then he maketh the question this, whether as his minde is in one instant mooued and caried by the meane of ye image to the remembrance of the trueth, so the honor of both be all one or no? But if he were in ye schooles at Cambridge, the boyes would tell him, that there can bee no mouinge in one instant, because in euerie moouinge there must bee the marke from whence, and the marke whereunto the moouinge is. Neuerthelesse hee aunswereth this question, with a doughtie distinction, that the honour giuen to the image, and to Christe, is

either the same in number, or the same in kinde or degree. And his opinion is, that it is the same in number, but not in degree. And of this aunswere he maketh the seuenth generall councell auctor, Actione, 4. Where Iohannes vicegerent of the East, saith, Non sunt duae adorationes sed vna adoratio imaginis & primi exēplaris cuius est imago. There are not two adorations, but one adoration of the image, and of the first examplar whereof it is an image. And here he raileth against M. Iewel, for falsifying and forging in translating duae adorationes: two sortes of worshipping and exemplifyinge his doctrine by Latria and Doulia whereof Iohannes meant not, but the contrarie is taught before in the same Action. How impudent and shamelesse the cauill of Master Sander is, I haue shewed before, when I rehearsed howe Constantius bishoppe of Constantia in Cypres, affirmeth that he woulde giue the same honour to images, that he did to the holy trinitie that giueth life, vnto whome al the rest did assent. So that M. Sanders opinion is contrary to the determination of the councel. For he holdeth that not Latria, but Doulia only commeth to Christ by his images. By which opinion, you see how greatly Christ is promoted, that in steed of Latria, a Diuine honour, which they confesse to be due to him, he must be content with the lower degree of honor by his image, because the image can receiue nor cary no greater. But if the image be neither a receiuer, nor a carier, Christ must lose all his honour, as he doth indeed, which is that way offered. Yet (saith Master Sander) doth not his image any more hinder his honour, then Sainte Paule doth. For when I honour S. Paule for Christs sake, no greater honour then Doulia commeth to Christ Verely Master Sander, how it is when you honour S. Paule, I knowe not, but when I honour him for Christes sake, I honour not him, but Christ with Diuine honour, as the onely author of those giftes of his spirite, by whiche he is preferred before other men. And where you say M. Iewel alledgeth wordes out of a book of Carolus Magnus, written against that Idolatrous synode of Nice,

which is forged, you speake not more peremtorily then falsly and perniciously. For what reason haue you to prooue that booke to be forged: forsooth, you aske howe could Carolus Magnus write such a book, which built so many churches and monasteries? As though Churches and monasteries could not bee builded but by an idolater. Yea, which so diligently obeyed the B. of Rome which crowned him. As though the bishop of Rome crowned him Emperour, to be his slaue and an Idolater, who left so many reliques at Aquisgraine and a little image of our Ladie with other Iewels: Paraduenture as truely as the image of Diana came to the Ephesians from Iupiter. Who caused the French men to conforme themselues in their Church song to the Romanes. But where finde you that hee caused them to conforme themselues in image worshipping to the Grecians? Finally a booke of such smal credit that neither the librarie whence it was taken, nor towne where it is printed, nor the man who printed it, is named. These be weightie reasons to discredit ye booke, as though it were necessarie that euery booke must come out of a librarie, some haue ben preserued in priuate studies, some haue beene closed vp in walles. The place and name of the printer is not expressed, for that it is like to haue bee printed, where it might not be suffered to be solde. But ye very stile argueth it is not forged in our time and I haue before it a testimony of Mattheus West-monasteriensis which was writen about 200. yeares agoe, that such a booke was written against that councell by Albinus or Alcuinus, and presented to the French King Carolus, whose name it beareth, not perhappes written by him, but by his commaundement and authority published.
               After this he discourseth vpon Thomas of Aquines opinion, which holdeth that diuine honour which they cal datria, is due to the image of Christ, which if it be an errour, (saith maister Sander;) it is an errour in Phisophie, which to affirme is a most shamelesse absurditie. Last of all he concludeth against S. Thomas that a lesse degree of honour is dewe to images, then to ye paterne: affirming

that ye church honoreth not ye image for his own sake, for no man is taught to beleeue in images, or to cal them his gods, or to do sacrifice to them. What say you M. Sander, who teacheth pilgrimage to images, doth not your churche? And how can they pray to thē, if they do not beleeue in them? Who teacheth them to cal an image Christ, that is their lord and God, but euen you which defend images to be honoured by the names that they haue of ye things whereof they be images. Therefore when you call an ymage Christ, you call it God, and Lord, sauiour, and redeemer. The image of the Trinitie, what call you it but the trinitie? Fie vppon this horrible idolatrie which is defended with such a sleueles excuse, that you honour not the image for his owne sake, no more did the Gentiles their images. Chrisostom in Homi. 18. in Ep. ad Eph. writeth thus of them, Cum illi dicimus quòd simulachrū adoret, non inquit simulacrum, sed Venerem sed Martem. Et cum rogamui quae est ista Venus? Qui grauiores inter eos sunt, respondent, voluptas. & quis est Mars? Animus masculus & vehemens. When we say vnto him that he worshippeth an image. No saith he, not the image but Venus or Mars. And when we aske, what is this Venus? the grauer sort among them aunswere, pleasure. And who is Mars? A manlike and valiant corage. Augustine in Psal. 96. which place I haue cited before sheweth that the Gentiles affirmed, yt they worshipped not the images for their owne sake, but for ye diuine powers which they did represent, euen the same which the Christians called Angels. So yt the Papists are all one with ye Gentiles in their excuse, as they agree with them in Idolatrie, & worshipping of images.
            
            FINIS.
God be praysed.
         
         
            
            A REFVTATION OF MAITER IOHN RASTELS CONFVTATION AS HE CALLETH IT OF maister Iewels sermon. by W. Fulk.
            
               To the Preface.
               
                  TO giue the Reader a tast of such sinceritie,
                     Fulk.
                   as he must looke for in all M. Rastels booke of confutation, hee sheweth in his preface, where speaking of three maners of aunswering, he declareth ye same by an example taken out of the bishops sermon: that sole receiuing is not to be suffered among Christians, where as the bishoppe hath no such position in all his sermon, but that priuate masse was not vsed for the space of sixe hundreth yeares after Christ. Thus admonishing the Reader that maister Rastell as his grand capteine M. doctour Harding, not able to finde any thing either in scripture, or antiquitie, for the maintenance of their ordinary priuate Masse, doth flie to extraordinarie vses and vnlawfull vsages of sole receiuing, being all such, as either some necessity might seeme to excuse, or as all the Papists themselues do confesse to haue beene abuses, I leaue his leude preface, & hasten to the book it self.
            
            
               A refutation of maister Rastels confutation.
               SECTIO PRIMA. In which he speaketh of the councel of Nice & of vnwritten verities.
                     Rastell.
                  
               
               TO passe ouer the two first leafes of his booke and halfe the third,
                     Fulk.
                   in which is much vaine babling but no point of confutatiō, in the second face of the third leafe, he beginneth to picke his iust quarel at the sentence set before the bishoppes printed sermon, which is this. Let old customes preuaile. It greueth M. Rastel & his fellowes, which perswade the ignorant people that our relygion is all nouelty, that M Iewell should make any such claime vnto antiquitie. And first therfore he wil know whether ye scriptures do not cōteine al things necessary to saluatiō?

Yes verely, and Gods curse light on him, that teacheth the contrarie. Then he will knowe, where we finde this saying in scriptures, or if it be not in the scripture of god, why we wil vse a sentēce of ye coūcel of Nice, which was but a cōgregatiō of mens Verily if we found not ye matter of this sentence in Gods worde, we durst not auouch it to be true that was vttered by men, being applied to any point of doctrine. But we finde the same doctrine in the sixt of Ieremy, where the Lord saith, Stand in the wayes, and beholde, and aske for the olde way, which is the good way, and walke therein, and you shall finde rest for your soules. Nowe this saying of the councell of Nice, let olde customes preuaile, being the same in effect and meaning, though somewhat differing in sounde of wordes, we embrace it as the worde of God, and the holy scripture, which we do not restraine vnto the letters and sillables, but vnto the plaine and manifest sence and vnderstanding of them. The seconde quarrell he picketh to the placing of this sentence before the bishoppes sermon, because it is vttered by the Councell of Nice in a particuler case concerning ye iurisdiction of the bishops of Alexandria and Antioch, and therefore cannot serue for a generall sentence. For all olde customes (saith he) must not be preferred before new customes, example of washing of feete, & abstaining from eating of bloud, which were olde customes. But if the councell meant, that olde customes should preuaile against newe writinges, then all books of Luther & such like are striken through which one foine. Wherefore hee concludeth that the councell meant, that olde customes shoulde preuaile, against the pretensed alledging of the verye scripture it selfe, and newe doctrine of men. And so this sentence doth at once ouerthrow all maister Iewels religion. But hauing compared this sentence to the text of scripture, by which the true meaning therof may appeare, I will not stand about this trifling cauils. Cōcerning our iudgmēt of antiquitie this it is. We wil not admit whatsoeuer is old, but only ye religiō which is eldest of al, which hath god for ye autor, ye
                  
Patriarches, Prophetes, and Apostles for the witnesses, and all learning, doctrine, and religion, which is vnder the age of these yeares, we reiect as newe, false, and diuelish. As for customes, ceremonies, and manners, which are subiect to mutation, we receiue them, or refuse them, as they be approuable or disprouable by the saide old auncient and Catholike doctrine. And bicause M. Rastel hath not only touched the sixt Canon of the Councell of Nice, where this sentence is written, but also charged M. Iewell with ouerthrowe of his religion thereby, I must let the reader vnderstand, that he suppresseth one point thereof, that vtterly ouerthroweth ye piller of all Popish religion, & that is, the Popes supremacie. For yt Canon maketh the Bishop of Alexandria, equall in iurisdiction to the Bishop of Rome. For the reason of the iurisdiction confirmed vnto the Bishops of Alexandria is this. Quia & vrbia Romę Episcop
                        •
                      parilis mos est. Bicause the Bishop of the citie of Rome hath the like or equall custome of iurisdiction. But M. Rastell will proue by the storie of Arrius, that the Councell meant by that sentence, that it is onely tradition, custome, and manners, which killeth the hearts of heretiques, and defendeth the Catholike Church: and not the authoritie of the Scriptures. Bicause Arrius was such a proude heretique, that he despised all the interpretations of the auncient Fathers that were before his time, as Alexander Bishop of Alexandria writeth of him. Yea, he is not ashamed to say, that although the Fathers of that Councell had scriptures against Arrius, yet their chiefe stay was not in yt scriptures, but in the receiued tradition. But this is a most impudent lye, for although the consent of Catholike writers of all ages, with the word of God, is not to be contemned, yet the only authoritie in determining of controuersies of faith, in all Councels, is and ought to be by the authoritie of the holy scriptures. The Apostles thē
                  selues in the Councel of Hierusalem, decided the controuersie of circumcision by the scriptures. Act. 15. A worthy paterne for al godly Councels to folow. Constantine also in the Councel of Nice, charged the Bishops there assembled

by his commandement, to determine the matter by the authoritie of the holy scriptures. Euangelici enim & Apostolici libri, necnon antiquorum Prophetarum oracula planè instruunt nos (inqui:) sensu numinis. Proinde hostici posua discordia sumamus ex dictis diuini spiritus explicatione
                           •
                        . The bookes of the Gospels, and the Apostles, and also the Oracles of the auncient Prophetes do plainly instruct vs (saith he) in the vnderstanding of God. Therefore laying away hatefull discord, let vs take explications out of the sayings of the holy Ghoste. 
                  Therdor. lib. cap. 7. By this charge it is manifest, how truely M. Rastel faith, that the decree of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   or equalitie of ye Sonne in substance with the Father, was made only by tradition, and not by the authoritie of the scriptures. For the Councel examining by scriptures the tradition and receiued opinion of the Fathers, and finding it agreeable to them, did confirme the same. And whereas the Arrians quarrelled that this worde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   was not found in the scriptures, and therefore would refuse it, it helpeth nothing M. Rastels vnwritten verities, for the trueth of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is proued by an hundreth textes of scriptures, as the truth of the Trinitie is, although neither of both words are found in the scriptures. We quarell not as those heretiques did, and M. Rastel a Popish heritique doth, of letters, syllables, words, and sounds, but we stand vpon the sense, meaning, vnderstanding, & doctrine which we affirme to be perfectly contained in scripture, what so euer is necessarie to saluation, as S. Paul saith: Al scripture inspired of God, is profitable to teach, to improue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousnes, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect to al good workes. 2. Tim. 3.
               And therefore olde customes being referred vnto the custome of the Church of God, in the time of the Patriarches, Prophetes, Apostles, and Doctours, that followed the same vnitie of Gods wordes, is the thing wee desire might preuaile in all our controuersies of religion: and so the sentence is wel inough placed, if Momus could let any thing alone.
            
            
               
               SECTIO. 2. Frō the second face of the 12. leafe to the first face of the 19. leafe.
                     Rastel.
                  
               
               When any order giuen by God is broken or abused,
                     Fulke.
                   (saith the Bishop) the best redresse thereof, is to restore it againe into the state that it was first in the beginning. M. Rastel saith, the Bishop can not tell where of he speaketh. For whereas he affirmed, that S. Paule had appointed an order touching the ministration of the sacramentes vnto the Corinthians, M. Rastell will not simplie graunt that this order was appointed by God, although S. Paule himself say, he receiued it of christ, which he deliuered to thē. For this difference hee maketh. That an order giuen by God must be obserued without exception, and yet he addeth an exception of reuelation, and especial licence from God. But what so euer order S. Paule did giue, (he saith) is subiect vnto the Church, to remoue or pull vp, as it shall please her. Thus the blasphemous dog barketh against ye spirit of God. But I trust al sober Christian minds will rather beleue S. Paul then Rastel, who saith of such orders as were giuen by him. 1. Cor. 14. If any man seem to be a prophet, or spirituall, let him know ye things yt I write to you, yt they be the cōmandements of God. But now M. Ra. will take vpon him to teach vs ye order giuē, yt Paul speaketh of, namely, That ye Christians had certein charitable suppers, called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , after which as August. saith, & before which as Chrysost. saith, they did vse to receiue ye sacramēt. Note here yt M. Rast. which wil haue old customes tried by ye fathers, bringeth in here two Doctors, one contrarie to ye other. To ye purpose. This order was taken away by cōtention & disdaine of ye rich against ye poore, & therfore Paule purposed to bring them againe to yt order of sitting, & eating their supper altogether, yt rich with the pore, by saying: That which I receiued of the Lord, I deliuered to you. And not to reforme any abuse of ye sacramēt, by reducing it to the first institution. This iudgement of M. Rastell is partly by him proued, by the authoritie of Theophylact, but chiefly it standeth vpon his owne authoritie, without further reason. Howbeit, it is manifest by ye scripture, that

Paule reproued that mingling of prophane suppers, with the Lordes supper, appointing their priuate houses for their bodily refreshings of eating and drinking. Haue you not houses (saith he) to eate and drinke in? By which saying it is manifest, he would haue no eating and drinking in the Church (as M. Rastell dreameth) but onely the eating and drinking of the Lordes supper. And therefore that abuse of mingling their bodily suppers, with the spirituall supper of the Lorde whereof came so many abuses, and especiall the seuering and sundering of the congregation into diuers partes, which ought to haue receiued altogether, he laboureth to reforme, by bringing it to the first institution of the Lord him selfe. But M. Rast. following his owne dreame, asketh what there was in the institution, for sitting together or a sunder: for eating at Church, or at home? Yes forsooth: Christe did institute his supper to be a foode of the soule, and not of the body, and therefore to be celebrated in the congregation, and in common, as the saluation is common, and not to bee mingled with prophane banquets of bellie cheare, for which priuat houses and companies are meet, and not the Church of God. And wheras M. Rastel chargeth M. Iewel with not vnderstanding this place which he alledgeth, namely (therefore when you come together to eate, tarie one for an other:) which he saith pertaineth no more to ye institution of the sacrament, then a pot full of plumbs doth to the highway to London, he sheweth all his wit & honestie at once. For he denyeth that any thing that Saint Paule there rehearseth, namely these wordes, take, eate, this is my body &c. is the institution of the sacrament, or the originall paterne of reforming the Corinthians disorder, bicause time, place, vesture, number of communicants, and such other accidentall and variable circumstànces, be not therein expressed. So that by his diuinitie, either ye institution of the sacrament is not at all contained in ye scriptures, or else there is an other first paterne to reforme abuses by, then this yt is set downe in the scriptures. I would maruel at these monstrous assertions,

but that I see, ye obstinate Papists cannot otherwise defend their Popish Masse, except they denied ye institution of the sacrament & patterne of reformation, to be conteyned in the scriptures. But if it be granted (saith M. Rast.) whiche is to farre absurde, that S. Paule did reduce the Corinthians to the first originall and institution, Why doe not rich men now bring meate to the Church, and receiue the sacrament after they haue filled their bellies? Forsooth because Christe instituted no such maner of suppers. And why (saith he) do you not washe one anothers feete, hauing a commandement so to do? But if this commandement be litterally to be vnderstanded, why doe you Papistes breake it? If it be not, why do you require that of vs, which you confesse is not required, to be done of any? Humilitie is commaunded whereof our Sauiour Christe gaue vs example in that fact, & that God graunt we may obserue: the outwarde ceremonie he commanded not to be obserued of any, but that which was signified thereby▪ And whereas Maister Rastell compareth the receiuing of both kindes by the lay people, with that ceremonie of washing of feete, to make it seeme that the iustitution of Christ might be altered in the one, aswell as in the other, he declareth what reuerence or estimation he hath of the institution of Christe. For as that ceremonie of washing of feete is and may be altogether omitted (as he fantasieth by the authoritie of the Church) so not only one kind of the sacrament, but both kindes also may be likewise taken away, both from the people & the priest, if it please the Churche of Rome. If he denie the conclusion, what hath he gayned by the argument of that example? Or what hath he proued against this our assertion, that nothing is to beleeued without the expresse worde of God conteined in the scriptures?
            
            
               SECTIO. 3. From the first face of the 19. leafe to the second of the 23. leafe. Of the disagreement of the Gospellers.Rastel.
               
               
                  Whereas the Bishop had saide, that the light of the Gospell is now so mightily and so farre spread abroade, that it was to be hoped, no man would lightly misse his way as before in time of darkenesse, and perish wilfully: it offendeth M. Rastel, that he should boast of this glorious light of the Gospel, which he a most obstinate blinde man will not vouchsafe to see. Likewise that he calleth the heresie of Papistrie, the darkenesse of the time afore. And he would knowe where this glorious light of the Gospell is to be seene? Concerning the light of Poperie, because the Kingdome of the beaste by Gods iudgement is darkened in these partes of the worlde,
                     Apoc. 15. where he is knowen to sitte, which maketh M. Rastel and his complices to gnaw the tonges for anger, he is faine to demonstrate the light a farre off beyond the reache of any mans eyes sight, among the newe found landes, and the wilde Indians, conuerted (as he saith) not by the Protestants, but by Popish monkes and Friers. Although it were easie to proue, that protestantes also haue planted some Churches in those newe founde landes, as in Gallia Antartica, but what follie were it to boast of that? How far and wide the Gospel is spread in Europe, he that is so blind that he will not see, who can make him acknowledge it? Euen Italy & Spaine, haue yeelded great numbers of Martyrs & confessors. Al other regions of Europe in a maner at this day haue either vtterly banished Papistry, or at lest by publik authoritie giuen libertie to ye Gospel: as England, Ireland, Scotland, Flanders, Holland, France, Germanie, Denmark, Bohemia, Polonia, Hungaria, Suetia, Gothia, &c. But M. R. seeing he cannot shewe his Popishe light abroade, he wil shewe it in corners of mens harts, because (as he supposeth) there is neuer a citie, in which there is not some Papistes, and therefore he wil conclude, that the Gospel is not mightily and farre spread abroade. By which reason he may proue, that it neuer was; nor shall be mightily spread abroade; for euer there haue beene, and shalbe enimies that will not imbrace it. Another reason he would seeme to bring of sixe diuers kindes of Gospellers, wheras

therere is but one Gospel, which is a fond & malicious cauill, for I can bring more then 16. kinds of Papists, which differ in some opinions and ceremonies, wheras al ye difference he can assigne amongst them that be truly accounted professors of the Gospell, is either in one article of the sacrament, or else in outward rites and ceremonies, which cannot exclude any of them from the possession of ye Gospel, so long as they al agree in the doctrine of eternal saluation. He vrgeth vs as Tertullian did ye Marcionistes & heretikes of his time, to shew ye beginnings of our Churches, which wee do daily, when we approue our doctrine to be grounded vpō the foundation of the Prophets & Apostles, bringing in no new Gospel as those heretikes did, whereof they could not deduce the beginning from ye Apostles & Euangelistes of Christ. And whereas he saith we haue no one vndouted true iudge, teacher, or faith, because we read Luther, & the Doctors old & new wt iudgement, yt is, because we builde not our faith vppon any one man, as they do vpon their proude Pope, but vpon Christ & his eternall word. I answer we haue a most certein faith groū
                  ded vpon the teaching of a most holie maister, euen ye spirite of Christ in his word, who is a most vndouted iudge, both for wisdome & authoritie to determine all controuersies. Wheras the Papists building altogether vpō men, haue no vndouted iudge, teacher, or faith, not only because al men are liers & vnconstant by corrupt nature, but also because they cannot agree among themselues, whether ye Pope or the councel is ye superior iudge, teacher, or rule of faith. But M. Ra. as ye rest of ye Papists do, gloryeth much yt we haue receiued ye gospel frō ye Pope, whose iudgment in expositiō therof, we shold as well receiue, as we acknowledge his fidelitie in keeping it wtout corruption. But we vtterly denie, that we haue receiued the Gospell from the Pope, but rather from the Greeke Churche, neither doe we acknowledge any fidelitie of the Pope in keeping of the Gospel, whome we accuse of shamefull corrupting ye Latine text therof, and as for burning of the Books, either he could not, ye same being dispersed into so many copies, or he needed not, when he persuaded al men yt the Gospell

had none other sence, but that it pleased him to frame vnto it. Finally when Pope Leo the tenth accounted ye Gospel nothing else but a fable of Christe, whiche brought them so great honor and wealth, as who seeth not either how reuerently the Pope preserued the Gospell, or for what cause he kept it vndestroied. Finally M. Rastels prophane iesting of riding post to heauen, declareth himselfe to be a right Papist, that is to say an Atheist, which maketh a scorne of religion, and of the hope of the life to come, euen as the same Pope Leo saide at his death, that this one thing he should gayne by dying, that he shoulde be resolued concerning the question of the immortalitie of the soule. Wherein all the learned men in the worlde before could not satisfie him. Last of all what an impudent lyer Maister Rastell is, you may plainely perceiue, when he chargeth the Bishop with this confession: That these nine hundreth yeres and more, none did euer take this way which he doth follow. For although the Bishop made his chalenge of sixe hundreth yeares after Christe▪ yet did he neuer confesse that in the nine hundreth yeres following; none did euer reteine or imbrace the Gospell whiche he teacheth, when God be praised, there was a number euen in the moste blindest times that sawe the light thereof, although they were fewe, and persecuted by Antichriste.
            
            
               
                  
                     Rastel.
                  SECTIO. 4. From the second face of the 23. leafe, to the first of the 38. leafe. In which he taketh vpon him to proue that the English communion and seruice doth not followe Christe and his Apostles, in taking into their hand
                     •
                  , and blessing the cuppe and the challice, nor the primitiue Church in praying toward the East, mingling water with the wine, signe of the crosse, altars, incense, tapern, praying to Saintes, and praying for the dead.
               
                  
                     Fulke.
                  The 
                     •
                  . in his sermon affirmed (as R. saith) 1. The holy cōmunion to be restored to ye use & form of the primitiue

Church. 2. To ye same order yt was deliuered & appointed by Christ, 3. and after practised by the Apostles, 4. and continued by the holy doctours and fathers, by the space of fiue or sixe hundreth yeares, throughout all the catholike Churche of Christ, 5. without exception or anye sufficient example to be shewed to the contrarie. Al these Master Rast. saith be lyes, which is his short aunswere. And I coulde aunswere as shortly, that then they be lyes of Master Rastells forging. For the bishoppe affirmed no such thing of the ceremoniall forme of our Communion, but of the doctrine thereof. But let vs see his answere at large.
               He woulde know how this Communion of ours doth agree with that, which Christ deliuered, and thē rehearseth ye institution of Christ, beginning at the eating of ye Pascall Lambe, and the washing of his disciples feete, as though either of these perteined to the sacrament, and forsoothe we must tell him, how many thinges more, & how many things lesse, our order in ye cōmunion booke hath. And firste what scripture we haue for the linnen clothe: for the priestes standing on the North side of the table, for our prayers, confessions, collects, & other ceremonies, and seeing wee haue no scripture for these, the Communion is not restored to the order appointed by Christ. I aunswere, that forasmuch as those matters perteine to order and decencie, we haue scripture sufficient to authorize them, although as I saide before, the bishop speaketh not of the ceremoniall forme of ministration, but of the substaunce and doctrine, which is the essential forme of the Communion: concerning which we haue neyther more nor lesse, then Christ vsed and deliuered.
               Yet (saith Master Rast.) we haue many pointes lesse then was done by Christ at his last supper. First he will not presse vs with yt question, why we do not Communicate after supper, which peraduenture yet some doth with the sicke, as a thing not vnlawfull, nor tyed to any time, but by the generall rule of order and decencie: but he demandeth, why we take not the bread into our handes,

before we consecrate it, as Christ did? A profounde question. As though we doe not both take it, breake it, receiue it, and deliuer it with our handes, as Christ did. Or as though Christ appointed at what moment we should touch it, or that M. Rastel is able to say, that Christ spake nothing of his institution before he touched the breade: or as though we did not vse ordinarily before we make the exhortation vnto the Communion, to take the bread and breake it, and with the cup to set it before vs, & not to let it stand at the ende of the table, as he belyeth vs, as though we wer
                     •
                   ashamed to folow Christ.
               The seconde thing that we haue lesse then Christ did (as he saith) is blessinge of the breade, which is vtterly false, for we blesse it as Christ did, not with the signe of the crosse as ye would haue vs, but with thanksgiuinge and prayer, as the Euangelistes doe testifie that Christe did, and as the primitiue and Apostolike Church did practise. And therefore Iustinus marty
                        •
                      speaking of the sanctified or blessed nourishment of the sacrament, calleth it 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      that nourishement for which thankes is giuen by the worde of prayer, receiued of him. And touching the reuerende gestures vsed by Christ at his supper, as we doubt nothing, but that he vsed them alwayes, so can M. Rastell with all his prating prooue none other, then the Euangelists haue set downe. And therefore for his loking on the bread, separating it from the rest of the bread on the table, blessing it by some special signe, as the signe of ye crosse, &c. when he can prooue out of the scriptures, we shall bee content to refourme our Communion accordinge to those supposed gestures. In the meane time, notwithstanding his ruffian like raylinge, our order of celebration, hath all things instituted and deliuered by Christ, to be obserued in the reuerent ministration of this most holy sacrament.
               The seconde lye he chargeth Master Iewell with all is, that he saith we haue the same order, that was practi
                  
                     •
                  ed by the Apostles, where as we reade of none order

practised by them. For Actes the 2. we read (saith he) that they did breake breade in houses. And yet it may be doubted whether that was the communion, and actes 13. saith he when the Apostles had fasted and sacrificed, they sent forth Paule and Barnabas. But where finde you that translation, Master Rastell, that they sacrificed? will you now forsake your owne Latine translation? Ministrantibus illis Domino, when they ministred vnto the Lorde, and so wilfully runne into the curse of the Tridentine councell? or will you appeale to the Greeke text 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which worde signifieth any publike Ministerie by the iudgement of all learned Graetians, and Erasmus himselfe, whom you folowe in this translation, though you count him an heretike, and forsake your Catholike translation, confirmed by generall Councelles? Well, then I see that papists iangle of general councels and catholike interpretations vnto other, but they themselues will be holden of none, anye longer then they liste. But to the matter, he saith that S. Paule 1. Cor. 11. testifieth of the veritie of the sacrament, but not of the order, referringe that to his owne comming. As though he doeth not manifestly reforme a disorder, or as though other thinges which he saith he woulde set in order at his comminge. could be taken for the same thinges that he wrote of in his Epistle. But what of al this? we obserue the same essentiall order that the Apostles practised by Christs institution, which S. Paule in that place reduced, & otherwise ye bishop neither said nor ment, therfore ye foule lyes come onely out of M. Rastelles foule mouth and slaunderous penne.
               From whence come fiue other lyes that folowe, namely, ye the order of the cōmunion restored, hath bin cōtinued by ye holy doctors & fathers, as in the beginning of this Section: wherto he addeth, to make ye fift lie, yt the bishop saith, some refuse ye cōmuniō, where there be many refusers: in deed a few is too many, but if there were a thousand times so many, they are truely said some, so long as they be not all.
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  Communion agreeth not with the primitiue Churche, & olde fathers. First he bringeth in Iustine, Athanasius, Basill, and Agustine, to shewe that they vsed to praye to the East, as though that were anye parte of the Communion.
               And he will know of vs wherefore we appoint the priest to stand on ye Northside. Verely euē for the same reason, that the primitiue Churche did chuse to praye towarde the East. Namely to auoide the superstition of the Iewes, that prayed towarde the West, as we doe to auoid the superstition of the papistes that vse to pray toward the East, otherwise all quarters of heauen, of their own nature, are indifferent for vs, to turne our selues vnto in our praiers, either publike or priuate.
               The seconde exception is, of mingling of water with the wine, which is also a pointe nothinge materiall, as their owne schoole doctours doe confesse, the vsage of this he prooueth by a counterfett decree of Alexander bishoppe 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ome, by Cyprian, and the third councell of Carthage: sauing that he belyeth Cyprian, who in deede reprooueth them that ministred with water alone, but not such as ministred with wine alone, although hee thinke it conuenient that water shoulde be mixed with the wine. But all his reasoninge is for wine, and not for water, against water alone, and not against wine alone.
               Wherefore the vse of water being not of Christes institution, as many other thinges practised of the fathers at the first as indifferent, or profitable ceremonies, being ouergrowne after with superstition and opinion of necessitie, our Churche hath done verie well to curse them of, and leaue nothinge but the pure institution of Christ.
               The third exception is of the signe of the crosse, which he saith, ought to be vsed in ye cōmunion, & yt he proueth by the counterfet liturgies ascribed to S. Iames & S. Basill, he citeth also Tertulian, to prooue that men vsed to make that signe on their foreheads customably at euery

action, which they did, to shewe themselues to be Christian
                     •
                   against the Heathens. Likewise he citeth the sayings of Chrisostome and Augustine, to proue that they vsed the signe of the crosse at the celebration of the communion, which is not denyed, yet cannot he proue, that the vse of that signe is necessarie to the ministration: and the first that we reade of, that had it in estimatiō, were ye Valentinian heretikes Ireneus lib. 1. Cap. 1. By fond emulation of whome, the Catholikes also began to vsurpe the same signe. Therefore our communion which lacketh that signe, lacketh nothing that is either necessary or profitable, or (considering the abuse of it) meete to be reteined.
               The fourth exception is of Altars, which we haue not, neither in deed had the primitiue church, but tables made of bords, which although they called altars, as they did also cal them tables, yet were they neither in forme, nor matter like those which the Papists haue, as I haue shewed at large in the aunswere to M. Hesk. lib. 3. Cap. 31. whither I remit the reader. As for maister Rastels proofe out of that saying of the Apostle to the Hebrues: we haue an Aultar of which they may not eate, which communicate with Idols: declareth what a wel exercised man in the scriptures he is for neither be ye words of the apostle Heb. 12. as he doth falsifie them, neither doth he speake of any materiall altar, but of our spirituall Altar Christ. The words be these we haue an Aultar of which it is not lawful for thē to eat, which serue in the tabernacle. His next proofe is for hallowing of aultars, and oyle, & of ye priests blessing, out of the prouinciall councel of Agatha, which he citeth Cap. 14. in steede of 10. which was a new decree made by 35. Bishoppes in Fraunce, almost fiue hundreth yeares after. Christe, and therefore not Catholike, either for time or place. The saying of Opratus which he citeth last, you shal finde at large in the aunswere vnto Hesknis before named.
               The fifth exception is of incense, which hee proueth by a prayer of the counterfet masse of S. Iames, which yet

may be otherwise taken figuratiuely. Also by a saying of Dennys, who was not knowē in the church fiue hundreth yeres after Christ for a writer, neither of Eusebius, Ierōe, nor Gennadius. 
                     Last of al by a saying of Ambrose lib. 1. in cap. 1. Luc. I would to god that while we incēse the aultars & bring sacrifice thither, the Angels should stand by vs. By which word
                     •
                   he meaneth nothing else but prayers, which are figuratiuely, both in the psalmes & in the reuelation called incense or sacrifice. Wherefore popish sensing is not of such antiquitie as he pretendeth.
               The sixt exception is of lightes and tapers, vsed in the primitiue Church, which is false, except it were in the night season, to giue them light. For profes he citeth a counterfet sermon of Augustine de tempore, which for all that speaketh but of oyle & wax for the vse of the night. Neither is the verse of Paulinus otherwise to bee vnderstanded, Of the Aultars bright, that were rounde ydight, with lampes thicke set and light. 
                  Finally where he citeth Hierom against Vigilantius, excusing the superstitiō of some women, that lighted candles at day time, partly by their deuotion, partely by the example of the East Churches, which onely at the reading of the gospell vsed to light their candels in signe of ioye, you shall see by his owne wordes in the same place, that neither it was the custome of the latine church to 
                        •
                     ett light candels on the aultars, neither did he allowe them that vsed so to doe, Caereas autem non clara luce accendimus sicut fustra calumniaris, sed & noctis tenebras hoc solatio temperemus, & vigilemus ad lumen, no tecum caeci dormiamus in tenebris. Quod si aliqui propter imperitiam vel simplicitatem saecularium hominum, vel certe religiosarum faeminarum de quibus verè dicere possumus, confiteor zelum Dei habens sed non secūdum scientiam, hoc pro honore martyrum faciunt, quid inde perdis? We do not light wax cādels in ye brod day light as thou dost slander vs in vaine, but that we may temper the darknesse of the night with this comforte, & may watch by a light, least we should sleepe with thee in the darke like blinde men. And if any lay men, or perhaps

deuout we men, through ignorance or simplicitye doe so for the honour of the Martyrs, of whome we may truly say: I confesse they haue a zeale but not according to knowledge, what leesest thou thereby? By these words you may see howe this custome came vp, namelye of superstition and ignorance, by Hieromes owne confession, although hee was more readie to excuse it, then to reforme it, as his duetie had beene.
               
               After some rayling against our grosse, vnreasonable, and vnnaturall heresies (as he calleth them,) hee returneth to two other exceptions, the one of prayers made to saintes, vsed at the communion, the other of prayer for the deade. For proofe of the first, hee citeth the liturgies falsely intituled to Basill and Chrisostom, which the worlde knoweth are of a much later stampe, the one being vnknowen to Gregorie Nazianzen, that wrote Basils life, and commended his actes, the other praying for Pope Nicholas and the Emperour Alexius, whiche were sixe hundreth yeares after Chrisostome was deade.
               After these he citeth the authorities of Chrisostome & Augustine, that mention was made of the saintes and martires at the celebration of the communion in their time, which wee confesse, and so there is in our ministration, but no prayer was in their time offered vnto them, more then is nowe: as euen that place of Augustine which hee citeth, sufficiently doth proue. De ciuit dei lib. 22. Cap. 10. although he cite it falsely and by patches. 
                     Suo loco & ordine nominantur, non tamen à sacerdote qui sacrificat inuocantur? they are named in their order and place, yet are they not called vppon by the priest that sacrificeth: & what can be more plaine against inuocation of saintes, then this testimonie of Augustine? But hee citeth another place of Augustine, Contra Faust. Manich. lib. 20. cap. 2, where hee saith, the Christians did solemnelye frequent the memories of the martyrs, both to stirre vp themselues to a following of them,

and also to be made companions of their merites, and to be helped by their prayers. This was Augustines iudgement in deede, but yet in the same place, he denyeth that any Aultars were set vp vnto them, or that any prayers were euer offered vnto them. Quis enim Antistitum &c. for what bishoppe standing at the aultar in the places of ye holy Martyrs, euer saide? We offer vnto thee O Peter, or Paule, or Cyprian.
               
               As for prayer for the deade, wee confesse it was vsed at the communion in the time of Chrisostome and Augustine, but not as any part of the communion, or as the institution of Christ, or the practise of the Church for two hundreth yeares after Christ, but onely as a superstitious errour, crept into the Church and not espied, while the fathers were busily occupied in fighting against monstruous heresies of greater importance. Wherefore these exceptions notwithstanding, our celebration of the Communion hath the whole institution of Christe, the practise of the Apostles, and the obseruation of the primitiue Church for fiue or sixe hundreth yeares, so farre as it agreeth with the saide institution and practise, which was in all substantiall and essentiall partes, although the later age had added diuers superfluous and supersticious vsages: and otherwise we boast not of the conformitie of our ministration, with the auncient obseruaton, as maister Rastel, like a malicious cauiller, doth charge the Bishop, I cannot say whether more lewdely then folishly.
            
            
               
                  Rastell.SECTIO. 5. From the first face of the 38. leafe to the 2 face of the 41. leafe.
               
                  
                     Fulk.
                  The Bishoppe said there is no ordinance or misterie so good▪ but through foly or frowardnes of men, it may be abused: & after reherseth many abuses of ye sacramēt. M. Rastel saith, if he can take him tardie but in one, he must be guiltie of all. A wise man I promise you, I haue taken him tardye alreadie in falsifying the scripture and Saint Augustine, yet will I not denye, but that some

thing he saith is true. But let vs see howe he taketh him tard
                     •
                  e. The abuse of baptizing dead men was condemned in the third Councell of Carthage, and the sixt Canon. But (saith Maister Rastell) in the seuenteene Canon of that Councel, strange women are forbidden to dwel with the Cleargie, whereas nowe (saith he) they doe not onely receiue them to their seruantes, but also to their bedfellowes. And I pray you syr, haue not some Popish Priestes such seruants and bedfellowes also? Of seruants he will not deny, but bedfellowes if they haue, hee will say they haue them not as wiues, but as Concubines: So that belike it is better to haue Concubines then wiues. Neuerthelesse, the Canon which forbiddeth straunge women, forbiddeth not their wiues, as it is most manifest, nor yet their sonnes wiues, to dwell with any of the Cleargie, wherby you see he is taken tardie in his owne trip. It seemeth he neuer read the Councel, or else he is a most impudent reporter of that he readeth: As for the 27. Canon that he citeth in steed of yt 24. of water to be mixed with wine, I say he falsifieth the Councel, saying that it commaundeth water and wine both to be vsed in the sacrifice, the words be these: 
                     Vt in sacramentis corporis & sanguinis domini, nihil amplius offeratur quàm ipse Dominus tradidit, hóc est panis & vinum, aqua mixtum. Nec amplius in sacrificijs offeratur quàm de vuis & frumentis. That in the sacramentes of the body and bloud of our Lorde, nothing more be offered then our Lord himselfe deliuered, that is, bread and wine mixed with water. And let nothing more be offered in the sacrifices, but that which commeth of grapes and of corne. This last clause then excludeth water as any necessarie part. But yet he will presse vs with the 36. Can which forbiddeth a Priest to consecrate the Chrisme, and licenseth him to cōsecrate virgins. And we (as he saith) haue taken away oyle, consecration, and virgines. In deed in such matters of ceremonies and externall discipline, we do not deny, but that we varie from thē, & vpon good grounds: otherwise we are not bound to the determination of any Councels, but as they agree with Gods word. But seeing ye
                  
Papistes glorie, that al their doctrine, ceremonies, and discipline, are of Catholike or vniuersall antiquitie and consent, wee may iustly presse them, with euery Canon of any auncient Councell, which they affirme can not erre. Namely with the 26. Can. of this present Councel, which forbiddeth, that the Bishop of Rome or any other Bishop of any principal See, should be called Princes of the Priestes, or the highest Priest, or by any like title: but only, the Bishop of the principall See. I might alledge many other Canons, wherein order is taken for the modest behauiour of the sonnes and daughters of Bishops, which proueth their mariages lawful, but for shortnes I passe them ouer. Another abuse the Bishop noteth, that in the time of Tertullian, and Cyprians time, the people tooke the sacrament home with them. This M. Rast. denieth to haue ben an abuse, & here he craketh of his equalitie with M. Iewel (howe wisely let other iudge) that his nay is as good as the Bishops yee. The matter therfore resteth vpon proofe, whereof we shall consider in the next section.
            
            
               
                  Rastel.SECTIO. 6. From the second face of the 40. leafe to the first face of the 42. leafe.
               
                  
                     Fulk.
                  The Bishop alledged the example of a woman out of Cyprian, which opening her chest with vnworthie handes, in which was the holy thing of the Lord, by fire breaking out, she was terrified that she durst not touch it. This miracle (saith M. Ra.) proueth none abuse in keeping the sacrament, but her fault in presuming to touch it with vnworthie handes. But why may it not serue to proue both, seeing Christe gaue not his sacrament to be locked vp in Chestes, but to be receiued? Take, eate (saith he:) but neither the breach of Christes commandment, nor of the end of his institution can persuade M. Ra. to acknowlege it to be an abuse, bicause he imagineth, that carying home of the sacrament, may iustifie their reseruation therof for adoration, yea and the communion vnder one kind, wheras it neither iustifieth the one, nor proueth the other. For

that they (though abusiuely) kept it in corners to receiue, ca
                     ••
                  ot serue to iustifie the popish maner of hanging it ouer ye altar, or carying it abroad in procession to be worshipped. And there is no colour in the world to make vs thinke, that they caryed not as wel of the sanctified wine, as of the sanctified bread, home to their houses. But it is a sport to see, yt he would proue it to be the body of Christ, by the fire that came out of the chest. The same Cyprian sheweth an other miracle of an vnworthie receiuer, in whose hand the sacrament was turned into ashes, will hee say the body of Christ was turned into ashes also? But to be short, he would knowe what Doctour or Councell we can shew, to proue this carying home of the sacrament to be an abuse. For Doctour he shal haue Origen in Leu. cap. 7. Hom. 5. 
                     Nam & Dominus panem quem discipulis dabat, & dicebat eis accipite & manducate, nō distulit, nec seruari iussit in crastinum. For our Lord differred not yt bread which he gaue to his disciples, & said vnto them, take ye, and eat ye, neither bad he yt it should be kept vntil the next day. For councel he shal haue Caesar Augustanum. Eucharistiae gratiam si quis probatur acceptam non consumpsisse in Ecclesia, anathema sit in perpetuum. If any man be proued, not to haue spent in the church, the gift of the Eucharistie which he hath taken, let him be accursed for euer. Finally, if it bee no abuse, why do not the Papistes suffer it to be done? specially of their Popish brethren whome they take to liue in persecution, vnder princes that professe the Gospell of Christ.
               An other abuse the Bishop rehearseth within Saint Cyprian and Saint Augustines time, the Communion was giuen to young babes, contrarie to the commaundement of the holy Ghoste. Let a man examine him selfe, and so let him eat &c. whereas infantes are not able to examine them selues. This will not Maister Rastell acknowledge to be an abuse, neither that, a reason of the abolishing thereof, but onely the bare authoritie of the Church, which belike hath abolished a good custome. But hee faith, infants might as well communicate as be baptized, wherein hee playeth the Anabaptist, requiring instruction

before baptisme, which the scripture doth not in the children of the faithfull, as it doth examination i
                     •
                   the communicants. Againe he saith, they may as well communicate in the faith of the Church, as they may be baptized in the faith of their Godfathers. But I answere, they are baptized in ye faith which their Godfathers confesse, & not in that faith which they beleue, for perhaps they may be hypocrites, and so voyde of faith, or heretiques, and holde a false faith. But seeing Christ said, Drinke ye all of this, he will knowe why infants may not also drinke, and if they may not drinke, then by all, are meant none, but al that were present, that is, all Priests. But I answere, drinke ye all of this, is saide to all them, to whome, take ye, eat ye, &c. is saide, that is, to all that are able to vnderstande the mysterie, or else none might take and eate, but all Priestes, bicause onely Priestes (as they say) were present, which yet they are not able to proue. As for his comparing of the sacrament with spicebread and cakebread, sauoureth of a mynde that inwardly derideth all religion, though outwardly he pretend neuer so much Popish holinesse.
            
            
               
                  Rastel.SECTIO. 7. From the first face of the 42. leafe to the first face of the 43. leafe.
               
                  
                     Fulke.
                  The Bishop rehearseth, that Marcus an heretique and Necromanser, (as Irenaeus writeth) made that by enchantment, there should appeare very bloud in the chalice. Hereof Rastel gathereth, that the people beleeued bloud to be there, and so he serued their faith and deuotion by his enchauntment, but that is vtterly false, for he would haue deceiued the people, to make them thinke that hee had the bloud of Christe, whereas the Ministers of the Catholike Church had but wine. He counterfeted also a multiplying of the same wine by his sorcerie, and all to get credite to his heresie, and not to serue the faith as M. Rastel vntruely and vnlearnedly affirmeth, but to ouerthrowe the faith of the people of God.
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
            
            
               
               SECTIO. 8. From the first face of the 43. leafe to the first face of the 45. leafe.
                     Rastel.
                  
               
               The Bishop rehearseth other abuses of the sacrament,
                     Fulk.
                   as that some hang it before their brest for a protection, some take the sacrament for a purgation against slander, S. Benet ministred the communion to a woman that was dead. M. Rastell confesseth the sacrament may be abused by Coniurers and other, but he will not graunt that S. Benet did amisse, because he was a Saint, as though Saintes could not do amisse. And he counteth it no reason, against S. Benets fact, that Christ gaue not the sacrament to dead folke, for that he saith is no reason: because Christ forbad no communion, that three be not present, neither badde the chalice to be filled when all is supped vp, nor bad vs kneele and say, we do not presume to come to this thy table, nor carrie home the cantels of bread that are left. But notwithstanding his fonde quarrelling whatsoeuer apperteineth to the decent and reuerent ministration of the communion, Christ cōmanded, though not euerie particular thing by name. And Maister Rastell sheweth himselfe to be an ignoraunt Asse, that compareth substances and accidentes, the essential causes & variable circumstances together, whereas the one must haue the expresse worde of God, or else it can haue no being, the other for the manner of the being, hath generall rules to order it by, but no particulars expressed.
               But Maister Rastell, will not condemne the fact of Benet, because Saint Augustine dare not condemne the fact of those virgins that drowned themselues contrarie to the commandement, Thou shalt not kil, because they might haue an extraordinarie spirite, as Sampson had, and because S. Ambrose commendeth the fact of his brother Satyrus, one that was not baptised, and therefore might not receiue the sacrament, which hanged it about his necke in a tempest and escaped. All these notwithstanding, if he will not admitte that Saint Benet did euill in breaking the commandement of Christ, yet let him heare what the

Church decreed in the 3. councel of Carthage, the 6. Canon. 
                     Placuit vt corporibus defunctorum Eucharistia non detur, Dictum est enim a Domino, accipite & edite. Cadauera autem nec accipere possunt nec edere. It is decreed that the sacrament of the Eucharistie be not giuen to the bodies of them that are dead. For it is saide by our Lord. Take ye, and eate ye. But dead carcases can neither take nor eate. The councell vseth the same reason that the bishop doeth, but M. Rastel, wiser then the councell, sayeth that it is no good reason.
            
            
               
                  RastelSECTIO. 9. From the first face of the 46. leafe to the seconde face of the 47. leafe.
               
                  
                     Fulk
                  The Bishop affirmeth, that Albertus Pighius, one of the greatest pillers of the Popish parte, findeth fault with the Masse. M. Rastel denying him to be a great piller, (perhaps thinking himselfe to be as great) confesseth that booth he and o
                     •
                  her do so, but that it is not in the body of the Masse, but in the garments, and he saith they shew the better conscience to confesse the trueth, whereas protestants will acknowledge no faults one by an other, which is a shamelesse ly. But what conscience the whole Popish Church hath, hereby it may be seene, that seeing there be faultes in the Masse, so long ago espied, yet not one of them is by the Pope and his cleargie reformed.
            
            
               
                  RastelSECTIO. 10. From the seconde face of the 47. leafe, to the second face of th
                     •
                   48. leafe.
               
                  
                     Fulk
                  That the Bishop in his sermon refuseth to speake of transubstantiation, real presence, or sacrifice, and chuseth to speake of the communion in both kindes, of the Canon of the Masse, and of the priuate Masse, Maister Rastel

sayeth it is a timerous bragging, and vaine glorious weakenesse. But how well he hath quit himselfe in those cases that Maister Rastell imagineth he was afraide to deale with, his learned writings doe more sufficiently declare, to his true prayse, then Maister Rastels rayling surmises are able to obscure. And those thinges beeing taken from the Masse, which he chooseth to speak of, would make the Masse a poore sacrifice, and smally to be regarded.
            
            
               SECTIO. 11. From the second face of the 48. leafe, vnto the first face of the 58. leafe, Wherein he speaketh of seruice in the mother tongue.
                     Rastel
                  
               
               The Bishop reproueth the vse of the vnknowen tonge in the Masse, by the authoritie of S. Paule,
                     Fulk
                   that will haue all things in the Church done to edifying, and that prayers and thankes giuen in the Church be such, as the people to them may answere, Amen.
               Maister Rastell quarreleth that this fault is common to the Masse, with Euensong, and Mattins, therefore it is no proper fault of the Masse. A proper reason: rayling and lying are no peculiar faultes to Maister Rastel, but common to him with Maister Harding, Maister Sanders, Maister Alen, and an hundreth more, therefore he doeth Maister Rastel wrong that reproueth him of rayling and lying. But before he answere the Bishops obiections, he wil make no lesse then fiue obiections him selfe against him, out of the same place of Saint Paule, wherein he triumpheth.
               1 Why all the Psalter of Dauid is read in the English Church, when all the Psalmes be not vnderstoode of all English men? Forsooth syr there is no Psalme, but something may be vnderstoode of euerie Englishe man that hath capacitie of vnderstanding, and the rest, that they may learne to vnderstand them.
               2 How many people be there that vnderstand not the easiest Chapter of the Gospell, muche lesse the Prophets

and Psalmes? But sir they are often read that they may the better be vnderstoode, or at least so much of them, as is necessarie for them to knowe for their saluation.
               3 Where singing is vsed, howe can they vnderstande any thing? Such singing as taketh away vnderstanding is forbidden in our Church, both by the booke and by iniunction.
               4 How can a thousand people vnderstande him that hath a small voice, or Cornishe men, or Northerne men, a fine Londoners speech? &c. The Bishop should haue care to prouide a man, as well for voyce, as for other qualities, able to edifie the people, and suche nations of the Queens obedience as vnderstande not the English tongue, haue their prayers in their owne tongue, whiche he saith, he had forgotten, I thinke he saith as it is, for a lyer should haue a good remembraunce.
               5 He saith we haue one Chapter for the better learned of the Parishe, another for the poorer, which is a flam fiue of his owne deuising. Yet he saith, there would be no end of confusion, if nothing should be read in the congregation, but that which should be vnderstoode of all that are present: as though he were wiser then the holie Ghoste, which in expresse wordes hath so commaunded, that al may learne, that all may be comforted, meaning all the congregation, not a man of a straunge language comming in chaunceably or curiously, beeing none of that flocke.
               But what answere hath he to Saint Paule? euen a most shamefull shifte and impudent lie. Namely, that Saint Paule speaketh onely of preaching, which he graunteth must be in the vulgar tongue, and the Gospell and Pistle he could be content should be also, if it pleased the Popes holinesse. But Saint Paule nameth expressely, not onely preaching, but also praying, giuing of thankes, and singing of Psalmes or Hymnes. But he obiecteth that Saint Paule saith, he that speaketh with tongues edifieth himselfe, and he that giueth thankes in

a strange tongue, doeth giue thankes well: It is true, if his prayer and speeche be godly and priuate, but in the congregation, the Apostle by no meanes alloweth any man to vse a strange tongue. Yes saith M. Rast. if there be an interpreter. In deede S. Paule speaketh of them which had a miraculous gifte of strange tongues, which might be vsed to set forth Gods glorie, so that there were an interpreter, that the Churche might be profited, otherwise he would haue Gods gift to be silent in the Churche. To be short, M. Rast. affirmeth preaching it selfe to be so vnnecessarie, that pictures may not onely supplye the wante thereof, but also are necessarie for the faithfull people, and more profitable then a most eloquent and learned sermon of M. Iewell himselfe. Who would reason any longer with such an insensible Idoll? which by ye iust iudgement of God, is made like vnto those Images whiche he worshippeth, and in whome hee putteth his trust.
            
            
               
                  SECTIO. 12. in the 58. leafe.
                     Rastel
                  
               
               The bishoppe alledgeth S. Augustine, which saieth,
                     Fulk
                   that in our praiers wee must not chirpe like birdes, but sing like men. To this he maketh none answere, but that we must learne to vnderstand the English which we read, or els we are chirpers, as though Englishe men could vnderstand no more of English, then of Latine.
            
            
               SECTIO. 13. From the first face of the 56. leafe to the 2. face of 59. leafe.
                     Rastel
                  
               
               The bishoppe citeth a lawe of Iustinian, that the priest shoulde speake with an audible voice,
                     Fulk
                   that the people might say Amen, therefore the people shoulde vnderstande what the minister saith: M. Rastel aunswereth to this nothinge, but yt the people do, and may saye Amen, though they vnderstand him not, so long as there is no mistrust in the persons faith & honesty. So that belike, if the priest be a knaue, no man shoulde saye Amen to his

masse. Good stuffe I warrant you. But in that the people said Amen to the priests wordes of consecration, he will prooue like a luftie logician, whiche findeth no reason, but much rethorike in yt bishops sermon, yt they did exclude al figuration, and significatiō of his body. We wil reason no longer, M.R. hath gottē the day, and that with maine logike. And as for the second abuse, of not receiuing in both kindes, if it were any abuse, it is the fault (he saith) of the bishops & priests, and not of the masse, which consecrateth in both kinds. But seeing receiuing is made one of the parts of the masse, receiuing in one kind onely, is an abuse of the masse it self. I know he wil answer, the priest receiueth in both kindes. In deede if the sacrament had bene instituted for priests onely, the aunswere had bene somewhat, but if the blood of Christ pertaine to more then priestes, surely the sacrament of his blood shoulde not be denyed to anye, for whome he shedde his blood.
            
            
               
                  Rastel.SECTIO. 14. From the second face of the 59. leafe, to the second face of 61. leafe.
               
                  
                     Fulk.
                  The bishop saide, the Canon of the masse for manie causes is a verie vaine thinge, and so vncertaine, that no man can redily tell on whom to father it. Notwithstanding the bishoppe saith for many causes, yet Master Rastell taketh exceptions to his argument, as though for the vncertaintie of the author onely, it shoulde be refused: comparing it most leudely with certaine bookes of holy scripture, the indighters of which, although they be not knowne, yet the onely author is both knowen, and acknowledged to be the holy Ghost. But Pope Innocent the third, saith, it came from the Apostles, other say from Gregory the first, & other from Gregory the thirde. But that it came neither from the Apostles, nor frō Gregory the first, euen that place which M.Ra. citeth out of Greg. lib. 7. ep. 63. doth proue sufficiently. For there Greg. reproueth the order of the liturgie or canon vsed in his time,

because the Lords praier by that order, was not said ouer the sacramēt, as wel as ye praier of Scholasticus. But M.R. will haue Scholasticus to signifie a scholer or disciple of Christ, and not to be a proper name, which is altogether vntrue & vnlikely, for if Greg. had thought any Apostle or disciple of Christ to haue bin ye auctor of it, he would neuer haue takē vpō him to reproue it, & seing he thoght it expediēt yt the lords praier should be said ouer ye sacrament, which is not vsed in the popish canon, it followeth also that Gregorie the first, was not the author of the popish canon. And so it is not prooued to haue bene made within the compasse of sixe hundreth yeres after Christ.
            
            
               SECTIO. 15. From the second face of the 61. leafe, to the first face of the 63. leaf
                     Rastel
                  
               
               Here he chargeth the bishop with a shamefull lye,
                     Fulke.
                   for saying that the priest in the canon desireth God to blesse Christ his body, denying any such thing to be in ye Latin canon, but confesseth yt the Graecians vse such words, and excuseth thē, by vehemency of desire, wheras those words do proue, yt the authors of those liturgies beleeued not ye bread to be turned into the body of Christ, which they would neuer haue praied yt God shuld blesse, vpō any vehemency of desire, to confesse ye body of Christ to haue need of sanctification. But to returne to ye Latine canon, I pray you M.R. what be these Dona sancta & sacrificia, those gifts & holy sacrifices which he desireth God to blesse, ye bread & wine? what holines is in thē before they be consecrated? So for al your loud lying clamors, the canon is not constant with it self, or your heresie of transsubstantiation agreeth not with the canon. Also yt M. of the sentence, lib. 4. dist. 13. plainly affirmeth yt your masse is called Missa, because the Angell ye is praied for, is sent to consecrate the body of Christ, which praier is saide after the priests consecration.
            
            
               SECTIO. 16. From the first face of the 63. leafe to the second face of the 64. leaf in the which he speaketh of the sacrifice of the masse.
                     Rastel
                  
               
               
                  He would know what blasphemie it is for the priest to offer Christ to his father in a propitiatorie sacrifice. Verily so great blasphemie, as none can lightly be greater. First because it taketh away the eternall and vnsuccessible priesthood of Christ. Secondly, because it maketh the priest more excellent then Christ. For euery sacrifice is excepted for the dignitie of him which offereth it, so the sacrifice of Christ, which by his eternall spirite offered vp himselfe, was acceptable vnto God. Heb. 9. But M.R. being forsaken of the scripture, flyeth to ye sayings of the doctors, that not onely the priest, but all ye Church offereth Christe, neuertheles the olde fathers euen by saying so, declare that they meane not to set vp a propitiatory sacrifice, but onely to celebrate a remembraunce of the only, & singular sacrifice of Christ. 
                     Chrysost. ad Heb. cap. 10. Hom. 17. Hoc autem quod facimus &c. But this that we do, is done in remembrance of that which was done. For do this (saith he) in remembrance of me. We make not another sacrifice as the high priest, but the same alwayes, but rather we worke the remembraunce of that sacrifice. And August Contra Faust. Man. lib. 20. cap. 18. Vnde iam Christiani, &c. Whereupon now the Christians do celebrate ye memorie of the same sacrifice once finished, by holy oblation and participation of the bodie & blood of Christ. Contra aduersari
                           ••
                         lag. & proph. cap. 18. He calleth the death of Christ, Vnum, singulare, & solum verum sacrificium, the one singular, and onely true sacrifice. These places with manye other, are sufficient to expounde what they meane, when in any other place figuratiuely and vnproperly. they call the celebration of the communion, an oblation or sacrifice of the bodie and blood of Christ. It is great leudenesse and deceiptfulnes to vrge the termes vsed by the doctors, and to refuse their meaning sufficiently expressed in diuers places of their writings.
            
            
               
                  
                     Rastel
                  
                  SECTIO. 17. in the 64. leafe.
               
                  
                     Fulk
                  Whereas the bishop saith, it is Christ which presenteth

                  
                     •
                  s, and maketh vs a sweet oblation in the sight of his father, M. Rastell denyeth that it followeth not, that the priest offereth not Christ: because Saint Augustine saith de ciuit dei lib. 10. cap. 20. that as the church is offered by Christ, so Christ is offered by the Church. But that which Augustine maketh here common to al the Church, maister Rastel restreineth to his popish priests. And although Augustine in the same place expounde himselfe sufficiently when he saith; the daily sacrifice of the church is a sacrament of the oblation of Christ, yet in Cap. 5. of the same book he speaketh most plainely: Sacrificium ergo visibile inuisibilis sacrificij sacramentum, id est, sacrum signum est: Therefore the visible sacrifice, is a sacrament, that is to say, an holy signe of the inuisible sacrifie. What can bee saide more plainly concerning his meaning by the terme of sacrifice?
            
            
               SECTIO. 18. From the first face of the 65. leafe to the ende of the 67. leafe.
                     Rastel
                  
               
               The blasphemous prayers of the Popishe Canon, which desireth God to accept the body of his sonne,
                     Fulk.
                   as he did accept the sacrifice of Abel and of Melchisedech, he excuseth by vehemency of deuotion, and by ye vnworthines of ye offerer, as though either of both should be ye cause, why Christs body should not be acceptable of it selfe. Last of all, he flyeth to ye example of the figuratiue speaches vsed by the holy ghost in the Psalmes and canticles, as where God is saide to sleepe, to awake as giant refreshed from his wine, yea & to the rethoricall figures vsed by men, as he saith by Bernard, Bonauentur, Gregorie, & in ye hymmes of the church, which he matcheth vnfitly with ye holy scriptures. But how will he make this prayer a figuratiue speach, that it may be excused by any such example? For seeing he will admit no figure in the word, body or oblation, the other wordes are plaine without figure, God to accept the sacrifice of Abel &c.
            
            
               
               
                  Rastle.SECTIO. 19. From the 68. leafe, to the seconde face of the 69. leafe.
               
                  
                     Fulk.
                  The foolish prayer of the Canon, that an Angel should carie away the body of Christ, he defendeth to be meant after a spirituall manner, & caueleth of the bishops translating of perferri to be caried away, which signifieth to be caried vp, which is a toy to mocke an Ape, for neither doth the bishop talke of Angels backes, & such other bables as M. Rastel deliteth to prate of, but of the fond absurditie of the Papistes, which imagine the ministerie of Angels necessarie for the carying of Christs body, (or as he saith excusing the matter) for ye acceptaciō of their sacrifice. But in very deede, this prayer being taken out of the old liturgies, wherein they desired not the sacrament, but their sacrifice of praise and thankesgiuing to be presented to God by the ministery of Angels, is so absurde, when it is applyed to the transubstantiated body, that it can haue no reasonable sense, as it had in the liturgie cited by S. Ambrose and other old liturgies, where the like prayer is made for their sacrifice, but they beleued not their sacrifice to be the very natural body of Christ, as the Papists say they doe.
            
            
               
                  
                     Rastle.
                  
                  SECTIO. 20. in the 69 leafe.
               Where the bishop giueth ouer, to speak further of the Canon,
                     Fulk.
                   maister Rastel saith, it was because he had no mater against it, but his owne misunderstanding. But what matter he had, & howe well hee hath mainteined it, his aunsweres to maister Harding sufficiently declare.
            
            
               
                  
                     Rastell.
                  
                  SECTIO. 21. in the 70. leafe.
               Against adoration of the sacrament, he saith we haue no arguments at al,
                     Fulk.
                   but such as may serue for ouerthrow of all orders in the Church. In deede these argumentes

may well and worthily serue to ouerthrow all plantes, not planted by Christ. For why may not one hatchet serue to cut downe an hundreth fruitlesse and hurtfull trees?
            
            
               
                  SECTIO. 22. in the same leafe to the second face of the 71. leafe.
                     Rastel
                  
               
               That Christ gaue no commaundement of adoration,
                     Fulk.
                   he saith, it is no sufficient reason, first because we must not condemne all voluntary seruice of God, which is without his commaundement. Then belike S. Paul was not well aduised, when he condemned 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; that is, voluntarie worshippe of God without his commaundement Coll. 2. vers. 23. And where as he cauilleth of them yt worshipped our sauiour Christ in ye fleshe, I aunswere, as many as acknowledged him to be ye sonne of god, knewe they had an expresse cōmandemēt to worship him. The rest reuerenced him as the prophet of God. And whereas he saith like a protestant, that an argument of authority negatiue, is naught and protestant like, I aunswere an argument of mans authoritie negatiue is naught, but an argument of Gods authority negatiue, I am content it be counted protestant like, in as much as God hath expresly forbidden, what so euer he hath not commaunded in his worship. Deuter. 12. vers. 32. Contrariwise to reason from the authoritie of men negatiuely, is Papistlike, and the best argument they haue for many things, as if they be asked why say they not masse in englishe? they will answere, because the Church hath not commanded them. Why doe you not giue the communion to Infants? Maister Rastel saith in this booke, because the Church doth not commaund it. Why doth not the priest weare his chisible & other vestments at euen song? Because the church hath not commaunded it. But maister Rastel saith, Christ hauing said the sacrament to be his body, needed not to commaunde the same to bee worshippid, no more then the king when he speaketh to the Lords in the darke, needeth to bid thē put of their caps. A dark example for such an obscure argumēt. But when will he proue, that Christ

is the same in the sacrament, that the king is in the darke? for remoue the darke, & the king is seene, but take away the accidentes of breade and wine by your owne school
                     •
                   doctrine, and where is the bodie of Christ?
            
            
               
                  Rastle.SECTIO. 23. From the seconde face of the 71. leafe, to the 2. face of the 72. leafe.
               He decideth the argument taken out of the authoritie of saint Paule negatiuely,
                     Fulk.
                   who declareth the whole institution of Christ, and neuer willed adoration to be vsed to the sacrament. And asketh whether S. Paul command vs to stand, kneele, lye, or fit, to tumble, leane vpon brest, or elbowes: I aunswere whatsoeuer of these gestures is decent & orderly he hath appointed, the other he hath forbidden. And yet the protestantes logike, which hee doth so delicately contemne, is not so simple to make no diference betweene matters of substance, and matters of circumstance, as hee by his Popish sophistrie doth confounde.
            
            
               
                  Rastle.SECTIO. 24. From the secōd face of the 72. leafe to the second face of the 74. leafe wherin he beginneth to speak of adoration of the sacramēt.
               Where the bishop saith that the olde doctours neuer make mention of adoration of the sacrament,
                     Fulk.
                   maister Rastell saith, the argument is both naught and lying. Naught, because it may bee they vsed it although they neuer spake of it, & lying, because he saith they do speake of it. But to aunswere the naughtinesse of the argument, I say maister Rastell is both a naughtie and lying gatherer of the bishoppes argument, dismembring that which hee ioyneth together thus. Christ, his Apostels, and the primitiue church, neuer made mention of adoration of ye sacrament, therefore is not to bee vsed. And concerning the lying supposed, I answere, that no auncient doctour speaketh one word of adoration of the sacrament as the verye sonne of GOD, but either of adoration of

Christ in heauen, or of worshipping and adoring, that is, reuerently handling and honouring of the mysteries of Christ, and no more of this sacrament, then of the other, namely baptisme. For aunswere to the places he citeth out of Chrysostome, Ambrose, Augustine, I will referre the reader to mine answere, vnto the 45.46. & 47. Chapters of the second booke of Heskins parleament, where this question is handled more at large. Sauing that which he citeth out of Hom. 83. out of Chrysost. that we are fed with that thing which the Angels do honour, which we confesse to be the body of Christ after a spirituall maner, yet pertaineth it nothing to adoration of the sacrament. And much lesse that he citeth ex Orat. in Philon. That as we entertaine God here, so he wil receiue vs there with much glorie. Where he speaketh of honouring God, and not adoring the sacrament.
            
            
               
                  SECTIO. 25. in the 74. leafe.
                     Rastel.
                  
               
               The Bishop aunswering a place of Augustine saith,
                     Fulk.
                   we must worship Christ where we eate him, but we eate him in heauen by faith, therefore we must worship him there. M. Rastel sayth we eate him on earth also, but proofe he bringeth none greater then his owne saying, either of reason or authoritie.
            
            
               SECTIO. 26. From the end of the 74. leafe to the first face of the 79. leafe.
                     Rastel.
                  
               
               The Bishop proueth we must seeke Christe in heauen,
                     Fulk.
                   by these reasons. Wee must lift vp our heartes, wee must seeke those things which are aboue in heauen, where Christ is, and not the things yt are vpon earth, where Christ is not. C
                        •
                     ll. 3. And our conuersation is in heauen, from whence wee looke for our Sauiour, &c. Phil. 3. M. Rastel saith, the conclusion is inferred madly and miserably, bicause these textes do no more disproue Christes body to bee on earth really, then they proue our bodies to be in heauen really, as in this short example, our conuersation

is in heauen: and yet Paule was on earth in body, when he saide this: O wise and happie concluder! but blinde and blockish interpretour, which reasoneth, as though the worde Conuersation in Saint Paules saying, did signifie presence or being, whereas it signifieth franches or libertie 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   our franches, freedom, or conuersation is in heauen. Where is nowe your madd and miserable conclusion?
               The Bishops arguments therefore on these places stand firme and vnmoueable, that Christ is not on earth in body, but in heauen, where we must seeke him, not climbing with ladders, (as it pleaseth Maister Rastel to scoffe in so graue matters, but ascending by faith, and affection set on heauenly and spirituall things. As for his exposition of Sursian corda, howe wholesome it is, you may gather by this one note, that in the very beginning▪ he saith, that the body of Christe is not onely lying on the altar, and caried in mens handes, but also broken and diuided. The places hee citeth out of Saint Augustine for adoration, be aunswered in mine aunswere to Maister Heskins before mentioned.
            
            
               
                  Rastel.SECTIO. 27.
               The Bishop saith, that adoration of the sacrament is a newe deuise of Pope Honorius,
                     Fulke.
                   of three hundreth yeares agoe, and after him Vibanus the fourth made an holiday of Corpus Christi, &c. Maister Rastel is angrie, that three hundreth yeares should be counted a little while agoe, when it is not three score yeares since Luther sprang vp. But if Luther haue taught any doctrine that was not receiued in the Church a thousand and fiue hundreth yeares ago, we are content it be accounted newe, but whatsoeuer may be proued to haue bene taught 1500. yeares agoe, must needes be old, though Luther be newe, and in comparison of that age. Honorius and Vrbanus are but yong children. But remitting the antiquitie, Maister Rastell will stande for the veritie; bicause the Popes lacked no

counsell. Neither by your doctrine needed they any. 2. The Vniuersities were not without great schollers. Such as those blinde and hereticall times affoorded. 3. Religious houses and orders were not destroyed. Yea, they swarmed with Locustes to maintaine the kingdome of Absaddon. 4. The holy Ghost in true Catholikes was inuincible. Yea, but there were fewe true Catholikes in those days. 5. The wicked spirit in heretiques would haue bene venterous. Yea, the Pope, the Archheretique of the world was venterous ynough, when he set vp such idolatrie. 6. A good man with the daunger of his life, would haue spoken the trueth. So did many good men, which cost them their liues. 7. An heretique for fame would not haue passed vpon death: what neede an heretique feare death, when heresie was so generally receiued, that the true Catholikes were condemned and burned for heretiques, by the name of Albigenses, Waldenses, Pauperes de Lugduno, and such like, which from time to time were persecuted, imprisoned, and burned, for refusing and disalowing such idolatrie, and false worshipping.
               These be the worshipfull reasons he hath to proue the veritie of this bread worship, which after he hath dilated more at large, hee commeth at length to admiration of the seruice of Corpus Christi day, made by Thomas Aquinas, which hee thinkeh to be so excellent, that the very sound and sense of the Anthemnes, Respondes, and Versicles, declare whence they proceeded. And I am of the same opinion, for the comparing of such thinges to the sacrament, as pertaine nothing vnto it, declareth, that such comparison came from the spirit of man, & not from the spirite of God. As where it is saide, 3. Reg 19. That Helias sawe a cake of bread at his head &c. And Iob complaineth of the crueltie of his seruants, that would haue eaten his flesh. Iob. 31.
               And as for the holiday, though it were instituted but of late yeares, yet he taketh it sufficient to proue the adoration necessarie, which could not be seene in the Church

twelue hundreth yeres before, or els that holiday should haue bene set vp long before.
            
            
               
                  Rastel.SECTIO. 28.
               
                  
                     Fulk.
                  The Bishop saide, that for the space of twelue hundreth yeares after Christ, this worshipping of the sacrament was neuer knowne nor practised in any place. M. Rastel after his courteous manner saith, he lyeth, for he hath alledged S. Ambrose and S. Augustine before, to proue that the sacrament is to be worshipped: and now citeth Therdoret, Euthymius, Emissenus, Iames, Basil, and Chrisostome in their Liturgies for the same purpose. But the aunswere is easie to be made, none of all these speake of that worshipping or adoration of the sacrament which Pope Honorius commaunded, but of honouring, reuerencing, worshipping, or adoring of the sacrament as diuine mysteries, which honouring, worshipping, or adoring, we all confesse to be due to the blessed sacramentes, not onely to the Lordes supper, but also to the sacrament of baptisme. For none of all these writers beleeued the carnall presence of Christe in the sacrament, which the Papistes hold. Saint Augustine denyeth the sacrament to be that body which was crucified, in Psal. 98. Saint Ambrose calleth the sacrament the figure of the body and bloud of Christe. De sacra. lib. 4. cap. 5.
               Theodorete (whose saying hee citeth) being flatly against transubstantiation, as you may read more at large in mine aunswere to Heskins Lib. 3. cap. 56. calleth in the same Dialogue the sacrament, the tokens or signes of the body of Christe. And in his first Dialogue, he saith: The tokens which are seene, hee hath honoured with the name of his body and bloud, not chaunging their nature, but adding grace to their nature. His discourse at large is set downe in mine answer to Hes. li. 3. ca. 52. Euthymius in 6. Ioan. saith, that ye words of Christ must be vnderstod spiritually, & the sacramēts must be considred with inward 
                     •
                  ye, 
                     •
                  as mysteries.
               The very wordes of Emissenus which M. Rastel citeth,

expresse his minde to be of a spirituall presence. Beholde with thy faith, saith he, honour and wonder at the holie bodie and bloud of Christ. The very name of the gift which is vsed in the liturgie falsely ascribed to Saint Iames, declareth that the Author of that liturgie did not beleue it to be the naturall bodie of Christe, but a gifte or token in remembraunce thereof. The prayer whiche is made in those liturgies falsely ascribed to Chrysostome and Basil, at the lifting of the sacrament, proueth that they did not beleeue the bread to be chaunged into the bodie of Christ, after the wordes of consecration. For then they would not haue prayed, that God would giue to them the bodie and bloud of his sonne, and by them to the people, if they had them present before. And whereas they all cried, Sancta sanctis, holy thinges belong to holie men, it was not to call the people to worshippe the sacrament, which they lifted a little, but not ouer their heades to be seene, but to charge them that were not baptised to departe, and to prepare the rest to the worthie receiuing of the sacrament. Maister Rastell so great a Chrysippus and Aristotle of Logike, neuerthelesse vseth these argumentes to proue adoration. But leauing these, he asketh if any within that compasse of 1200. yeares beleeued the sacrament to be the very bodie of Christ: and if that be graunted, whether the very bodie and bloud of Christ be not to be worshipped, and then bringeth in Damascen, and Lanfrancus. Of the former it may be doubted, but very grossely he writeth, the other was an enimie of Berengarius, 200. yeares before Honorius the Author of this adoration. I answere breefely, although the carnall presence was receiued two or three hundreth yeares before Pope Honorius, yet there can no adoration be proued, for at this day the Lutheranes admitte the carnall presence, yet they abhorre adoration, saying the very bodie of Christe is present to be eaten, but not to be worshipped.
            
            
               
               
                  RastellSECTIO. 29. From the first face of the 89. leafe to the 93. leafe.
               
                  
                     Fulk
                  The Bishop sayde, that the schoolemen perceiuing the daunger of idolatrie that was vnto the ignorant people, in worshipping the cake if it were not consecrated, gaue warning to the people to worship it vnder this condition, if it were consecrated. M. Ra. like a Doctor determiner, cutteth of al the reasons of the schoolemen, and saith they were not the best learned, that so decide the controuersie. For there is no daunger at all vnto the people, so long as their intent is to worship God and the bodie of Christ. Example also he bringeth, that if a man honour him which is not his father, in steede of his father, because all the parishe saith he is his father, he doeth not amisse. In deede, if that man doe the duetie of a father to his supposed sonne, I thinke the errour is not greatly hurtefull to him that honoureth him as his Father. Agayne sayeth Maister Rastell, suppose that one were so like thine owne Father (whiche is possible ynough) that it could not be discerned, whiche of the two were thy true father, thou werest not to be blamed, if thou honour the one in steede of the other. I aunswere, suppose it were so, which is vnlikely ynough, I would thinke he were an vnaduised child, which would not inquire which of the two were his true father, before he chose to honour either of them. But Maister Rastel asketh, if he should honour no father, because he could not discerne the one from the other. And I likewise aske him whether hee should honour two men for his father, or two fathers in steede of one, because he knoweth nor which is his right Father. Finally, I would aske suche a not profound learned Maister of Arte, as Rastel is, but such a simple fellowe as Maister Rastell talketh withall in this discourse, whether an vnconsecrated cake bee as like the bodie of Christe, as one man may be to an other? I weene he would say no. But then M. Rastel would take the tale

out of his mouth, and reply that an vnconsecrated cake, and a consecrated, be as like as any two men can be. But then I would aske him, whether any thing wherein they may be counted like, is either the thing or the cause, or the signe and marke of the thing that is worshipped? If not, his two cases are as like to these of the sacrament, as an aple is like to an oyster.
            
            
               SECTIO. 30. From the first face of the 93. leafe. to the first face of the 98. leafe.
                     Rastel.
                  
               
               Three leaues and an halfe of this section are spent in a fonde quarrel of Maister Rastels picking,
                     Fulk.
                   that the Bishop should ascribe that opinion to Dunce and Durande, which is not theirs, but proper to Thomas of Aquine, against which they reason. But for al his impudent & shamelesse rayling & charging the Bishop with lying, it is Rastel himselfe which is the lyer and the slaunderer, for that whiche the Bishoppe speaketh generally of the schoolemen, he draweth maliciously vnto Dunce and Durande. Thomas holdeth that transubstantiation is necessarie, or else the Churche should committe idolatrie in falling downe before bread. Dunce holdeth that if there were no transubstantiation graunted, yet the presence might well stande, and the adoration to, as Maister Rastel saith, but he taketh parte with Thomas. But if the reason of Thomas be good for the presence of the bread, because it is a creature, why not also for the accidents of bread which are creatures also▪
               
               To the saying of Augustine In sermo ad Infantes, That whiche you see on the table is breade, Maister Rastel sayeth, it is a reason of Tinkers, Taylers, and Coblers, (O learned Clearke) and not of learned Schollers, to say it is bread, because it is called bread. But learned Maister Rastel, Saint Augustine doeth not say it is called breade, but he saith it is bread, and moreouer he maketh their senses Iudges thereof, Quid-etiam oculi

vestri renunciant. Which also your eyes do tell you. And that your learned penne hath set downe out of Prosper, which is not to be found in Augustines workes, yet maketh it nothing against the remayning of bread, but only saith, that vnder the visible kindes of breade and wine, we honour the bodie and bloud of Christ.
               To the saying of Gelasius, that the substance and nature of bread and wine doth not ceasse to be, he aunswereth that Gelasius doth expound him selfe straight after, where he saith: But they remaine in the propertie of their nature, as though nothing remained, but whitensse, thicknesse, &c. O impudent falsifier. Is substance and properties of nature all one? Againe I aske what are they that remaine in their propertie of nature, but the breade and wine? Finally the very argument whiche he vseth against Eutiches most plainely confuteth Rastell, for a moste shamefull and shamelesse peruerter of this Doctours meaning, for he concludeth, that as the substance of bread & wine remaine in the sacrament, so the bodie in Christ, after the assumption of the Diuine nature.
               The like beastly racking he vseth of the wordes of Theodoret, which vseth the same argument against the Eutichians.
               But in the end he saith, it must not be considered what one or two haue saide, but what the whole consent of the Church is, and if it were graunted that Gelasius and Theodoret denied transubstantiation, yet they graunting the carnall presence, it were a small matter, and nothing at all against the Catholikes, which hold of the generall councell of Laterane. What say you learned M. Rastel: is it not to be regarded, nor maketh it any thing against you, what Gelasius the Bishop of Rome hath written, whiche you holde can not erre? But where he sayeth, that they bothe graunt the carnall presence, I must sende the Reader to mine aunswere vnto the 60. Chapter of the 3. booke of Hesk. Parlea. for Gelasius, and to the 52. and 56. chapters of the same booke, for Theodoret. How vnlearnedly he affirmeth Cyprians errour

of rebaptization to be no heresie, because the church had not determined the contrarye, I passe ouer, when on the one side the bishoppe of Rome was against it, on the other side a whole councell in Affrica was for it.
            
            
               
                  SECTIO. 31. in the 98. leafe.
                     Rastell
                  
               
               The bishop shewed out of the schoole men,
                     Fulk
                   that if a man worship the accidents of breade, Idolatrie may bee done to the sacrament. M. Rastell saith, not to the sacrament, but to the accidents. But do not you papists call the accidents, the sacrament? else what difference make you betweene sacramentum & rem sacramenti, in S. Augustine, the sacrament and the thing of the sacrament? Againe he saith, the fault were not in the institution of Christ, but in the silence of the priest and simplicitie of the people, that were no better taught. As though Christ did euer institute the sacrament to be worshipped after any maner of Latri
                        •
                     
                   or Doulia, of which he reasoneth brutishly with putting such cases, if a man shoulde haue worshipped the only face of Christ as God, which no man would euer haue done, or his garment, which had bene idolatry whosoeuer had done it.
            
            
               SECTIO. 32. From the 99. leafe to the 103. leafe.
                     Rastell
                  
               
               Whereas the bishop lamenteth the miserable case of the people which are brought into idolatrie▪
                  
                     Fulk
                   with these blinde distinctions, M. Rast. deriding his needlesse and folish pitie, lamenteth the state of the worlde, when such things as are concluded in schooles, should be opened in pulpets, as though there were one doctrine of God for the schooles, and another for the pulpets. Yet he thinketh it not meete to teache the distinctions of the three persons in trinitie, but onely to beleeue as the Churche doth beleeued, as well in the trinitie as in al other articles, and namely in this of the sacrament.
               
                  Which position of his, if it may stand, there needeth none other creed to be preached, but onely this short curtall creed: beleeue as the church beleeueth, & you cannot do amisse.
               But in time of popishe tyrannye, you woulde not haue bin satisfied, if a man examined of his faith in the sacrament, had answered, I beleue as the church teacheth, or I beleeue it to be the body of Christ, as Christ said it, and meant it to be his body: but then you must grope him in fleshe, blood, and bones, as he was borne of the virgine Mary, &c. Whether he beleeue the substance of breade to remaine after the wordes of consecration spoken by the priest, &c. Well, howsoeuer it be, all learning resteth in the brest of reuerende M. Rast. M, of art & student in diuinity, who can with one breath condemne all the pedlers, and pelting craftesmens arguments, deuised in alehouses or shops, and after recited in the protestants schooles: as this, Christ is ascended in body in to heauen, and there sitteth vntill the end of the world, therefore he is absent from the earth in bodie, and consequently is not in the sacrament, an vnlearned argument (saith M. Ra.) as this, can a priest make God? but learned sir, who taught ye people to call that which the priest maketh, their maker? or what, or which of all the reuerend rabbins of poperie, did reprooue the people for so speaking? Againe can one bodie be in more places then one at one time? An argumente of ignoraunte people. O vnlearned Augustine, whiche hath defined, that the bodie of Christ can be but in one place at one time, in Ioan. cap. 7. Tr. 30. If a mouse eat the hos
                        •
                      doth hee ease Christes bodie? A peltinge craftesmans argument.
               What M. Rast. are you so arrogant in opinion of your owne learning, that you will condemne all the schoolemen for pedlers and tynkers, that haue moued, argued, & decided this question, and a hundreth like vnto it? came this question from protestants, or from your owne popish schooles? & not from the schooles onely, but euen

the instructions that haue bene written for euery simple curate, as Manupulus curatorum &c. But if a lerned man expert in liberall sciences (saith M. Rast. a great Master of liberal arts) should vse this argument of the necessitie of Christs body to be in on place: thē it were time to proue the contrarie. Howe I praye you? Because of the nature of a substance which occupieth no place. Is this the philosophie of Louaine? No maruaile if Ramus reproue Aristotle in Logike, when Rastell will set not him onely, but all the phylosophers that euer were, and nature it self to schole, and tell them that it is the nature of a substance to occupie no place, whiche is as muche to saye, as to bee no where, and as Augustine saith, that which is no where, is nothing at all, and so by Master Rastels profound physical philosophie, it is the nature of a substaunce, which al other men affirme to containe all thinges, to be nothing at all.
               But for a further resolution, he sayeth, Christe is in the sacrament, not as in a place locally, but as vnder forme of breade substantially. For before hee hath defined a substaunce to bee in no place: I woulde hee coulde holde him at this definition of Christes presence. If I shoulde reason with him of the nine maners of inesse, or beinge in a thinge, and aske him after whiche of them Christe is in the sacramente, perhappes hee woulde reiect that distribution, as sophistical and vnworthy of his learned answere?
               But Christe (sayeth hee) is in the Sacrament, not as in place locally, then saye I, a man poyntinge to the pyxe hanginge ouer the altar, in whiche the consecrated cake is, muste saye, if hee saye truely, Christe is not there, lykewise poyntinge to the same holden vppe at the sacringe, carryed in procession, or wheresoeuer hee seeth it, muste likewise beleeue and saye, Christ is not there.
               For I am sure he being a Master in all the seuen liberall Arts, is not so ignorant in grammer, but he will confesse

this word, there, to be an aduerb of place: not so forgetful of logike, but that he remembreth what the Predicament Vbi meaneth. And to say the trueth, if the papistes coulde be content with such modest termes as the scripture teacheth, that the bodie of Christ is receiued of the faithfull in the sacrament after a wonderfull and mysticall maner, there needed neither these fond questions, nor any so bitter contention about the sacrament of vnitie. But that they will make an idoll of the Lords supper, and a bayte to satisfie their ambition, couetousnes▪ & licentiousnesse, by the sale of their masses, & applying of their merites: these grosse and monstrous absurdities had neuer beene defended. The contentions of the schoole doctours he forceth not vpon, so long as the Church agreeth. But can your church agree (M. Rast.) when the doctours thereof dissent? If any difference of opinion be betweene Luther and Zuinglius, you crye out of our dissention. If your Church may agree within it selfe, notwithstanding ye infinite brawlings between the Thomists, and Scotists, Albertists, Occanists, about smal matters (as you say,) because all those agree in the chiefest pointes of poperie: I pray you let there be vnitie in our churche, notwithstan-the teachers vary in some matters, not of greatest momēt, agreeing in all necessarie articles of Christian religion. And if Holcot lye, in saying a man may merite by worshipping the deuil, and yet be a popish catholike, Let Luther erre in defending the carnall presence, and yet bee good christian catholike. And if your churche bee not chargeable with Holcots lye, why shoulde our churche beare the blame of Luthers error?
               As for your excuse of Holcots lye, by the schoole distinction of a thing done materially & formally, wherein you shew a high point of learning, with your example of worshippinge of Luther being a diuell in forme of a doctor: I say it is wholesome diuinitie, to iustifie all superstition, Mahometrie and Idolatrie in the world, not onely to be excusable, but also to be meritorious.
            
            
               
               SECTIO. 33. From the first face of the 103. leafe to the 104. leafe.
                     Rastle.
                  
               
               Where the Bishop saide, hee was vnwilling to spende time in discouering the misteries of Popish learning,
                     Fulk.
                   but that the importunitie of Papistes boasting (as though all learning were on their side) enforceth him: Maister Rastell more like a parasite to prouoke his popishe readers to laugh, then a man either of wisedome or honestie, scoffeth & rayleth on him, calling him a bench wistler, rather thē a preacher. But of both their learnings let the worlde iudge.
            
            
               SECTIO. 34. From the 104. leafe to the 111. in which he taketh on him to defende the vanitie of Popish arguments vsed by papists vnder colour of similitudes and allusions.
                     Rastell
                  
               
               The Bishop discouereth this reason of Pope Innocent the thirde, God made two lightes,
                     Fulk
                   the Sunne and the Moone, therefore the Pope is so much aboue the Emperour, as the Sunne is aboue the Moone, Maister Rastell being angrie at this discouery, saith it is no mystery nor argument of strength, yet was it vsed by the Popes holynes which cannot erre. But the Church hath stronger arguments for proofe of this conclusion. First saith Maister Rastell that there be two states, spirituall and temperall it is proued by other reasons, and the first reason he vseth to proue the state spirituall, is much like that of the Popes whiche hee excuseth, Psal. 44▪ and In steede of thy fathers there are sonnes borne vnto thee (meaning saith he the Apostles, and bishopps, and their successours) them shalt thou appoint princes, and rulers ouer all the whole earth. As though none were the sonnes of the Church, but the Apostles, Bishoppes, and their successors, and as though the Prophete spake of temperall rule in this life, and not of a spiritual kingdome and inheritance

of all the worlde, which is common to all the faithfull after this life.
               But to omitte that which is not in controuersie of two states in the worlde, and the excellencye in spirituall thinges, of the ministery of the Churche aboue the office of princes, yet who will either graunt that the ministery is simply superiour to the King or Emperour so that the ministers are not his subiectes, or that the Pope in any respect ought to haue any dignitie as a minister of the gospell, whiche hee disdaineth to preach?
               Another defence of this pontificall argument, is, that it was a sweete and misticall allusion in his familiare letters to the Emperour: In deede greate familyaritie hee had with the Emperours of his time, with whome hee was in continuall discorde. Last of all like a blasphemous Dogge hee compareth it with the argument vsed by S. Paule for the couering of womens heades, taken of nature it selfe, whiche though it will not satisfie a contentious person whome nothing will satisfie, yet is it sufficient and stronge ynough to proue what naturall comlynesse requireth in that case, where as this of the Pope hath no shadowe of reason in it. For all the rest of those argumentes rehearsed by the Bishop, he maketh that generall reason, that their Church hath no custome to contende for them, yet haue they a custome to burne men for refusing such thinges, as they are not able to contende in argument to defende. And as for shauen crownes, and purple sandales, holy water, or praying in one tongue, hee sayeth, they were neuer taken for secreat mysteries in the Church, and if the scriptures applyed to them do not proue them, they take no harme, for by like they are good ynough without the scriptures. Sauing that the saying of Ezechiell Chap. 36. I will sprinkle you with cleane water, hee seeth not, but that it may bee applyed to holy water, though it bee meant of baptisme, because holy water putteth vs in mynde of our baptisme. Where fynde you that meaning

of holy water in all the exorcising or coniuring thereof? A poore shift God wott to defende a beggerly ceremonie.
               As for Ecce duo gladij hic, to prooue that the Pope hath power of both swordes, hee defendeth it to bee good and sufficient. Firste, because Christe had power of both, although hee vsed but one. But what hath the Pope to doe with Christe? Forsooth hee made Peter his lieutenaunt and ruler of all Christians, when hee had him feede his sheepe and lambes, Euen as good a reason as Ecce duo gladij hic.
               
               But what hath the Pope to doe with Peter, if Peter had beene such a one? Forsooth, because hee sitteth at Rome. So did Nero, and was Pontifex Maximus to as good as the Pope. But Barnarde vseth the same texte so. What if Barnarde was disposed to iest with the Pope in his owne interpretations? or if hee were in earnest, can Barnarde make that good which is starke naught?
               Last of all, the shamelesse and blasphemous beast, is not afrayde to compare this argument with the allegorie vsed by the holie Ghoste, Gal. 4. of the two wiues in Abrahams house, that were figures of two Testaments, which the Apostle vsed not to proue, but to declare and shewe plainly, as it were by example, that which hee had before moste substantially proued.
            
            
               SECTIO. 35. From the seconde face of the III. leafe, to the seconde face of the 118. leafe.
                     Rastell
                  
               
               The argumentes where on the masse is builded,
                     Fulk
                   being so absurde as euen his brasen face blusheth to allowe, hee aunswereth, the thinges proued by these argumentes are but the heire and nayles of the masse, and not the substantiall partes thereof, and yet those partes are good

ynough without those argumentes, namely by tradition. For the Corporall was of lynen before the argument of Christes buriall cloath was made for it, Chalices were of goulde and siluer, before the texte, Babylon is a cuppe of goulde, was alleadged for them. And facer
                        •
                     
                   signifieth to sacrifice, though Virgils verse had neuer beene written, Cum faciam vitula. For in the Iudges, Manoah saide to the Angell faciamus tibi haedum de capris, wee may offer to thee a kidde of the Goates: O subtile Maister Rastell. Where learned you first that Manoah spake latine? Secondlye that hee woulde offer sacrifice to a man, and not rather make readie a kidde to bee eaten of him, whome he thought to haue beene a man? for it followeth immediately in the text that Manoah knew not that hee was an Angell of GOD, least you shoulde imagine that Manoah had beene a Papist, and woulde haue offered a sacrifice to an Angell. But yet to couer his shame with impudence, he saith he will bee yet bolder, and applie whatsoeuer hee findeth in the scripture to mainteine Popish ceremonies, hee careth not howe fitlye, Theologia Mistica, hee saith hee woteth well non est argumentis apta. Mysticall Diuinitie is not fit to make argumentes of. But GOD keepe our faith from grounding vppon such diuinitie, as will neither satisfie our conscience, nor conuince the errors of other.
               Laste of all, least hee shoulde passe ouer this place without a blasphemie, hee compareth these balde reasons of Siluester and Durande, with the argument that Saint Paule maketh. 1. Cor. 9. vppon this text of the law, Thou shalt not binde vp the mouth of the Oxe that treadeth out the corne: therefore GOD which prouideth that beastes labouring shoulde not want their foode▪ much more woulde haue the minister of the Gospell rewarded for his trauell. Whiche is a most pithie argument, from the lesse to the more, as euerye learned man and godly will acknoweledge.
            
            
               
               SECTIO. 36. From the second face of the 118. leafe to the 127. leafe, in which he treateth of the priuate Masse.
                     Rastel
                  
               
               Whereas the Bishop proueth the priuate Masse to be contrarie to the institution of Christe,
                     Fulk
                   which ordeined a communion. First M. Rastell will not vnderstand what is meant by this word, priuate Masse, for al Masses (he saith) are common, which if it be true, to vse his own examples of an open houshold and a common of pasture, they be fooles that will pay any money for them. Afterward vnderstanding a priuate Masse to be when no man receiueth with the Priest, he asketh whether the Masse saide on Easter day be good, bicause there be a number of communicants, or whether any other Masse be good, at which be many yt receiue with ye Priest? I answer him, those Masses in yt point are lesse euil then the priuate Masses, in which there is no communion, bicause they erre not in that one point, although they are abhominable in many other. But now let vs heare how M. Rast. looketh the Doctours in the faces, which were cited by the Bishop against priuate Masse, as he promiseth to doe. First to Clemens and Dionysius he aunswereth nothing, but cauilleth at the Bishops manner of citing them, not for writings of such antiquitie as they are said to be, but yet sufficient to choake the Papistes which boast of their authoritie. And trifleth of the oyle, salt, singing, and in Dionysius which ceremonies as we haue not in our Church, no more haue the Papistes in such order as he rehearseth thē. To Iustine likewise he aunswereth nothing, but cauilleth of the water vsed to be mixed with the wine in his time, which was no ceremonie, but a custome of sobrietie: and of sending the communion to them that were absent, which we vsed not, neither is he able to proue that they vsed to send it, as the communion, but as almes rather, of the great plentie of breade and wine that was accustomed to be offred. And if it were proued to bee the communion, it maketh more

strongly against the priuate Masse, that they would suffer none that were absent not to communicate, much lesse would they suffer them which were present, not to receiue with the minister. The sayings of Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, Leo, he passeth ouer with confession, that the people in their dayes vsed to receiue with the Priest commonly, but hee denyeth they did so alway. Which hee weeneth to proue, by that Chrysostome saith, they did offer daily, and Ambrose saith, that in Greece they were accustomed to receiue but once a yeare. And he thinketh it were absurde, that there should be but one Communion in a yeare in Greece. But hee is much deceiued, for Saint Chrysostome as he confesseth, speaketh of often receiuing, ad Ephe. Hom. 3. and would haue all that receiued not to depart, euen as the Canons of the Apostles, and Gregorie in his Dialogues doe shewe. And although many of the people were negligent in comming to the Lordes table, yet was there no priuate Masse, bicause yt in those great Churches, there were always a great number of the Clergie, which receiued with the Bishop, vpon paine of excommunication.
               To the prayers of the Masse, which being in the plurall number suppose a number present▪ and a number of communicants, hee saith, they argue the antiquitie of the Masse to bee aboue sixe hundreth yeares after Christe: which is not so: in deede they argue the forme of those prayers to be ancienter then the priuate Masse, and more they argue not. But they may be vsed (saith Maister Raster) bicause at euery Masse be more present, then any bodily eye can see. O absurde Asse, that so arrogantly braggeth of learning, and so proudly despiseth so learned a Fathers arguments. Admit, that in steede of legions of diuels that be present at euery Masse, whose seruice it is, there were so many legions of Angels present as he fantasieth: doeth the Priest saying Oremus, Let vs pray, speake to the Angels that are present to pray with him yea, why not? will some froward Papist say. But to whome speaketh

he when he turneth about and sayth, Orate pro me fratres & sorores, pray for me brethren and sisters. Be there hee Angels and she Angels also? And when he prayeth that the oblation which they haue offered be saluation to all that haue receiued it, doeth he meane that the Angels haue taken their rytes of the Priest, though none of the people be present, but perhaps one sorie boy that helpeth him to say Masse? But the Prieste (he saith) is no priuate person, but a common officer, euen as when hee baptizeth. But is hee such a Magistrate to altar and chaunge the institution and ordinaunce of GOD? Baptisme may bee ministred to one alone according to the institution thereof, but the Communion which is a feast of the Church, ought not to bee kept without a number of guestes. To all the rest of the authorities cited by the Bishop out of the Canons of the Apostles, the decree of Calixtus, the Dialogues of Gregorie, hee saith they proue nothing, but that the people vsed to communicate, and there be diuers thinges in those writings, which wee doe not obserue, as though wee haue bound our selues to the obseruing of mens decrees as the Papistes haue. But what so euer they haue agreeable to the worde of GOD wee obserue and willingly, although hee slaunder our Church to suffer them to be present at the Communion, which doe not communicate, which is a most impudent and shamelesse lye: and yet easily to bee borne in comparison of their blasphemies, which he barketh out against the Priesthoode of our Sauiour Christe, saying, the order of Melchisedech should haue an end, if their stinking Masse were omitted, and that their Priestes must daily enter into Sancta sanctorum. O Antichristian Helhoundes, that challenge vnto your selues the peculiar Priesthoode of Christe, who onely is a Priest for euer after the order of Melchisedech, and hath no successours in his Priesthoode. Heb. 7.
               O blasphemous dogges, that will haue your hedge Priests to enter into Sancta sanctorum the most holy places

euery day, whither Christ hath once for all entered, and found eternall redemption. Heb. 6.
               And these blasphemies he had rather defend, then giue ouer the blasphemie of the priuate Masse, which with neither learning, modestie, nor conscience, he or any of al the rout of them is able to defend, either as lawfull or as auncient.
            
            
               
                  
                     Rastel.
                  
                  SECTIO. 37. in the 127. leafe.
               
                  
                     Fulk.
                  To the challenge which the Bishop made against the priuate Masse, he aunswereth nothing, but that they haue no priuate Masse, for all Masses are one common masse, trifling vpon the terme, when he can not say one word to the matter.
            
            
               
                  RastelSECTIO. 38. From the second face of the 127. leafe, to the 131. leafe, in which he treateth of receiuing the communion in both kindes.
               
                  
                     Fulke.
                  To the Bishops challenge, that the Communion was neuer ministred in one kinde to any man in the space of 600. yeres after Christes: he answereth first, that if it were not, yet their Church is out of daūger, bicause it is a matter indifferent for the Lay people to receiue in one kind, or in both, alledging for proofe a saying of Luther, written before hee was throughly conuerted from Papistrie. Secondly, hee will proue that it was receiued vnder one kind, first bicause in Luke. 24. and Act. 20. there is no mention but of bread. Ergo, Christe and Paule gaue them the communion in one kind, a good consequent. By the same I may proue, that Christe and Paule receiued them selues but bread, bicause there is no mention of wine. And yet the Papistes holde it necessarie, that the Priest which ministreth, should of necessitie receiue in both kindes. And whereas he is ashamed of this negatiue consequence, he chargeth vs with like reasoning, out of some place of Augustine, or Irenaeus, &c. Wheras he slandreth vs falsly, except it be vpon such an affirmatiue as excludeth all other things.
               
                  With like impudence he saieth, we doe not deny, but that in Tertullians time the sacrament in one kinde was carried home to their houses, which we doe vtterly deny, neither is he euer able to proue. As false it is, that he saith in Cyprians time it was carried to mens houses in one kinde, for Cyprian saith no such thing, nor any worde sounding to such end. And concerning the custome of sending the sacrament to Bishops that were straungers, which came to Rome, cited by Irenaeus Ad victor, whereby he would proue it was sent vnder one kinde, because wine would soone waxe sower, I say he vnderstandeth not what the custome was, but imagineth that the sacrament was sent a thousand myle of to those Bishops, whereas it was onely from the Table to the places where they did sitte in the Churche, or at the worste, to their lodging where they soiourned at Rome. But passing ouer as he doeth, all reportes of carrying and sending the sacrament, whiche prooueth nothing at all the communion in one kinde, for both might as well be carried and sent as one, he commeth to a fragment of an Epistle of Basilius Ad Caesariam Pratriciam, which also he falsifieth in translation, as the rest of the Papistes, Harding, and Heskins doe. For where he saith, that such as ledde a solitary life in the wildernesse, where no Priest is, keeping the communion at home, receiue of themselues, Communionem domi seruantes à seipsis communicant, meaning they receiued one of an other, which he translateth, They communicate by themselues, Gathering that a priest may as well receiue by himselfe in the churche, as the people at home, whiche doth not followe, although neither of both be wel done. And here againe he wil haue no wine for feare of sauoring, whereas their is no dout, but such strong wine as groweth in those countries, will be preserued as long from sauoring, as the bread frō moulding. Like is ye example of Serapion being at the point of death to whom the priest being sicke also, sent by a boye the sacrament. Vppon which example he vrgeth reseruation, which though it be not necessarie, yet is it not the matter in controuersie, secondly the cōmunion

in one kind, which is false, for he sent both and willed him to dippe the bread in the wine which he sent, and not in any thing else, as M. Rastell saith, which were an absurditie, that the bodie of Christe should be dipped in prophane licour, or sent by a boy, either if the Priest had ben so persuaded of it, as Rastel would beare vs in hand, yt all olde fathers were. That he receiued alone, proueth no priuate Masse nor alloweth sole receiuing as ordinarie, which was done in a case of extreame necessitie in one which was excommunicated, and could not departe this life, before he had receiued the sacrament.
               The last example is the superstitious fact of Satyrus the brother of Ambrose, which beeing not baptised, obteined the sacrament of ye Christians yt were in a ship with him in daunger of shipwracke, which because he might not receiue, he caused it to be wrapped, in Orario a linnen garment, which Maister Rastell calleth a stole, & wrapped that linnen garment about his necke, and without other helpe escaped by swimming. Here M. Rastel thinketh he hath great aduauntage. First that the Christians had the sacrament out of the Church. As though the ship might not be their Church for that time, to minister the communion in the time of that great daunger. Secondly that it was in one kind, except we can deuise how to wrap wine in a stole. No M. Rastel, this proueth not that the Christians receiued in one kinde, though they had wrapped one kinde in the stole (as you call it) for Satyrus, as yet no Christian. But why might they not either soake the bread in wine, as some did in those days, or else dippe a corner of that linnen cloth as some also vsed to doe, and wrappe it vp in that great linnen garment? And the words of Ambrose Fusum in viscera powred into his bowels wold not agree to drie bread. Last of all, whereas you say it was no fantastical figuratiue memorie which saued him from daunger, I agree with you: but it was not the sacrament that he carried, whatsoeuer you will call it, but his faith (as S. Ambrose saith,) that preserued him.
               
                  And how soeuer it was, the example of an vnbaptised mans weake and superstitious doing, doeth ye but small honestie, to confirme your common priuate Masse, sole receiuing, opinion of carnal presence, or what so euer beside you can gather out of it.
            
            
               SECTIO. 39. From the 132. leafe to the second face of the 135. leafe of seruice in a straunge tongue.
                     Rastel.
                  
               
               To the Bishoppes challenge, that common prayer was not in a straunge tongue within the compasse of 600. yeares after Christ, he hath nothing in the worlde.
                     Fulk.
                   But onely affirmeth that Augustine the Monke brought Latine seruice into Englande whiche the people vnderstoode not, whiche both is somewhat without the compasse, and also onely said of him without proofe or likelyhoode. He saith, he made not a newe Englishe seruice or Kentish rather, but vsed the Romane fashion and language. Be it graunted that he brought in the Latine seruice, yet how proueth he, that the people did not at that time for the moste parte, vnderstand the Latine tongue? Seeing he could preach to them onely in Latine, beeing a Romane, and they also t
                     •
                  at came with him vnderstoode no parte of the English tongue, as our stories doe testifie. And that he planted not the Romane seruice, it may appeare by the aunswere of Gregorie to his thirde demaunde of the diuersitie of the Romane Churche, and the French Church, in which answere he bindeth him not to the Romane Church, but willeth him to choose out of all Churches, what he thinketh most conuenient and profitable for the Englishe Churche. And seeing the Scriptures and diuerse Homelyes, and Prayers remaine still in the Saxon or old English tongue, I do not see but he might haue made a newe English seruice, although by reason of so many mutations & troubles as happened in this land by meanes of ciuil and externe warres, & in the

meane time Antichrist daily more and more incroching, the same might growe out of vse, and latine onely be reteined, which perhaps at the first was but vsuall vnto monasteries or clarkes. But how soeuer it was, this is an inuincible argument that Augustine planted not the Romane seruice in this land, bicause there were so many diuersities of customes as there were diuerse Bishops sees, and al they differing from the vse of the Romane church.
               But hauing none authoritie, he hath reasons perhaps to defend latine seruice. First latine seruice is as meete for Englishmen, as English seruice is for Welshmē, wherwith he saith we finde no faulte, wherin he lieth. For the Welshmen that vnderstand not english, haue their common praier in their Welshe tongue.
               The second reason he vseth that Sainct Paule did write in greeke to the Romanes, ergo the seruice must be in latine to Englishmen. He saith himselfe there be many differences betweene an epistle & a common forme of praiers, which is verie true. But will he proue therby, that the Romanes had their common praiers in greeke? The cause why the Apostle did write in greeke, was bicause he wrote not only to the Romanes, but to the whole churche vnto which the greeke tongue was more familiar then the latine, and was of many vnderstoode in Rome. And also because the holy Ghoste 
                     •
                  ad consecrated the Greek
                     •
                   tongue, beeing the principall tongue of the gentiles, vnto the writinges of the newe Testament, auoyding to vse the Latine tongue, euen to the Romanes, for the mysterie of the name of Antichriste Latinos conteined in the nomber of the beastes name 666. as Irenaeus doeth testifie. His thirde reason is, that there be many thinges to be saide in publique praier, which ought to be saide in secrete, therefore an vnknowne tongue is best to vtter them. His antecedent he proueth not out of scripture or any auncient authenticall writer, but out of the liturgies falsely ascribed to Saint Basil, and Saint Chrysostome, and yet the argument hath no consequence in the world, for then those prayers in the Latine

seruice to the Romanes, shoulde bee in an vnknowen tongue, and all the rest in a knowne tongue to euerie nation.
               Finally, where he saith, there needeth no diuersitie of seruice according to the diuersitie of languages, he speaketh directly contrarye to the decree of the councell of Laterane, cap. 9. which commanded the bishoppes to prouide, that the sacraments and other diuine seruice, should be ministred to all people in their diocesse, according to the diuersitie of their languages and customes. By which it is proued, that seruice in an vnknowne tongue is neither so auncient as it is pretended, nor yet so allowed in all times, but that euen a popish councel hath decreed against it.
            
            
               SECTIO. 40. From the second face of the 135. leafe, to the 139. leafe, in which he speaketh of the title of the vniuersall bishop.
                     Rastle
                  
               
               To the bishops challenge, that the bishoppe of Rome was not called an vniuersal bishop,
                     Fulk.
                   or head of the vniuersall Church, he answereth that the title was due, although it was not vsed, and after his accostomable manner cauilleth of the worde vniuersall, whereas the bishop doth sufficiently expound himselfe, by addinge, or head of the vniuersall Church, which he taketh in hand to proue, giuing ouer the former title of vniuersall. First by a lowsie counterfett Epistle most falsely ascribed to Anacletus, which he citeth to be the second, but it is in the thirde, in which the vnlearned asse that counterfeted that Epistle, interpreteth the name of Peter giuē him by Christ, which was Cephas▪ to signifie a head and beginning, whereas by the Gospell we learne that Cephas was a stone, as Peter is, if the knowledge of the Syrian tongue shoulde fayle vs.
               His seconde authoritie is out of Cyprian. Lib. 3. ep. 11. The wordes of certaine scismatikes that tooke part with Nouatus against Cornelius bishop of Rome, and vppon

their repentaunce beeinge in Africa, were receyued into the Churche. These men confessed that they did acknowledge Cornelius to bee a bishoppe of the most holy Catholike Churche, whereas before they refused him, and claue to Nouatus, a false bishoppe of Rome not lawfully ordained: like as afterwarde they acknowledge, that there shoulde bee but one bishoppe of a Catholike Church, meaning in one citie, for else they shoulde haue denyed Cyprian, and all other bishoppes of the worlde to bee bishoppes sauinge onely Cornelius the bishoppe of Rome, whereas Cornelius being lawfully called to be bishop of Rome, they had taken part with Nouatus, which would be a bishoppe by intrusion. He citeth also Cyprian lib. 1. ep. 3. heresies haue risen of none other cause, but that the priest of God is not obeyed, and that there is not one priest of God in the Churche for a time. and one iudge in steede of Christ thought vpon: whiche Cypriane speaketh not of one priest, to be as iudge of all the Churche, but of one in euerie Churche, and namely he speaketh of himselfe, complaininge that he was contemned by a leude heretike and scismatike, called Felicissimus with his complices.
               His thirde author is Ambrose in 1. Tim. 3. whiche although it bee denyed to be the worke of Ambrose, but rather set forth of some man of muche later time in the name of Ambrose, to get more credite vnto his writing, yet receyuinge it as Ambrose, what sayeth hee? Forsoothe that Damasus was a gouernour of the Church of Christ, whiche is the house of God: whiche he sayeth in none other sense, then S. Paule enstructed Timothie to behaue himself in the house of God, which is the Church of the liuing God, not meaning to make him supreame head of all the Church of Christ, no more did Ambrose meane to make Damasus, then bishop of Rome.
               His fourth authour is Cyrillus, whome hee citeth in Lib. Thesau. a counterfette place, not to bee founde in all the workes of Cyrillus, by whome so euer it was forged.
               
                  His last authour is Gregorie. Libro 4. Epistola 32. who sayeth that although the charge of all the Churche was committed to Peter as chiefe of the Apostles, yet he was not called an vniuersall bishoppe
               I confesse the charge of al the Church was committed to Peter, whiche was not bishoppe of one Churche, but an Apostle sent vnto the whole worlde, as all the rest of the Apostles were. But that prooueth not the supremacie of the bishoppe of Rome, who if hee were a right bishoppe, yet were hee no Apostle, and so hath nothinge to doe with the charge and commission of an Apostle.
               Hee nameth also Sainte Augustine whiche in diuers places calleth Rome Sedem Apostolicam, a seate Apostolike, whiche is nothinge else (sayeth Maister Rastell) but that place whiche may plante and pull vppe, sette and lette, and hath his power ouer the whole worlde. But where learned hee this deffinition of a seate Apostolike?
               O impudent and arrogaunt disputer! All Churches that were planted and honoured with the presence of the Apostles, were called Apostolike seates, yet did they neuer claime, neither would Rastell giue vnto them that whiche he maketh to bee the deffinition of a seate Apostolike. As for Augustine, doeth often call Rome, Babylon the seat of Antichrist, De ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 17. & lib. 18. cap. 2. & 22.
            
            
               SECTIO. 41. From the 139. leafe to the 144. leafe, in which he speaketh of the reall and corporall presence of Christes bodie in the sacrament.
                     Rastle
                  
               
               The bisho
                     •
                   saith the people were not taught yt Christs body is really, substantially, corporally, carnally,
                     Fulk.
                   or naturally in the sacrament. Master Rastell saith, although

these termes be not founde, yet that which is signified by them is found. For thus he vseth in euery matter to trifle about termes, as though the bishop did striue for wordes and sylables, and not for the matter. And he would haue the bishop to bring out of any antiquitie, that the people were taught to beleeue, that the bodie of Christ is onely figuratiuely, sacramentally, significatiuely, tropically, imaginatiuely in the sacrament, to the denyal of all presence and reallitie, as though a sacramental presence were not a presence and a reall presence also, if by reall you meane that whiche is in deede, and not counterfeted, though it bee not after a grosse and carnall manner.
               For that Christ is present, and truely receyued in his sacramentes, wee doe gladly confesse, whiche is all that any aunciente writers speaketh of his presence, Hierome, Isychius, Cyrillus, Origen, Augustine or Chrysostome: whose names he citeth, or any other within 600. yers after Christ. But to maintein that grosse & corporall maner of presence or receiuing, which the papistes doe now holde, there is none of the olde writers that saith any thing to the purpose. As for Damascen is far out of the compasse, a corrupt writer, and yet more grosse in termes, then his iudgement was, as it were easie to prooue, if his authoritie were of any weight.
               But Master Rastel asketh if these words be not plaine inough. This is my bodie which shall bee deliuered for you, Luk. 22. Hee maketh them somewhat plainer by chaunging the pretertence into the future, for Luke reporteth the words: which is giuen for you. I againe aske him whether these wordes bee not as plaine. This cuppe is the Newe Testament in my blood, which is shedde for you? Wee doubt not but that it is the sacrament of his true and naturall body, for we make not two bodies of Christ as the papistes doe, a naturall bodie, and a spirituall bodie, which true and naturall bodie of Christ being in heauen, is giuen vnto vs in those holy mysteries after a wonderfull and vnspeakeable manner, not carnally nor

corporally, but spiritually and diuinelye. And where as Maister Rastell citeth a longe saying of Cyrillus against an Arrian, whiche denyed,
                     lib. 10. ca. 15 in Ioan.
                   that wee haue any corporall coniunction with Christe, and proueth the same by the strength and power of the misticall benediction, which maketh Christ to dwell corporally in vs, it is nothing in the worlde to his corporall and carnall manner of presence. For we also do graunt, that the power of the mistical benediction is such, as maketh Christ to dwel corporally in ye faithfull, which is nothing else (as he doth immediately expounde himselfe,) but yt they are made members of Christes bodie and members one of another, which is not after any carnall or naturall manner, but after an heauēly & diuine manner of vnion. For the same Cyril doth affirme yt Christ giuing ye sacrament to his disciples gaue thē 
                  fragmēta panis peeces of bread. By which is the plaine hee meant not to teach any transubstantiation of the bread into the natural body of Christ.
               This place of Cyrill is set downe at large in mine aunswere to Hesk. lib. 2. Cap. 14. And where as hee saith, we do weaken the hope of the resurrection of our flesh, by denying the carnall manner of presence of Christs body in the sacrament, I say it is vtterly false, and the contrarie is true, that the Popish heretikes do weaken the hope of resurrection in all them that haue not receiued the sacrament, when they faine such a presence of Christes body in the sacrament, as cannot bee receiued without the sacrament.
            
            
               SECTIO. 42. From the 144. leafe to the ende of the 145. leafe.
                     Rastell.
                  
               
               To ye Bishops challenge, that ye body of Christ cannot be in a thousande places or more at one time,
                     Fulk.
                   hee aunswereth, it needed not to be proued, because reason must giue place to faith, and one principle proued of Christes presence, draweth all the rest after it, and thirdly because Christs body is not locally present in the sacrament, but

in one place onely. Finally hee citeth a long saying of Chrisostome in Ep. ad Heb. Hom. 17. reasoning how Christ is offered euery day, but the whole discourse is cleane contrary to Maister Rastels purpose, and especially the first sentence and the last, expoundeth howe Christ was offered, not really, but as in a remembrance. Doe wee not offer euerye day? Wee offer in deede, but as men which make a remembrance of his death, these wordes shewe what kinde of oblation it was, that they did make, namelye a celebration of the memoriall of his death, and not a propitiatorie sacrifice of Christes bodye, carnally present.
               The last wordes are these, Wee offer not another sacrifice as the bishops did, but alwayes that same, or rather wee make the remembrance of that sacrifice. This correction sheweth, that it was not properly a sacrifice whiche they offered.
               Finally there is not one worde in that discourse, but it is directly against the sacrifice of the Masse.
            
            
               
                  Rastle.SECTIO. 43. From the 145. leafe. to the 149. leafe.
               
                  
                     Fulk.
                  To nine parts of the bishoppes chalenge hee aunswereth nothing, but refuseth for their particularitie to answere to them. First, that the Priest did not holde the sacrament ouer his heade. Secondlye, that the people did not worship it with Godly honour. Thirdly, that it was not then hanged vnder a Canopye. Fourthly, that after consecration there remaineth nothing but accidences of breade and wine. Fiftly, that ye priest deuided not the sacramēt in three parts & receiued them all himselfe alone Sixtly, that whosoeuer had said the sacrament is a figure, a pledge, a token or a remembrance of Christes bodye, had not therefore ben iudged for an heretike. Seuenthly, that it was not lawefull to say 30. or twentie &c. Masses in one Church in one day. Eightly, that images were not set vp to be worshiped. Ninthly, that the lay people were

not forbidden to reade the worde of God in their owne tongue. Maister Rastell saith, this is an vnlearned and pelting kinde of reasoning, but he proueth it by vnlearned and pelting examples: as it is not read that Christe did crye from his mothers breast, or did weare a peticoate, hose, or shooes, or went on his mothers errande, &c.
               As though any of these thinges were articles of our beleefe, as some of those are among the Papistes, or as though it perteined any thing to knowe such matters, as the Papistes pretende their matters necessarye not onely to be knowen, but also practised. Finally he woulde perswade his popish friends that these thinges neede not to bee proued to bee of such antiquitie, because the Church hath receiued them. Then let him and his fellowes bee a shamed and crie creake, whiche were wont to boaste of fifteene hundreth yeares antiquitie, for all their doctrine and ceremonyes, the consent of all ages, the traditions of the Apostles and such like: where nowe they are cutte shorte of the first sixe hundreth yeares, and being vrged to shewe their antiquitie, can say nothing, but that it is not needefull.
            
            
               
                  SECTIO. 44. in the 149. leafe.
                     Rastell.
                  
               
               To the Bishoppes challenge that the wordes of consecration by no authoritie of councelles or Doctours,
                     Fulk.
                   ought to bee pronounced closelye: Hee confesseth the matter, but hee can proue (or else hee lyeth) that there must be an heade in the Churche, whiche as well in this matter, as in all other must bee obeyed. Howe well hee can proue it, is tryed in the fourtie Section.
               The rest of the challenges hee giueth ouer, being desirous to bee at an ende with them, as I cannot blame him.
            
            
               
               
                  Rastle.SECTIO. 45. From the end of the 149. leafe to the 152. leafe, in whiche he woulde proue that priests haue auctoritie to offer Christ.
               
                  
                     Fulk.
                  He taketh vppon him to shewe, that the priest hath authoritie to offer vp Christ vnto his father. But good lorde whether more blasphemously, then ignorantly and vnlearnedly. For first, he citeth the saying of ye Apostel Heb. 5. Euery high Priest taken of men is appointed for men, in those things that perteine to God, to offer vp gifts and sacrifices for sinnes, which the Apostle speaketh expreslye of the priests of the old lawe, and proueth the excellency of Christ aboue them.
               Secondly admitting hee shoulde speake of Pristes of the newe Testament, which is false, he saith their sacrifice must be after ye order of Melchisedech, as it is written, thou art a priest for euer after ye order of Melchisedech: of which order Christ is a priest, in respect of Popish priestes that be nowe a dayes; or else Gods oth should be broken. Surely I merueile at ye great clemency of god which stoppeth not such blasphemous mouthes with thunderbolts. that make the eternall priesthoode of Christ, which hee hath without succession, to depende vppon their greasie order, which hath not beene but of late erected, neither shall continue for euer, where as our sauiour Christe worlde without ende shal bee both a king and a priest, which is the order of Melchisedech, and consisteth nothing at all in offering of breade and wine, as is manifest by the Apostle to the Hebrewes, who sheweth in what respect Christ is a priest after ye order of Melchisedech.
               As impudent as this is blasphemous, is his next argument yt by verye expresse commaundement of Christ in his last supper, they must offer him vp: saying, Do this in rememberance of me. As though Christ which neuer sacrificed himselfe but once, & that on the crosse, had at his supper offered himselfe to his father in sacrifice,
               
                  As for the testimonies of the Fathers which he citeth, are easily answered, that they spake of sacrificing Christe figuratiuely and vnproperly, as some of them confesse, namely Chrysostome, whome hee citeth, ad Heb. Hom. 17. which when he had demaunded, saying, Doe we not offer Christ daily? he answereth, yes, but rather wee celebrate the remembrance of his sacrifice: the other which hee citeth out of Dionyse, hath no word of offering Christ; although Dionyse be no writer within the compasse of sixe hundreth yeares: Neither do these words of the Liturgie intituled to S. Basil, which he rehearseth, speake more then of an vnbloudie sacrifice, which is the sacrifice of thanksgiuing, although the Liturgie is not of such antiquitie & credit, as it is pretended. And of as little is that, he citeth out of Ambrose in Psal. 38. which no man learned of sound and indifferent iudgement, will receiue for the worke of S. Ambrose. Such false principles must leane vpon counterfet Doctours.
            
            
               SECTIO. 46. From the 152. leafe to the 154. leafe, in which he taketh in hand 
                     •
                  o shape a generall aunswere to the particular questions which M. Iewell moueth.
                     Rastel.
                  
               
               Hauing proued nothing hitherto but him selfe to be a lying marchant,
                     Fulke.
                   a blasphemous and vnlearned defender of the sacrifice of the Masse, to all the rest of the questions of Indiuiduum vaegum merit ex opere operato, applying of the sacrifice of the Masse, accidents remaining, the case of the mouse eating the sacrament &c. He aunswereth that these termes for any thing he knoweth, were neuer vsed within the compasse of 600. yeares, but the matters were beleeued, and that he will proue by consent of learned men, and the voyce of the Church since those 600. yeares. This is in deede as he saith, merily but falsely to the Bishop, in the beginning of his booke, which way to Croyden
                     •
                   a poke ful of plumbs, the Bishop asketh proofe within

in 600. yeares of Christ, and M. Rastell will bring proofe without those 600. yeares, the Bishop requireth antiquitie whereof the Papistes haue so impudently bragged, and Rastel will bring foorth noueltie. But he hath a proper similitude, to shewe that these Articles, though they were not knowne to the auncient Church, for 600. yeares after Christe, yet are they not to be refused, no more then the fruites of Autumne, bicause they appeared not on the trees in Aprill, are to be reiected. Thus you see by this delicate similitude he denyeth the Church of Christe, his Apostles, Euangelistes, Martyrs, Confessours, Pastours & teachers, for 600. yeares together to haue beene a season fruitfull of matters of trueth, hauing nothing but greene ornaments and gay flowers, promising the wholesome fruites of Poperie, that haue appeared and waxed ripe in the latter time of the Church, as in the Haruest or moneth of September. If this similitude can be defended without contumely of Christ and the Primitiue Church, let al the Papistes clap their hands at it, and say. O learned M. Rast. that with so short an answere, hath satisfied all M. Iewels demaunds. But he will choake the Bishop and vs all with the last question: Where is it read (saith he) within 600. yeares after Christ, that our blessed Lady was preached or named the mother of mercy, the handmaiden of the Trinitie, the spouse of the holy Ghost, the Queene of heauen, the Empresse of hell? and yet if you beleeue in deed that she is the mother of God, all these Articles do follow, like as the rest of that veritie which saith, this is my body. It is well that M. Rastell confesseth these titles neuer to haue ben giuen to the Virgine Marie, neither by Christ, nor by his Apostles, nor by any in al ye Church for 600. yeres after Christ. Nowe syr, I will answere your question. I do as constantly beleeue with my heart, and more effectually then I can expresse with wordes, that the holy and blessed Virgine Marie is the mother of hers and our Sauiour Iesus Christ, the sonne of God, very God and very man. Yet all those titles which you confesse to be neither read in any antiquitie of 600. ye
                     •
                  res after Christe, I abhorre and

protest to be wicked, idolatrous, and blasphemous. And wheras you say that common sense teacheth, that a Kings mother is a Queene, and not of no place you trow, which is tried false by common experience, for King Dauid
                     •
                   mother was no Queene, I trowe, nor fiue hundreth more that haue beene in the world since his time, I aunswere: yet if it were graunted in earthly Princes, it followeth not in the King of heauen. For by the like reason and more probable, I might argue, the mother of a man is a woman therefore the mother of God is a Goddesse, from which blasphemie Saint Bonauenture a Popish Saint, is of no force, if he doe not farre exceede it, when he saith to the Virgine Marie. Iure matris impera filio, and againe, Coge Deum &c. By the authoritie of a mother commaunde thy sonne, and compel God to be merciful to sinners. &c.
            
            
               
                  SECTIO. 47. in the 154. leafe.
                     Rastel.
                  
               
               The Bishop declareth the vanitie of the Papistes aunswere, which is, that no Masse is priuate,
                     Fulke.
                   bicause that euery Priest communicateth with all Priestes that say Masse: for that by this reason, there should be no excommunication, whereas the partie excommunated would say, hee would communicate with the Prieste that saith Masse in Calicute. Maister Rastel saith, he that is excommunicate from one Church is excommunicated from al Churches, therefore he that is in the Communion, doth communicate with all Priestes. But hee vnderstandeth not the Bishops argument, or at least, he will not vnderstand it. For the sophistrie of the Popish argument resteth in the ambiguitie of this worde, Communicate, which signifieth to receiue the Lordes supper at one time and in one place, with others of their Church, which the Papistes take for receiuing generally, so that ye Priest in Louaine receiuing at his Masse alone communicateth with ye Priest yt likewise receiueth at his Masse alone in Calicut. Now if this receiuing wer a sufficient cōmunion, a Priest being excōmunicated in Louane, so yt no Priest wold suffer him to receiue with him at his Masse, if he would contemne their excō
                  munication, might say Masse him selfe, & say, yt although

none of you Louane Priestes will communicate with me, yet I wil communicate with the Priest that this day saith Masse in Calicut, yea, I will communicate with you in spite of your heart, for I will be at masse as soone as you, and then will I receiue at my Masse, when you receiue at your Masse, and so by our owne principle whereby wee defend our priuate Masses to be communions, I will communicate with you whether you will or no, yea, I can not choose but communicate with you, if I say Masse when you doe. And if you will say to me that I ought not to say Masse being excommunicate, I tell you, you can not excommunicate me, so long as I can say Masse. For though you count me excōmunicate, yet you knowe by our owne diuinitie, that if I doe say Masse, notwithstanding your censure, I doe consecrate as well as the proudest of you: and after I haue consecrated, I will receiue, and then I communicate, and so your excommunication is no excommunication at all.
            
            
               
                  
                     Rastel.
                  
                  SECTIO. 48. in the 155. leafe.
               
                  
                     Fulk.
                  Whereas the Bishop said, that the Masse had nether her name nor her partes, vntill foure hundreth yeares after Christe, he aunswereth, that she had the essentiall and necessarie partes, but not the garnishing and decking parts. So that by his owne confession, it was a namelesse and naked Masse which they had in the church for foure hundreth yeares after Christes. So that ye later times with him were alwayes more wise and more religious, then the former, newe deuises better then olde customes. And where then is there the proud challenge of antiquitie, vniuersalitie, consent, Apostolike tradition? And if the Church might be without the Popish Masse so long after Christe, why should they teach, that nowe it is so necessarie, as there ought to be none other forme of communion vsed in the Church of God, but it?
            
            
               
               SECTIO. 49.Rastel.
               
               M. Rastel protesting once or twise that he was wearie,
                     Fulke.
                   will now conclude with onely confuting these conclusions of M. Iewels comparison. S. Iames Masse had Christes institution, they in their Masse haue well neere nothing else but mans inuention. To disproue this he saith, the epistle and Gospell, the collets of the Sunday, the Hymne of the Angell, ye confession of faith, the saying of Agnus Dei, &c. are translated out of their Masse into our communion, therefore we take them for parte of Christes institution. I answere we take them as Christes institution, and not as commended by the Masse, and yet are they no parte of the communion, though they be vsed in our liturgie, some before, and some after the communion.
               Secondly he would seeme to confute the Bishops saying, that Saint Iames Masse had Christes institution, because if we had thought so in deede, we would haue translated it into English, and so haue vsed it in steede of the Popish Masse, and then it would haue seemed more superstitious, and full of ceremonies then the Popish Masse. And so he rehearseth a number of superstitious ceremonies, gestures, and prayers that are in it. I answere, the Bishop said truely as he thought, that the liturgie falsely ascribed to Saint Iames, hath Christes institution concerning the Lorde Supper, notwithstanding it be ful fraught with idle ceremonies, and some superstitious and erronious prayers, whereas the Popish Masse hath cleane ouerturned the institution of Christ, touching the ende of the Lordes supper, reteyning well neere nothing of Christes institution, except you will say it hath bread and wine, which it most horribly abuseth to the prophanation of Christes death, and most filthie idolatrie.
               Finally, the saluation of the virgine Marie whiche was then aliue, although it were more meere to be vsed to her person beeing aliue, then after she was departed

out of this worlde) the prayer made for them that liued in monasteries, the tearme of consubstantiall not heard of in the Church before the Nicene councell, and many other argumentes doe sufficiently proue, that the saide liturgie was not written by Saint Iames the Apostle, nor by any that liued many hundreth yeares after him to the iudgements of al men that haue either knowledge to discerne trueth from falshoode, or conscience to acknowledge that which they can not choose but know. And euen Bartholomew Garanza a Papist, that gathered the abridgement of councels, affirmeth that the liturgie which Saint Iames vsed, is not extant at this day. O Lord bring into the way of trueth all such as erre of simplicitie, and be not mercifull to those that sinne of malicious wickednesse.
               After this clearkly confutation, followeth a counterfet challenge (as he pretendeth) to shew the Bishops follie, but in deede to shewe his owne follie, and the weaknesse of his cause, which he learned not, (as he saith) of Salomon, to answere a foole according to his follie, but of Menalcas one of Virgils sheepheardes, in his thirde Eglogue, which when he could not answer the ridle propounded vnto him by his aduersarie, he putteth for than other as harde as he thinketh: Dic quibus in terris, &c.
               
               His first section conteineth 21. articles, whereof the greatest parte are not helde at all by any of vs, therefore there is no cause why we should proue them, the rest be matters of meere indifferencie, which may be vsed or left vndon without any hurt of our religion, & some perhaps may be proued (which he litle thinketh of) to his shame.
               Of the first sort are these 1. that there was no drie communion, and we say there ought to be none, although the Papistes make a drie communion, when they robbe the people of the cuppe of the Lordes bloud. The thirde that Bishops did not sweare by their honour: we affirme they ought not to sweare, nor yet by God, as I heard Boner sweare, being conuented before the Bishop of Winchester his Chauncelour, and a great number of persons

beeing present.
               The 4. that bagpipers, horscoursers, gailers, alebasters, were not admitted into the Cleargie without sufficient triall. We affirme they ought not, nor yet any of the scullerie or blacke garde, as some yet liuing were made Priestes in Queene Maries time.
               The 6. that no Bishoppe not content with prisoning his aduersaries, call vppon Princes to put them to cruell death. We holde that no Bishop should imprison his aduersary, much lesse procure his death, but if the challenge had beene of Gods aduersaries, I would haue aunswered otherwise. For if in 600. yeares none of Gods aduersaries was, or ought to haue beene put to death, by procurement of Bishops, by what ground of antiquitie doe Popish Bishops procure so many to be put to death, yea murther them selues in their prisons and inquisitions, vnder pretence, that they be Gods aduersaries?
               The 17. that no Bishoppe did gather beneuolence of his Cleargie to marrie his daughter, &c. We aunswere, this no way concerneth religion, no more then putting of the ring on the womans left hande, which is the 18. or calling the people by ringing of a bell whiche is the 21. Now concerning the rest, as the seconde, that there should be no celebration of the Lordes supper except there be a good number to communicate, three or foure at the least, &c. is proued by the Canons of the Apostles, that Excommunicate all Christians that be present, and doe not communicate Can. 9. Also the first Epistle of Anacletus (which is good authoritie against a Papist) forbiddeth the priest or Bishop to sacrifice alone, and commandeth all the ministers that are present, to receiue with him in paine of excommunication. And appointeth what number shall be present. of deacons, namely on solemne dayes seuen, on other dayes fiue or three, beside Subdeacons & other ministers. These decrees do proue, that there should be no celebration of the Lordes supper, but when there be a good number to communicate.
               Concerning the 5. of distinction of Bishops or Priest
                     •
                  
                  
in apparell frō the laitie, which yet we hold to be a thing of his owne nature indifferent. Celestinus Bish. of Rome saith in an Epistle to the Bishops of France Epi. 2. Discern
                        •
                     ndi a plebe vel cęteris sumus doctrina non veste, conuersatione non habitu, mentis puritate non cultu. We must be discerned from the common people, or other men by doctrine, not by garment, by conuersation not by apparell, by purenes of minde, not by attyre.
               To the 7. that the communion table was remoueable and carried too an fro, it is proued by Augustine, who In quest. vet. & Non test. ques. 101. saith, it was the office of the Deacons of Rome, as well as of all other Churches, to carrie the altar and the vessels thereof, and although he call it an altar in this place and many other, yet doeth he in as many places call it a table, and in his Epistle to Bonifacius Ep. 50. it appeareth, that it was made of boordes and not of stones.
               To the 8. for saying communion on good Friday, although perhaps it might be proued by those fathers of the primitiue Church, that kept their feast of Easter after the manner of the Iewes, whiche was the 14. day of the moneth, whiche some tymes did fall vpon that Friday whiche is called good Friday, yet beeing no matte
                     •
                   of religion, there is no cause why we should be bound to proue it.
               The like I say to the 9. of singing of Gloria in excelsis after the communion, and to the 11. of saying the Creede of Athanasius vpon principall holie dayes.
               Concerning the 10. that the sacrament was ministred in the loafe bread vsually to be eaten at the table, it is proued by S. Cyprian In sermone de Caena Dom. whiche saith of that bread wherewith they did minister, Panis iste communis in carnem & sanguinem mutatus, procurat vitam & incraementum corpor
                        •
                     bus, &c. This common bread being chaunged into our flesh and bloud, procureth life and increase to our bodies.
               Also by S. Ambrose Li. 4. Cap. 2. de sacram. Who rehearseth ye obiection of the ignorant, saying. Tu forte dicis, meus

panis est vsitatus, &c. Thou perhaps wilt say, my bread is cōmon & vsual bread. Also by Gregorie, which in his dialogues reporteth that two Coronae loaues of bread, were giuen to one that was thought to be a poore man in rewarde of his seruice in a bathe, but he being a guest, willed that the same shoulde bee offered in sacrifice for him.
               To the 12. for the ministers wearing of a Cope or surplesse, which hold it to be no part of religion, and that the communion hath bene ministred in common apparell, we will go no further then our Sauiour Christ himselfe, Ioh. 13. and there is no question, but his Apostles and the primitiue Churche many hundreth yeares followed his example.
               To the 13 that the words of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 11. should be red at the ministration, rather thē of S. Mathewe, Marke, or Luke, it is a matter of meere indifferency, & yet better ordered, then your popishe canon, whiche rehearseth the wordes after none of all foure.
               To the 14. that they vsed a common cup at the Communion, is prooued also by scripture, that our sauiour Christ ministred in the same cup, which he and his company had vsed at supper.
               To the 15. that the curses of Gods law, should be redd vpon Ashwednesday, we hold it not as a thing necessarie, but an order of indifferencie, vntill a better discipline be restored.
               To ye 16. concerning procession about the fields, we vse none but a perambulation, which is a matter of meere ciuill pollicie.
               To the 19. whether Saint Peter were euer at Rome or no, it is no article of our beliefe, but we are able to proue by scripture, that he neither was there as bishoppe, nor so long as the common opinion is.
               To the 20. that the minister in time of necessitie hath giuen the communion to one alone, is proued by the example of Seraphion, vsed of the Papist
                     •
                  , but vnfitly to defende your priuate masse, to whom being at the point of

death, the communion was sent by the prieste, who at the same time also was so sicke that hee coulde not come himselfe, Eusebius libros 6. capitulo 44. and yet that communicatinge which we alowe, is but graunted to the infirmitie of suche as cannot bee perswaded to forbeare the sacramente, not as a thing simplie allowed.
               If anye one man aliue, coulde prooue anye one of these articles by Scriptures, doctours or councelles, hee promiseth to subscribe, what I haue prooued, let the Reader iudge. After this followe twentie nine articles more.
               The 22. that the bishoppe of Rome was not called Antichriste the cause was, that vntill after sixe hundreth yeare, the bishoppe of Rome was not Antichriste. But that Antichriste shoulde bee a Romaine, it is prooued by Irenaeus, Libro 5. and that Rome shoulde be the Sea of Antichriste Sainte Augustine testifieth, De ciuitate Dei, libro 16. capitulo 17. callinge Rome Westerne Babylon, and libro 18. capitulo 2. callinge Rome seconde Babylon, &c.
               Also Hierome ad Marcellam, iudgeth Rome to bee Babylon, spoken of in the Apocalypse, and in praefati. in Didymum, hee calleth Rome Babylon, and the purple whore, and Algasiae Quest. 11. and manye places else.
               Gregorie also affirmeth, that who so woulde bee called vniuersall bishoppe, was the forerunner of Antichriste, whiche was Iohn of Constantinople, also he prophesieth that Antichristes reuelation was at hande, and that an armye of priestes shoulde wayte vppon him, whiche was fulfilled in his nexte successour saue one, namely Bonifacius the thirde, whiche was the first Pope of Rome, that was called vniuersall bishoppe, and was Antichriste him selfe, as Iohn of Constantinople was his forerunner about the yeare of our Lorde, 
                     •
                  10.
               To the 23. that no consecration was required to the sacramente, but the vertue of the peoples fayth, is

not holden of vs, and therefore wee are not to prooue it.
               To the 24. that the residue of the sacramentall bread, which was not receyued by any olde custome of the Church of Constantinople was giuen to young children that went to schoole, is prooued by Euagrius, libr. 4. cap. 36. whether to spredde their butter, as hee requireth is to shewe, or to eate it with cheese, or fleshe, &c. I cannot saye. Also I finde in Concilio Matisconensi. 2. Can. 6. that what so euer remained after the ministration, shoulde be giuen to yong children by the priest (not spred in deede with butter) but sprinkled with wine.
               To the 25. that no man was conuented for affirminge the carnall maner of presence of Christes bodie in the sacrament, I aunswere, it was because there was no man founde which held that grosse heresie al that space of 600 yeres after Christ.
               To the 26. that it was lawfull to haue but one communion in one Churche in one daye, I aunswere it was a custome of the Churche before Leo the firste, as appeareth in his 79. Epistle, who appointed that when the Communion woulde not serue all that came to the Churche, there might bee another celebrated, and that so often in one daye, as the people filled the Churche: and otherwise wee saye not of one Communion in a daye.
               To the 27. that an Image of Christe, or of a Sainte was defaced and iudged vnlawfull to bee in the Churche of Christian men, is prooued by the Epistle of Epiphanius, who reporteth that he him selfe did reade such a one paynted on a vayle at Anablatha, which Epistle was translated out of Greeke by S. Hierome, and is in the 2. Tome of his workes.
               The 28. of Bishoppes settinge vppe their owne, their wiues, or their childrens pictures, in their parlours and chambers, is a vaine matter, not touchinge religion anye thing at all.
               
                  The 29, that Christ deliuered his body to many more then his twelue Apostles, is no article of faith, neither greatly material, whether he did or did not, yet it is most probable, that seeing he did eate the olde sacrament of the Pascall lambe with the whole housholde that were his disciples, he did vnto them also giue the newe sacrament of his bodie and blood.
               The 30. that Iudas Machabaeus in offeringe for the dead, added to the lawe, it is manifest by the scripture, because there is no suche oblation appointed by the lawe. And yet his oblation helpeth not the papistes, because those for whom he offered, dyed in mortall sinne, beinge defiled with Idolatrie as the storie doth report.
               To the 31. and 32. that a bishoppe did marrie after he was a bishoppe, or married the seconde or thirde wife, the first being dead, it is not vnlike, seeinge the scripture requireth no more abstinence from marriage in a bishop, then in any other man. Clemens as Eusebius testifieth, lib. 3. cap. 30. saith, Petrus & Philippus liberis procreandia operam dederunt. Peter the Apostle, and Philippe did beget childrē. Socrates lib. 5. cap. 22 saith, Multi illorum episcopatus tēpore etiam liberos ex legitimis vxoribus sustulerint. Manie of them, euen in the time that they were bishops, begat children of their lawfull wiues. As for M. Rastell termes of harlot and fyery passion, &c. I omit to speake of, as more meet for such a ruffian like railer, then worthy of any answere. The councell of Gangra in their Epistle to the bishops of Armenia, report it, as one of the heresies of the Eustachians, that priestes which haue contracted matrimony should be despised, and the sacramentes ministred by them should not be receiued. Praesbiteros qui matrimonia contraxerunt, sperni debere dicunt. Which wordes prooue that bishops married as well as priestes. The same councell Can. 4. accurseth them that make a difference betweene a married prieste and another, in respecte of his marriage.
               To the 33. that preachers mooued not yong men and women not to be ashamed of lust, I saye, it is no parte of

our doctrin, but a lewde slander imputed to Luther most vniustly, who speaketh of the desire of marriage & not otherwise.
               To the 34. that euery man should reade the scriptures & not giue eare to mans traditions it is the very counsell & words of Basil in his short definitions, quest. 65. Chrisostome doth often exhort al lay men to reade the Bible, in a great number of places.
               To the 35 that Lent and Friday shoulde be fasted for polycie, and not for deuotion, we doe not hold, but that abstinence of flesh shoulde be vsed at such times, which is a matter of meere policie, as for abstinence of flesh for religions sake, was condempned in the counsell of Gangra. And Montanus the heretike was the first that made lawes of fasting. Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 18.
               To the 36. that Palme sonday was solemnised without bearing of bowes, it is proued at the least for three hundreth yeares after Christ, in which time all stories testifie, that the Church was for the most parte vnder persecution, and had no such processions about the streates, but rather kept them in secrete corners, ye like I say for candels on Candelmas day, which coulde not be borne within 600. yeares of Christe, because Pope Sergius was the first that appointed them to be borne, whiche was seuen hundreth yeares after Christ. As for Masse on Christmasse day, I answere the same, the Masse was not all made within 600. years, if he speake of the popish Masse: if he speake of the communion, it is a thing indifferent whether it be celebrated that day or no.
               To the 37. although the celebration of the natiuitie of Iohn baptist, be but a variable & indifferēt ceremony, yet may it be proued by many auncient homilyes, that it was kept within the compasse of 600, yeres. As for the feast of the natiuitie of the blessed Virgin Marye, or of her assumption, that they were not celebrated within that time, it is manifest, because they were not instituted many hundreth yeares after. As Durande confesseth the feast of the natiuitie, not to haue beene kept of old time.

And touching the assumption, the verye lessons read in the popish mattyns on that day doe affirme, that manye doubted of her assumption, lect. 3. and also affirme, yt she dyed and was buried, and that her sepulcher was shewed in the vale of Iosophat. lect. 2.
               To 38. they that pray to God to bee defended by the ministery of Angels, whether it bee vppon the feast of S. Michaell, or any other day, haue the authoritie of ye scripture, which declareth that they be ministring spirites appointed for the defence of them that shalbe saued. Psa. 34 Heb. 1. Neither do they seeke helpe at any other creatures handes but of God, onely by the mediation of Christe, who desire God for Christes sake to helpe them by such spirituall or bodily ministers, or means, as hee hath appointed. For they worship God, and not the Angels, they pray to God, and not to Angles.
               To the 39. for vsing the signe of the crosse in baptisme and not in the communion, I aunswer, we count it not needefull either in the one sacrament, or in the other.
               To the 40. of throwing downe Aultars erected vnto Christe, I aunswere: Ezechias is commended in scripture, for throwing downe the hill aultars erected vnto GOD, and in which the people did offer sacrifice onely to the Lorde, because they were not erected according to Gods commaundent, and yet was not hee accounted an heretike. 2. Regum. 18. Much lesse are they to bee called heretikes, that throwe downe the Popishe aultars whiche were set vp against the onelye Aulter and sacrifice of Christ and his passion, to the most blasphemous defacing of the same.
               To ye 41. yt any bishop was maryed on Ashe wednesday, it is a foolish demaund to require the proofe, but that i
                     •
                   was lawful for a bishoppe to mary any day in the yeare, it is proued by ye authoritie of scriptures, which exclude no day as vnlawfull to mary in.
               To the 42. that no man did write that the gouernemēt of women was monstrous, we grant, neither do we holde

this article though some one man haue witten it.
               To the 43. that est, in these words, hoc est corpus meum, is to be taken for significat, it is proued by Tertullian, who expoundeth hoc est corpus meum, id est, figura corporis 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               This is my body, yt is to say, this is a figure of my body contra Marc li 4. S. Ambrose: ipse clamat dominus Iesus, hoc est corpus meum. Ante bedectionem verborum caelestium alia speci
                     
                        •
                     s nominatur, post consecrationem, corpus Christi significatur
                  ▪ Our Lorde Iesus himselfe saith alowd: This is my body. Before the blessing of the heauenly wordes, it is called another kinde, after consecration, the body of Christ is signified. Deijs qui myster. init. Chrysostome sayeth of the sanctified vessels, in quibus non est verum corpus Christi sed mysterium corporis Christi continetur. In which the very bodie of Christ is not, but the mysterie of the bodie of Christe is conteined▪ 
                  in Mat. Hom. 11. Augustine sayeth: Nam ex eo quod scrip
                        •
                     um est, sanguinem pecoris animam eius esse, praeter id 
                        •
                     uod supra dixi, non ad me pertinere quid agatur de pecoris anima, possum etiam interpretari pręceptum illud in signo positum esse, non enim Dominus dubitauit dicere hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis sui. For as concerning that which is writen, that bloud is the life of the beast, beside that which I sayed before, that it perteineth not to me what is done wt the life of a beast, I may also interprete that commaundement to consist in a signe. For our Lord doubted not to saye, This is my bodie, when hee did giue a signe of his bodie, cont
                        •
                      Adamantum. In this same Augustine sheweth that these wordes hoc est corpus meum, are to be taken in the same sense, that these words sanguis est anima pecoris, where est, is manifestly taken for significat by his iudgement, & there is no one article wherein we differ from the Papistes, that hath more plentifull confirmation in the doctours of our doctrine therein, then this of the carnall presence of Christ in the sacrament.
               To the 44. that the lay people communicating did take the cuppe one at anothers hand, it appereth by the words of Basill in Ep. ad Caesar. Patri. for of those that dwelled in the wildernesse, where no Priest was, (saith hee,)

                  a seipsis communicant they receiue of themselues, or one of another. And in Alexandria, and Aegypt euery one of the people hath the communion in his house, and receiue it there at home. Et in ecclesia sacerdo
                        •
                      dat partem, & accipit eam is qui suscipit cū omni libertate, & ipsam admou
                        •
                     t ori propria 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Idem igitur est virtute, sine vnam partem quis acc
                        •
                     piet a sacerdote sine plures partes simul. And euen in the Church the Priest giueth one part, and he which receueth it, taketh it with all libertie, and putteth it to his mouth with his owne hand. Therefore it is the same in vertue, whether a man take one part of the Priest, or more partes together. Also it appeareth by the 6. Councell of Constantinople, Can. 
                     •
                  8. that before that time Lay men in presence of the Bishop, Elder, or Deacon, did diuide ye deuine mysteries among thē selues, which vntil then was not forbiddē. Our Sauiour Christe also hauing once deliuered the cup, did not take it into his handes so often as euery one of his disciples did drinke, but willed them to diuide it among them selues. Luc. 22.
               To the 45. that a controuersie of religion being decided by the Byshop of Rome, the contrary parte was not taken for heresie, nor the mainteiners thereof for heretikes, is proued by the controuersie of rebaptising them that were baptised by heretikes, which when Cornelius and Stephanus Bishops of Rome had decided, yet was not the contrary opinion taken for heresie, nor Saint Cyprian & al the bishops of Affrica which agreed vppon it in a councel at Carthage, counted for heretikes: a matter notoriously knowen to all them that reade Cyprians workes, or Euseb. lib. 7. Cap. 3. which vtterly ouerthroweth the popes authoritie.
               To the 46. that any executed for felony, was put in the kalendar for a Martyr, is a thing needelesse to proue, yet the penitent theefe whiche being crucified with Christ, was executed iustly for his offences, is of good writers counted a Martyr. So might one hanged for felonie, and at his death repenting and detesting Papistrie.
               
                  To the 47. that such as refused to renounce the Bishop of Romes authoritie were excommunicated, it appeareth by the Councell of Carthage. 3. Cap. 26. which forbad that the Bishop of Rome or any other Bishop of the principal See, should be called the highest Priest, or the prince of Priestes, or by any such title. Also the Councel Mileuitanum doth excommunicate all them that appealed to the Bishop of Rome or any other out of Aphrica. Cap. 22. Yea he yt thought such appellations lawfull, was excommunicated, by which it appeareth, yt though there be no expresse mention of an othe, yet an othe in that case vpon good ground might be tendered.
               To proue that a Fryer of 60. yeares age being made Bishop did marry a woman of 19. yeares of age within sixe hundreth yeares after Christ, which is the eight and fortith article, it is impossible, because there was not any fryer in the worlde 1200. yeares after Christ.
               To proue that any Bishop preached, that it is all one to pray in a dunghill and in a Church, whiche is the 49. article, is no assertion of ours neither of any man I thinke in the worlde.
               To the 
                     •
                  0. that such as were no heretikes, refused to subscribe to a generall councell gathered by the Byshop of Rome, is proued before by saint Cyprian and the Byshops of Aphrica of his time, also by Saint Augustine and the bishopps of Aphrica in his time, which refused to subscribe to the Bishops of Rome, Zosimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus pretending ye councel of Nice for their authority, in receiuing appeales, but when the true Copyes were brought from Alexandria and Constantinople, they wer
                     •
                   found falsifiers of the Nicen Councel. Concilio Aphricano▪ cap 101. & 105.
               After all these iollie questions he confesseth, he should do vs wrong to require the probation of these articles, bicause many of them containe indifferent ceremonies, in many he sticketh vpō such termes, as he thinketh are not found in the auncient Fathers, in some he presseth vs with particular wordes, leauing the generall principle, and in

some with priuate mens opinions: he might haue added in some, with his own impudent lyes and forgeries, which none of vs do holde, and such he would make the Bishop
                     •
                   challenge to be, but the world hath sufficiently seene the contrarie proued, that most of the matters contained in that challenge, be of the greatest mysteries of Poperie, whereas these of M.Ra. witlesse and shamelesse deuising, for the most part are not maintained at all in manner and forme as he propoundeth them, and such as be materiall, are sufficiently proued. But nowe that he hath played the foole as he confesseth all this while, he promiseth to play the wise man in propounding matters of weight & substance, in which you shall see, that euen as before he chargeth vs to proue many things which we do not hold, and therefore he playeth not ye wise man, but the craftie marchant, to make the ignorant beleeue that wee maintaine, that we are not able to iustifie.
               He diuideth his challenge into foure partes,
               
                  the first hath three Articles.
                  To the first, that it is vnlawful to make a vowe to God of chastitie, obedience, or pouertie. I answere, it is vnlawfull to make a vowe of that which is not in a mans power to performe, as is the vowe of Virginitie, which is a gift not giuen to all, as our sauiour Christ testifieth. Matt. 19. Also Conciliū Arasicanū
                      2. decreed. ca. 11. De obligatione votorū. Nemo quicquam Domino rectè vouerit, nisi ab ipso acceperit, sicut legitur. Quae de manu tua accepimus damus tibi. Of the bonde of vowes. No man shall rightly vowe any thing to the Lord, except he haue receiued it of him, as it is read. Such things as we haue receiued of thy hand, we giue to thee. That breakers of such vowes were esteemed aboue others as singular witnesses of the libertie of the Gospell, is no part of our assertion. But that their meaning is honest, is proued by Leo B. of Rome Ep. 90. speaking of a Monke: Vnde qui relicta singularitatis professione ad militiam vel ad nuptial d
                           •
                        uolutus est, publicae paenitentiae satisfactione purgandus

est, quia etsi innocens militia & honestum potest esse coni
                           •
                        gium, electionem tamen meliorem deseruisse, transgressio est. Wherefore he which hath forsaken the profession of sole life, and fallen to warfare or marriage, must be purged by satisfaction of open repentance, bicause that although his warfare may be harmelesse, and his marriage honest, yet it is a transgression to haue forsaken his better choyse.
                  To the second, that it was abhominable to make any sacrifice to God, beside the sacrifice of thankesgiuing in words, & the figures for his benefites, with remembrance of his passion, &c. I proue by the authoritie of Iustinus, which affirmeth, that these were the only sacrifices deliuered vnto the Christians, therefore it was abhominable to vse any other. His wordes are in his Dialogue with Tryphon against the Iewes, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . For I my selfe doe affirme, yt prayers and thankesgiuings made by worthie persons, are ye only perfect and acceptable sacrifices to God. For these are the only sacrifices yt Christians haue receiued to make, to be put in mind by their drie and moyst nourishment, of the passion which God the sonne of God is recorded to haue suffered for them. Here note, that he calleth the sacrament drie and moyst nourishment.
                  To the third, that there was no Priesthood according to the order of Melchisedech, but onely the Priesthoode of our Sauiour Christ, it is manifest by the 110. Psalme, that the Priesthood pertaineth to him that sitteth at the right hand of God, euen to the Lord Iesus Christe: also by the Apostle to the Hebrues 5. & 7. Chapter: in which it is saide that he hath that Priesthoode, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, so peculiar to him, as it passeth not by succession: Neither was there euer any greater blasphemie, then that euery Popish Priest should bee a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, to offer Christe to his Father.
                  And that Priestes haue not a singular sacrifice to offer

for the sinnes of the people, is proued by S. Augustine 
                        •
                      
                     Contra aduersar leg & prophe. who calleth ye death of Christ, V
                           •
                        um singulare, & solum verum sacrificium, that one, singular, and onely true sacrifice, in which the bloud of Christe was shed for vs. But the Papistes call their blasphemous sacrifice, an vnbloudie sacrifice, therefore they haue not any singular sacrifice for the sinnes of the people.
               
               
                  The second part containeth 12. Articles in which he falsly chargeth Caluine in his institutions with diuers Articles, which neither he nor any of vs doe holde.
                  The first, that the sacrament of baptisme instituted by Christ, is no better then the circumcision of the old lawe, is proued by Saint Augustine, which saith, in Ioan. Tr. 26. speaking of the sacraments of the old law, that they were in fignis diuersa in re quae significatur, paria, diuers in signes, equall in the thing signified.
                  The second, that baptisme is a signe onely of our profession, and that our sinnes are not truly forgiuen in it, is no doctrine of ours, but of the Anabaptistes, mightily confuted by Caluine, whome he slaundereth to hold it.
                  The 3. that confirmation ought to be a sacrament is an inuention of man plaine, for that it is not taught in the scriptures to be an institution of Christ. Irenęus testifieth, that the annointing with sweete oyle came first of the Valentinian heretiques. Lib. 1. cap. 18. Also in S. Hieromes time, the Priestes made the oyle of Chrisme, and laide on their handes, and not the Bishop only. In Sophon. cap. 3▪ For a Bishop did nothing more then a Priest, but only in ordeining of ministers Hier. Euagrio. Wherevpon it followeth, that the Popish confirmation was not then a sacrament, which they hold can be ministred of none, but of a Bishop.
                  The fourth, that Christ deliuered in his last supper a figure only of his body to be eaten of his Apostles, is none of our assertions, for we affirme that he deliuered breade and wine, not as a figure onely, but as his very body and bloud spiritually to be eaten and dronken.
                  
                     The 5. that the power of forgiuing and reteyning sinnes which Christ gaue to his Apostles, is nothing else but a comforting or fearing of mens consciences by the promises or menaces of the scripture, &c. is not affirmed of vs, but that Christ hath giuen power to his ministers to assure the penitent of forgiuenesse in his name, to pronounce his iudgment to the vnrepentant: so that man followeth the sentence of God, and not God of man.
                  To the 
                        •
                     . that to confesse a mans sinnes to the priest, is a vaine and superstitious trauell, is proued by Chrysostome In Psalmo. 50. Non dico vt confitearis conseruo tuo vt exprobret, dicito Deo, qui curat ea. I bidde thee not confesse thy sinnes to thy fellowe seruaunt, that he may vpbraide thee, tell them to God which healeth them. That to seek to make vp a ful and perfect satisfaction by fasting, praying, almesdeedes, &c. is iniurious to the passion and merites of Christ, is proued by that saying of S. Iohn. The bloud of Iesus Christ doth purge vs from all sinnes, and if we confesse our sinnes he is faithful and righteous, that he will forgiue our sinnes and purge vs from all vnrighteousnesse. 1. Ioan. 1.
                  The 7. that the knowledge of the scriptures is a sufficient licence for a man to be a publike teacher in the Church, we denie: likewise, that there is no difference betweene the ministerie of the Churche and the people, althoughe that to speake properly of the terme priesthoode, all true Christians are alike Priestes to God, as it is most manifest. 1. Pet. 2. vers. 5. & Apoc. 1. verse 6.
                  To the 8. That Christian Princes had the auhoritie of supream head ouer the church in yt sense, which it is giuen to our souereigne, is proued by Constantine, Theodosius, Martianus &c. who called the generall councels, made lawes for establishment of religion, punished Bishoppes and other of the Cleargie offenders, and not onely the Emperours, but also many other Kinges of Spaine and Fraunce, who had the like authoritie in their Dominions, as appeareth in all histories, and in the actes of the councels generall and prouinciall.
                  
                     The 9. that faith onely iustifieth after one be baptised and sanctified, is proued by Basil in an Homily of humilitie Hom. 51. speaking of a man baptised and sanctified: Haec enim est perfecta ac integra gloriatio in Deo, quando neque ob iustitiam suam quis se iacta
                           •
                        , sed nouit quidem seipsum verè iusti
                        
                           •
                        ię indigum esse, sola autem fide in Christum iustificatum. For this is a full and perfect reioycing in God, when a man doeth not boast himselfe of his righteousnes, but knoweth him selfe truely to be voide of true righteousnesse, and to be iustified by onely faith in Christe.
                  The 10. that all the iustice and holinesse of good men is but an imputatiue iustice &c. is not saide of vs which affirme, that faith onely is imputed for righteousnesse and not the holines or iustice of any man. But we affirme that all the workes of men, be they neuer so holie and righteous, are imperfect, and therefore deserue not the rewarde of Iustice promised in the lawe to the perfect obseruers thereof, and to none other.
                  The 11. yt the keeping of 40. dais fast, had no cōmandement from Christ or his Apostles, it is manifest by Eusebius, which affirmeth that Montanus the heretike was the first that prescribed lawes of fasting. Lib. 5. Cap. 16. also he reporteth yt there was no certeintie of the time of fasting before Easter, for some fasted one day, some two dayes, some more, some compting their day 40. houres of day and night. Lib. 5. Cap. 20. And Augustine plainely sayeth, Quibus autem diebus non oportet ieiunare, & quibus oporteat, pręcepto Domini vel Apostolorum non inuenio definitum. What dayes we ought not to fast, or what dayes we ought to fast. I finde it not defined by the commandement of our Lord, or of his Apostles. As for ye abstinence from flesh in Lent for ciuill pollicies sake, because it toucheth not religion, we neede shew no proofe of it.
                  To the 12. that aneiling of Christians, hath ben abhorred of Christians, it is hard to proue, because yt Popish aneiling by the Priests with oyle consecrated by the Bishop, was not in vse in that time. The first that is read to vse suche like aneiling about 400. yeres atfer Christ was Innocentius

who appointed that al christian men vnder his obedience should vse oyle as witnesseth Sigebertus. But Durand and other writers, ascribe the institution of this extreame vnction to Felix the fourth, who liued about 514. yeares after Christ, so that vntil that time, this Popishe sacrament was not knowen in the Church. And as for reseruation of the sacrament of the altar forbidden, I shall need no better authoritie for M. Rastel, then the counterfet epistle of Clemens Bishop of Rome Epi. 2. Tanta in altario Holocausta offerantur quanta populo sufficere debent. Quòd si remanserint, in crastinum non reseruentur, sed cum timore & tremore clericorum diligentia consumantur. Let so many hosts be offered in the altar, as may serue the people. But if any remaine, let them not be reserued vntil the next day, but with feare and trembling spent out by the diligence of the Clearks. And for other men yt can discerne trueth frō forgerie, the testimonie of Euagrius, Li. 4. ca. 36. may serue, which reporteth an old custome of ye church of Cō
                     stantinople, to send for childrē yt went to schoole to spend whatsoeuer remained of the sacrament after ye cōmunion.
               
               
                  The thirde parte conteineth foure articles.
                  To the first, that calling vpon Saints in heauen was accounted then blasphemie, is proued by S. Augu. which so accoūted calling vpon Angels or any other creature. Conf. Li. 11. Cap. 42. Quem inuenirem qui me reconciliaret tibi? an eundum mihi fuit ad Angelos? qua prece? Quibus sacramentis? Whom should I finde that might reconcile me vnto thee? Should I haue gone to ye Angels? With what prayers? With what sacraments? And yet I confesse some seedes of that errour were scattered in his time. But before his time Epiphanius rehearseth it among the heresies of the Caiani, that they did call vpon angels Tom. 3. Haeres. 38. and calling vpon dead men he compteth it an heresie of the Heracleonites Hae. 36. And Contra Collyridianos he vtterly condemneth al worshipping either of dead Saints, or any else, or the virgine Marie, as them that robbe God of his honour, for what greater honour can we doe vnto God then to call vpon him in al our afflictions▪ Psal. 50. And Dauid saieth:

Whom haue I in the heauen but thee: and I haue desired none in the earth with thee. Psal. 73.
                  To the second, that the setting vp of images of Christe in Churches was counted idolatrie, it is manifest by Epiphanius, who as he testifieth in his epistle vnto Iohn bishop of Ierusalem, did rend a vaile in which such an image was painted: Cum ergo hoc vidissem, in Ecclesia Christi contra authoritatem scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem, scidi illud, &c. When I had seene this thing, that in the Churche of Christ, contrarie to the authoritie of scriptures, an image of a man did hang, I rent it in peeces, &c. As for ye signe of the crosse I haue shewed before out of Irenaeus, that the Valentinian heretikes were the first that had it in estimation, although afterward it grew to be esteemed of good Christians, by a corrupt emulation.
                  To the 3. that visiting of Saints tombes, and kissing their reliques after the Popish manner, was thought to be a superstitious vanitie, is proued by the Epistle of the Smyrnenses to the Phylomilienses Euseb. Lib. 4. Cap. 16. Wherein they shew, that the Gentiles and Iewes thought best to burne the bodie of Policarpus, least the Christians should leaue Christ and begin to worship him, and therefore they watched the Christians, least they should, take his bodie out of the fire, Ignorantes nos nec vnquam &c. beeing ignorant (say they) that we can neuer forsake Christ, which suffered for all them that shall be saued of the worlde, nor worship any other. For him truly we adore as the sonne of God, but the Martyrs we loue worthily as the Disciples and followers of our Lord, for their inuincible loue towardes their King and Maister, of whō we wish our selfes to be made companions and Disciples. Therefore when the Centurian saw the contention of the Iewes, they burned his bodie as their maner is being laid in the midst, and so at the length we got his bones, more precious then precious stones, & better tried then gold, & buried thē where it was meet, where also as neere as may be, being assembled, the Lorde shall graunt vs with ioye and gladdenesse to celebrate his Martyrs byrth day▪
                     
both to the remembraunce of them that haue fought alreadie, and for the exercise and preparation of them that shall fight hereafter.
                  Such reuerent burning therfore of their dead corpses, & laying vp of their reliques, as is of loue & not of superstition, we condēne not. But such as ye papists vsed of their reliques, they learned of the heretikes Osseni which as Epiphanius writeth, tooke the spittle and other fylthines of the bodies of Marthys and Marthana, whom they took for saintes, and vsed them for helpe of diseases, as the papists did with ye snottie napkins of Thomas Becket, such a saint as they were. And yt they should not obiect, yt some haue done as they doe, S. Augustine De moribus eccles. Cath. lib. 1. cap 34. Thus writeth. 
                        Nolite mihi colligere professores nominis Christiani, ne
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            professionis suae vim aut scientet aut exhibentes. Nolite consectari turbas imperitorum, qui vel in ipsa vera religione superstitiosi sunt, vel ita libidinibus dediti, et obliti sint quid promiserint Deo. Noui multos esse sepulchrorum vt picturarum adoratores. Gather not vnto me such professors of the name of Christ for example, as neither know nor shewe forth the vertue of their profession. Seeke not vp the multitudes of vnskilfull persons, which ether in true religion it selfe are superstitious, or else so giuen to their lustes, that they haue forgotten what they haue promised to God. I know there be many worshippers of tombes and pictures, &c.
                  
                  
                     To the 4. that miracles worked at their chappelles or memorie (among the heretikes as the papists be) were attributed at the firste tydinges of them vnto the diuilles subtiltie, is proued by S. Augustine, who speaking of miracles wrought at such places, saith De vnitate ecclesiae cap. 1
                           •
                        . Remoueantur ista, vel figmenta mendacium hominum, vel portenta fa
                              •
                           lacium spirituum, aut enim non sunt vera quae dicuntur, aut si 
                              〈◊〉
                            atiqua mirafacta sunt, magis cauere debemus. Away with these miracles, which are either the forgeries of lying men, or the wonders of deceiuing spirites, for either chose things that are reported be not true, or if any miracles of the heretike are wrought, we ought so muche the

more to take heede of you.
                  
               
               
                  The fourth part conteineth 3. articles.
                  To the first, that to praye for the soules departed, was thought repugnāt to the scriptures, is proued by this reason, for that although it be an ancient errour, yet was it not vsed of the Churche almost for 200. yeares after Christ, and the first that we reade of in any authenticall writer that maketh mention of prayer for the deade, was Tertulian, when he was an heretike, whiche learned it of Martianus who laide the firste foundation of purgatorie, as appeareth in his booke De anima cap de infe
                           •
                        is.
                  
                  To the seconde, that to offer sacrifice and giue almes for their soules health, was accompted impietie, I aunswere as to the first, vppon which it dependeth. Origenes in Iob. lib. 3. sayeth that the Christians did celebrate the day of death, Vtpote omnium dolorum depositionem, as the layinge aside of all paine. Likewise that they did keepe the memorie of their friendes departed, as well reioysinge in their rest, as prayinge for the lyke godly endinge in faith.
                  Also they called together the people with the Cleargie, and especially the poore to their buriall feastes, vt fiat festiuitas nostra in memoriam requiei defunctis animabus, quarum memoriam celebramus, nobis autem efficiatur in odorem suauitatis in conspectu aeterni Dei, that our feastiuitie may bee made in remembraunce of the reste, whiche is vnto the soules of them that are departed, whose memorie we celebrate and to our selues into a sauoure of sweete smellinge in the sight of the eternall God. This was the iudgement of the Greeke Churche in his time, of suche assemblies, prayers, and almes, as was vsed at the buryall of the deade, or in remembraunce of them.
                  To the thirde, that the last willes of founders of almes houses, Colledges, and monasteries, were broken concerning

their temporall goodes, and legacies, and that no part thereof did come to their owne blood and familie, concerning almes houses and Colledges of learninge, it neede not bee prooued, for they are maintained by our doctrine.
                  Concerninge Monasteries there were none then, but of suche as liued with their owne labours. Neuerthelesse if anye legacie of anye founder were to mainetayne Idolatrie and false religion, as there were manye of the Paganes whiche were founders of Idolatrous temples and Colledges, lyke to the popishe monasteries, it is certeine that either they were destroyed, or else conuerted to better vses.
                  Now if Master Rastell thinke it to bee necessarie, that their legacies shoulde be restored to their owne blood and familie, vppon the dissolution of such houses, hee might doe well to perswade a nomber of popishe gentlemen in Englande that enioye abbeies and their lands, to make such restitution, and when hee hath brought to passe that all which they haue is so restored, wee will beginne likewise to exhort godly gentlemen to doe the like, or rather to applye some part of them to the maintenance of learning and religion, and to the sustentation of the poore.
                  After Maister Rastell hath earnestlye required the aunswere of these questions, whiche haue bene so often aunswered in speciall treatises, (I meane so manye of them as wee maintaine) with promise of submission if they be proued, he desireth licence to rehearse the saying of Tertulian in his booke De praescriptionibus aduersus haereticos, which is such (as hee saieth) that euen religion muste agree to it, if with anye reason it will bee credited.
                  But in deed it is suche, as while Tertulian followed too muche, hee fell from the Catholike Church to be an heretike. The summe of that saying which M. Rast. hath shamefully gesded, & falsely translated, so that it seemeth

he hath not red it in Tertulians booke, but in some mans notes, that hath ioyned together as it were cantles or patches of Tertulians saying: the effecte (I saie) is this. That because some heretikes of his time receiued not all the scriptures, and those which they did receiue, they receiued not whole, but by additions and detractions, corruptions and wrong expositions, they peruerted them to their purpose, his iudgement was, that against such heretikes, the triall was not to bee made by scriptures, by which the victorie should either be none, or vncertaine, or not sure: and therefore in as much as they were not agreed what was scripture, and how great was the authoritie thereof, he thought that the order of disputinge required, that these questions shoulde first be decided. Vnto whom the Christian faith pertaineth: whose are the scriptures: of whom: and by whom: and when: and to whom the learning is deliuered, by which men are made Christians.
                  For where it shall appeare, that the trueth of the Christian learning and faith is, there shalbe the trueth of the scriptures and of the expositions, and of all Christian traditions. This is the iudgement of Tertulian, But seeinge we receiue all the scriptures Canonicall, without addition or detraction, yea and for the principal articles of our religion, wherein we differ from the papistes, we receiue the exposition of the most auncient writers, both of the Greeke and Latine Churche: not bringinge in any newe doctrine, but requiring that the olde doctrine may be restored, this rule of Tertulian doth not concerne vs. Yet are we able to aunswere to all his demaundes without any taryinge, and so as it shall satisfie Tertulian or anye man that vnderstandeth him. We say that Christian faith pertaineth to true Christians, and that the scriptures are theirs also.
                  We say also, that the learning by which men are made Christians, was deliuered of Christ, by his Apostles, and Euangelistes, in the time of the raigne of Tiberius the Emperour, first vnto the Iewes, and after vnto the Gentiles,

making one vniuersall Chruch dispersed ouer the whole worlde. And the trueth of this Christian learning and faith thus and then deliuered, we do hold and mainteine, therefore by Tertullians rule, the truth of ye scriptures and expositions & all Christian traditions are with vs, & the rather because it cannot be proued that we hold any one article of beliefe, but the same is conteined in ye manifest wordes of the scriptures, by which onely it may be tryed, what learning Christ deliuered to his Apostles, and they to the churches. For seeing the memory of man cānot ascende vnto so many hundreth yeares, the certeine remembrance must be had out of Records of writings, & for so much as no writings are either so auncient, or so credible as ye holy scriptures, the trial must be onely by ye scriptures, notwithstanding Tertullians opinion, as Augustine teacheth in many places of his writings against the Donatistes.
                  After this discourse vpon Tertullian, he addeth sixe articles more, falsely pretending that they are the demaundes of Tertullian, but altering them into the manner of a challenge, where as I haue both set forth and answered Tertullians demaundes, according to his owne words and meaning.
                  The first is, if we can proue by any sufficient and likely argument that we haue any true Christian faith at all among vs, for faith (saith hee) cleaueth vnto authoritie which they can neuer shewe for themselues &c: In deede suche faith as cleaueth vnto mennes authoritie, wee haue none, but suche as cleaueth vnto the worde of God: as saint Paule saith, faith commeth by hearing of the worde of God, which is onely true Christian faith, wee haue the whole faith of Christians, as we do dayly proue, not onely by the auctoritie of scriptures, but also by the testimony of aunciēt writers agreeable to the same. And because he is so impudent to deny that we haue any true Christian faith at all, I demaunde of him, why hee doth not then rebaptise those that are baptised of vs, seing he is persuaded, that neither the minister nor the godfathers,

(whose faith according to their doctrin, maketh much fo
                        •
                      baptisme) haue any true Christian faith at all?
                  The seconde, that the scriptures are deliuered vnto vs, that we be the right keepers of them, is proued by this argument, that we be the church of God vnto whome the scriptures and the custodie of them perteineth. That wee are the church of God we proue by this argumēt, that we beleeue and teach all that and nothing else but yt, which God by his holy scriptures hath appointed to be beleeued and taught for Christian faith.
                  The thirde, we knowe from whome wee haue receiued the gospel, not from ye Papists. Namely frō ye doctrine of god and his holy spirite, from such ministers as were stirred vp of God and lightened with his spirite according to the scriptures, and from the books of the Greekes and Hebrues, and not of the papists.
                  The fourth, we knowe by what successours the gospell came vnto vs from God the authour of it, euen from the prophets and Apostles, Euangelistes, pastours and teachers of the church of all ages, florishing in sight of the worlde vntill the comming and tyrany of Antichrist had ouerwhelmed all the worlde with darkenesse, by whom they were persecuted and driuen into corners, according to the prophecie of Christe in the Apocalipse cap. 12. but yet so as they alwayes continued and testified the trueth, oftentimes openly protesting against Antichrist, vntill nowe at the length the time being come in which Antichrist must be consumed, they are againe brought into the sight of the worlde, and the kingdome of Antichrist is made obscure, ignominious, & contemptible.
                  The fift. we knowe at what time the Gospell was first delyuered vnto the Church of the gentiles, namely in the reigne of Tiberius, in whose time Christ suffered, since which time it hath alwayes continued, and shall do to the end of the worlde.
                  To the sixt. wherein he requireth vs to shew the foundatiō of some Church, house, communion table, or booke &c. by which it may bee gathered that a true apostolike

religion was within the 600. yeares as void of ornamēts, ceremonies, reuerence, distinction of places and dignities, sacraments and solemnities perteining to sacraments as ours is. I answere, our religion hath all sacraments, ornaments, ceremonies, distinction, solemnities, reuerence, necessarie vnto eternall life, and therfore to shewe a monument of a religion voide of these, it perteineth not to vs. Beside that it is a foolishe and vnreasonable demaund, for vs to shewe any such monument remaining aboue 900. yeares, when by so often inuasion of enemies and mutation of states, as hath fallen in the worlde, other monuments could not remain, but learned writings out of which we haue often proued our religiō to be the same, that was in the most auncient and purest times of those 600. yeares after Christ.
                  In the conclusion Maister Rastell protesteth, vntil the aunswere be deuised, that he will continue in that faith which Augustine ye Monke receiued of Gregory ye great, and he of Pelagius, & Pelagius of Benedictus, and so reherseth ye Bishops names of Rome vnto Peter who receiued his doctrine of Christ: whiche is nothing else but a popish bragge. For neither is he nor al the rablement of them able to proue, that Christ deliuered to Peter, or Peter to Clemens a greate number of articles of doctrine, that Augustine deliuered to the Saxons, neither that he and his fellow Papists, do hold all that doctrine & faith, which Augustine receiued of Gregory, & Gregory of Pelagius &c. ascending to ye heighest. For a great number of errours and corruptions haue since that time crept into the Church, that neither Augustine nor Gregory euer heard off.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Faultes escaped. The first number signifieth the page, the last the number of the lines.
            Page 6 line 17 me to l. me but to 9 38 title l. little 57 28 conceiue l. concurre 68 28 quo l. quem 73 8 continue l. conteine 90 13 are l. not 114 33 vbi
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                l. vti
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                115 30 Hierome l. Herevpon 145 1 diuinitie l. dignitie 171 22 l. adunationē 25 adunation 1847 l. Guitmūdus 202 3 saint l. sēt 237 23 vvhich l. vvith vs 254 37 that l. if 271 25 l. by vvhich 277 19 Catatholia l. Catathetico 287 9 as grossly l. a grosselye 29 8 18 Covvel. rave 19 Caulfes l. ravve 367 35 Enconijs l Encaenijs 430 38 could not haue l. could haue 434 21 tvventieth l. thirtieth 439 28 Arrius l. Aerius 443 29 holy l. highe 463 14 this l. his 28 lesse l. better 32 vituspatiū l. vitas patrū 484 37 decree l. deare 502 15 body l. bloud 512 10 our l. an 522 6 petat l. potat 538 13 their l. the 542 21 ancestri l. authoritie 35 iustification l. instruction 343 27 pope l. people 546 9 Sina l. Syria 54 9 Euasius l. Euagrius 35 opportunitie l. importunitie 556 36 Augustus l. Augustulus 557 3 selfe l. like 570 30 variations l. vacations 574 32 tables l. idoles 589 9 Papathium l. Pammachium 590 13 Peter l. Paule 31 autorato l. ancorato 605 31 nor l. vvere & vvere l. to be 610 17 three l. their 34 l. him that 616 18 admit l. omit 617 27 an l. and an 625 30 algarus Abgarus 631 23 names l. nunnes 29 Chapter l. Chaire 632 14 emende l. emendo 24 Constantius l. constātinus 637 36 this l. his 6417 pavende l. paneade 653 11 vvord l. vvood 656 21 offering l. esteming 665 8 paynted l. printed 621 27 capillorum l. lapillorum & 32 l. I here 700 10 Marianatha l. Maran-atha 707 32 iust l. first 708 28 vvhich l. vvith 720 1 l. but that our cōmunion 736 7 excepted l. accepted 746 31 such a not l. not such a 746 34 yet l. yea 761 3 & 33 sauoring l. sovvering 775 11 is of no force l. is not farre of 779 8 readdid call 181 5 guest l. ghost 783 4 any l. an 7 is l. vs 30 reade l. rende 790 33 meaning l. mariage 797 18 vt l. et 798 10 Martianus l. Montanus.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   