
      
         
            
            
            THE
ANATOMIE
OF VRINES.
            CONTAINING THE CONVICtion
and condemnation of them.
            Or, the ſecond Part of our diſcourſe of vrines.
            Detecting and vnfolding the manifold falſhoods and
abuſes committed by the vulgar ſort of Practitioners,
in the iudgement of diſeaſes by the vrines onely: together
with a narrow ſuruey of their ſubſtance,
chiefe colours, and manifold contents, ioyning
withall the right vſe of vrines.
            Wherein is contained plentie of profitable and delectable
Hiſtories concerning this ſubiect.
            Collected, as well out of the ancient Greeke, Latine, and Arabian
Authors, as out of our late famous Phyſitians of ſeuerall
Nations: their authorities quoted and tranſlated out of
the originall tongues, together with ſome of the
Authors owne obſeruations.
            
               By IAMES HART of NORTHAMPTON.
            Neuer heretofore publiſhed.
            
               LONDON,
Printed by Richard Field for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be
ſold at his ſhop at the South doore of Pauls. 1625.
         
         
            
            
            of vrines, to wit, ſuch as do decline from any one extreame,
what concerneth the ſame, may eaſily, by that which hath
bene ſaid of the ſame extreame, be vnderſtood. Now if any
ſhall enquire what is the cauſe I ſpend ſo much time about
this ſubiect: I anſwer, it is by reaſon of the old inueterate opinion,
or rather errour, which moſt people haue conceiued
concerning this ſtrumpet; whom for this cauſe I haue here
vnmasked, and layed open to the view of euery one that will
not ſhut his eyes in the cleare Sunne-ſhine; and that to the
end that none may be circumuented by the fraud and cozenage
of ſuch as abuſe her for their owne benefit. But leſt any
ſhould imagine theſe things to be but fancies fetcht from
mine owne braine, therefore not contented to ſet down mine
owne poſitiue opinion, I haue both backt, fortified and flanked
it with the bulwarks of the best writers of ancient and
later times, whoſe owne words I haue truly tranſlated, directing
thee likewiſe, learned Reader, to the marginall quotations,
where for thy recreation and better ſatisfaction, not
the names of the authors onely, and the particular places, but
the very words of the originall are often ſet downe, that ſo
it may more euidently appeare, that this latter iurie finds her
guiltie, as the former great enqueſt after the inditement
found Billa vera. The condemnation muſt then of neceſsitie
follow, ſince the parties offending hauing had theſe three laſt
aſsizes allowed them to pleade for themſelues, haue ſaid nothing.
This ſentence I referre to thisThe honorable Court of Parliament. ſage aſſembly, who, as
I hope, will take this publicke buſineſſe, as a matter of no ſmall
moment, into their ſerious conſiderations. But me thinkes I
heare ſome ſay, what is then the vſe of vrines in diſcerning
of diſeaſes? or ſerueth it for no vſe at all? I anſwer, that ſo
farre am I from abrogating this ſo ancient and neceſſarie
a ſigne, receiued by all our ancient and late writers, which
I do highly eſteeme, and account of the ſame being rightly

vſed, howbeit as it is commonly vſed, it is moſt ſhamefully abuſed.
            The right vſe of vrine then is,The right vſe of vrines. together with all the reſt
of the ſignes and ſeuerall circumſtances of the diſeaſe (in
ſuch diſeaſes I meane where it is of any force or validitie, in
ſome diſeaſes being of no vſe at all) to giue vs notice of the
nature, together with the changes and alterations, as likewiſe
what is like to be the iſſue of the ſame. The Phyſitian is
therefore firſt to enquire diligently into the nature of the diſeaſe,
together with all the other ſignes and circumſtances
thereof: and then, comparing all together, to giue forth his
beſt and moſt aſſured iudgeme
                  •
               t.Fooliſh cuſtom of the countrey people. Moſt fooliſh therefore and
abſurd is the ſottiſh cuſtome of the countrey people now a
dayes, bringing the vrine to the Phyſitian, it may be in ſome
old oylie or inkie bottle, and then to demand of him as of ſome
Delphian oracle, the whole nature of the diſeaſe, the patients
age, and diuerſe other things wherewith they ought to
acquaint vs, as alſo with all the other ſignes and circumſtances
of the diſeaſe: euen as the client is to lay open his cauſe to
the Lawyer, how learned ſoeuer, and skilfull in his profeſſion.
It is yet not vnworthie the obſeruation, that one and the
ſame vrine hath often diuers and ſeuerall ſignifications, and
therefore vnleſſe by diuerſe other ſignes and circumſtances
limited, can neuer affoord vs any certaintie, as hereafter
both in the colours and contents the enſuing diſcourſe ſhall
make manifeſt. And thus may the right vſe to the wiſe and
vnderſtanding eaſily appeare; eſpecially to ſuch as haue bene
or yet ſhall hereafter be admitted vnto ſuch myſteries. And
therefore ignorant Empiricks, women, and many other ſuch,
haue no ſhare or intereſt in theſe affaires, as not being able to
diue into the depth of the premiſſes. And as for cleargie men,
they cannot be ignorant, that they ought to be employed about
buſineſſes of an higher nature. And if they will haue a care

of the ſoules entruſted to them, they need not trouble themſelues
with their bodies. Now that one ſigne, in ſome diſeaſes
onely to be obſerued to be of any vſe, ſhould with a Papall
prerogatiue aſſume all authoritie vnto it ſelfe, is both againſt
common ſenſe,The pulſe in many diſeaſes to be preferred before the vrine. daily experience, and the authorities of the
learned. The pulſe will pleade for a preheminence aboue the
vrine: and to iudge of this, as of a number of other ſignes,
it will of neceſsitie require the Phyſitians preſence. Now
that the vrines in many diſeaſes, and thoſe of vndoubted
danger, do often ſhew thee no more then the ground thou goeſt on;
and that many other ſignes beſides are of neceſsitie to
be obſerued, hath bene at great length related in the former
tractate, and ſhall yet more plainly and particularly in this
which followeth appeare. And for thy more particular information,
I haue ſet downe the ſeuerall ſignifications of vrines,
and that according to the opinions of ſuch Authors as haue
written of them; together with ſome particulars which haue
neuer yet bene publiſhed by any Engliſh writer that I haue
as yet ſeene, as by the contents of the bookes and chapters may
appeare. Some things alſo which haue bene by others written
and auouched for vncontrolled truths, I haue confuted as
falſe and erronious: and that, as I thinkt, by vnanſwerable
arguments, illuſtrating the ſame with varietie of ancient
and recent authorities, together with plentie of pertinent
examples, being true hiſtoricall relations, obſerued both by my
ſelfe and other Authors: the which howſoeuer they do not
ſimply proue; yet do they not a little illustrate the matter in
hand, and make it more perſpicuous to the meaner ſort. Now
whereas I ſometimes inſert ſomething of the ignorance and
vnſufficiencie of ſome offenders, ſome may, perhaps, reply,
that it may ſometimes befall a good Phyſitian to faile as well
as any of them. I confeſſe Indeed, Bernardus non videt omnia:
He is a good horſe that neuer ſtumbled. Neuer to

faile is a priuiledge denyed to any of the ofſpring of ſinfull
Adam:Quand
                     •
                  que b
                     •
                  
                  nus dormitat H
                     •
                  
                  merus. Horat. howbeit the learned Phyſitian building vpon reaſon
and experience, keepeth alwayes an orderly and methodicall
courſe in all his proceedings: and if he may ſometimes
erre (as being a man and not a God) how much more then an
ignorant Empiricke, a ſhee-Phyſitian (ſuch a one as now liueth
in Northamptonſhire, and in whom I wonder that any
that hath any braines in his head can ſee any ſufficiencie)
that I ſay nothing of a medling Miniſter that neuer was
trained vp in that profeſſion; ſhall they I ſay be obnoxious to
error in ſo intricate an Art, wherein they haue no intereſt,
as being meere vſurpers vpon other mens right? Beſides, the
vulgar not being able to iudge of the ſufficiencie of the learned
Phyſitian, preferreth often the paines of ſome ignorant
Empiricke, (ſoothed vp it may be by the ſucceſſe of ſome caſuall
cure) before the labors of the moſt learned & honeſt artiſt.
But my meaning is here of an ordinary erronious courſe
of practiſing, euē againſt the rules of art, & the very grounds
& principles of this phyſicall profeſsion. Of ſuch errors I could
haue ſet downe a multitude, beſides thoſe few which I had
by relation, either from the patients themſelues, or elſe from
ſome of their moſt familiar friends and acquaintances, who
haue proteſted, that they will be readie to iuſtifie the ſame vppon
their oathes.Caſuall cures ſometimes ſucceeding, do not proue a ſufficiencie in the par
                  
                     •
                  ies thus practi
                  
                     •
                  ing. Neither yet let this ſuffice, that ſome of their
proctors pleade for them a number of happy and ſucceſſefull
euents; ſince that thus we may often magnifie the moſt vile
wizard, and moſt ignorant old wife in the countrey: this argument
taken from iſſue and euent being a meere Paralogiſme,
a fallacie and deceit, taking that often for a true
cauſe which is no cauſe indeed, as in the concluſion of this
diſcourſe ſhall more plainly appeare. And in this I appeale to
the learned and honeſt Artiſt, not to ſuch a perſons paraſite,
who taketh for good and current coyne what ſoeuer commeth

out of his mint, nor yet their otherwiſe honest, yet in this
point, too partiall patients, in this particular blinded with
the miſt of ignorance, or a preiudicate opinion of ſuch mens
ſuppoſed ſufficiencie, they themſelues not being able herein
to diſcerne betwixt right and wrong.
            Now that this hath bene noAn vſual & ordina
                     •
                  ie cuſtome to browbeat & ouerthrow errors and impoſture, and to pleade for truth. vnuſuall cuſtome to browbeat
and ouerthow errors, euen in this profeſsion, and for the
maintaining of truth to pleade againſt impoſture, might eaſily,
as well by ancient as later authorities, be euinced, which
would be too tedious here to relate. But amongst many, one
late writer I cannot paſſe by (the learned Libauius I meane)
who hath wreſtled with many ſuch monſters; as namely Michelius,
Hartmannus, Scheunemannus, the impudent
Prieſt Gramau
                     •
                  s, and that famous, I meane infamous impostor
Ambaldus, author of that counterfeitThis Panacaea was a certaine medicine made of ſaffron, quick ſiluer, vermilion, antimonie, and certaine ſea ſhels made vp in faſhion of triangular lozenges, ſtamped and ſealed with certaine ſtrange characters, and ſold at a very deare rate, the very name importing asmuch as a medicine againſt all diſeaſes; and was in as great, or greater eſteeme among the Germanes, as euer Aurum potabile once here amongſt our ſelues. Liban contra Ambald & defenſ. ſyntagm. a
                        •
                     can. chym. contra Henuingum Scheunem.
                Panacea, like
our Aurum potabile, ſuppoſed good againſt moſt, if not all
infirmities; who notwithstanding, for his ignorance not being
able to vndergo the triall and examination of the Phyſitians
of the Citie of Ausburg, was moſt iuſtly by the Magiſtate
baniſhed the ſame, and ſo his fame after a while turned
to fume or ſmoke. And haue we not of late dayes had here
at homeD. Gwin. & D. Ra
                     •
                  igh againſt aurum potabile, D. Cotta againſt this and diuers ignorant erronious practiſers.
                ſome maintainers of truth and oppoſers of impoſture,
ſome liuing euen at this day? And againſt this ſame
abuſe in particular, beſides Foreſt, Euritius Cordus publiſhed
in Latine a learned booke: ſo did likewiſe Guilielmus
Adolphus Scribonius, the learned Langius in ſome of his
Epiſtles, and many others alſo, as hereafter ſhall appeare. But
I am not ignorant, that whoſoeuer will publ
                  •
               ſh any thing in
this laſt and learned age, cannot chuſe but vndergo the cenſure
of many iudges, as witneſſeth the worthieHieron epiſt. 
                     •
                  32. partis tertia referente Langio. 
               
                  
                     •
                  erome.
Some will perhaps ſay the ſtile is too meane and plaine: and
others, if there were any elegancie in it, would cry out, he

playes the Orator (perhaps odious in handling vrines) not
the Phyſitian. And ſome preoccupied with a partiall and preiudicate
opinion, like the diſeaſed of ſome cholericke feauer,
to whō the ſweeteſt things ſeeme bitter: ſo whatſoeuer fruite
groweth in ſome mens gardens, be it neuer ſo good, will giue
no content to ſome mens ouer curious & nice reliſhes: ſo hard
a thing is it to practiſe this one point, Omnibus placeto.
            
            Howſoeuer, kinde Reader, if thou come with a deſire to
ſubmit thy ſelfe to the rules of reaſon, to haue thy iudgement
rectified if erronious, and with an earneſt deſire to be fully
informed of the truth, let not my labour be lost, but peruſe,
I pray thee, this tractate, wherein thou mayeſt perhaps finde
ſomething for thy ſatisfaction. And howſoeuer, perhaps, the
cookerie may not giue thee full content, yet remember the
matter is but meane, in the which I haue had a greater regard
to the matter it ſelfe, then to the curious manner of deliuering
the ſame; and a greater care to ſatisfie the ſimpleſt
vnderſtandings (for whoſe cauſe I haue principally publiſhed
theſe may paines) then with the ornaments of an Orator
to pleaſe the eares of the moſt learned. Optimum condimentum
fames: A good appetite needeth no ſauce. The
Germanes in diuerſe places of Saxony, in ſtead of currants
bake their cakes with blacke Poppy ſeeds: and in ſtead of
ſtewed broth boyle wilde or horſe radiſhes with their beefe.
The French findeth a good relliſh in his ſoure ſauces: and a
Spaniard maketh often as great account of a Lemmon, as an
Engliſh man of a pecce of powdered beefe. Whatſoeuer it is,
and howſoeuer liked, yet my principall purpoſe was and is to
profit the publicke. If I ſhould pleade a priuiledge from backbiters,
and immunitie from malignant tongues, I ſhould ſu
                  •
               
for that which hath bene denyed the greateſt and worthieſt
perſonages of ancient and later times. And ſome varlets
haue bene found, who would rather fire the famous temple of

Diana, then not miniſter matter to talke of them. And as for
my ſelfe, I deny not but I ſhall find ſome of the offenders here
mentioned, who will ſnarle and grumble at my ſo plaine and
vnpartiall reprouing of their faults. Some, who ſhould haue
ſhewed better example, conſcious to themſelues of their owne
guiltineſſe, haue broken the ice already, & as I am informed,
haue much repined at the Preface of my former tractate.Iohn 18. 23. 
               If I
haue ſpoken euill be are witneſſe of the euill: but if well,
why ſmiteſt thou me? If they can iustifie their actions, let
them publiſh their apologie, and let the Reader iudge. But if
they can do nothing elſe but maligne other mens labours, and
themſelues loyter, I wiſh them to be filent.
            
               Carpere vel noli noſtra vel ede tua.Martia
                        •
                     .
               
               Bring forth thy birth, or barke not thus at mine.
            
            But all they can ſay, moueth me no more then the barking
of a dog, or the yelping of a foxe, as knowing that,
            
               Obſequium amicos, veritas odium parit.Terent.
               
               Flatterie gets friends, but truth oft enuie finds.
            
            It is for thy ſake therefore, kind and vnpartiall reader, who
haſt learned to value vertue at her higheſt worth, that I haue
vndertaken this taske: which I acknowledge to be ſo far frō
perfection, that I confeſſe I haue but with a rude pencill pourtrayed
out the lineaments of this picture, giuing hereby fit opportunity
to ſome cunning Apelles to perfect the ſame hereafter.
Homo ſum,
               Terent. 
               humani à me nihil alienū puto: A man
I am, and as all the ſonnes of Adam, ſubiect to error. But let
the righteous reproue me,
               Pſal. 141. 5. 
               it ſhall be as a precious ointment,
and ſhall not hurt my head. So intreating thy patience
to take theſe my paines in good part, not to be too ſharpe
and cenſorious, nor yet too open eared to hearken to enuious
inuectiue ſpeeches of any whoſe ſores are here lanced, and to
keepe one eare open for thy friends iuſt apologie, I reſt,
            
               Thy euer vnfained, well-wiſhing friend, a fauourer of the
publicke good, and a profeſt enemie to all fraud and
impoſture,

                     •
                  AMES HART.
            
         
         
            
            THE CONTENTS OF THE
Chapters contained in this whole Tractate.
            
               IN THE FIRST BOOKE.
               
                  CHAP. 1.
                  THe Introduction, where ſome thing of the antiquitie, excellencie,
and eminencie of Phyſicke, and of the lawleſſe
intruſion of ſome ignorant perſons vpon the profeſſion of Phyſicke,
with the abſurditie of the ſame.
                  CHAP. 2. Of the vncertaine iudgement affoorded vs by
vrines in generall, together with their limitation to certaine
diſeaſes, & that out of a manie learned and approoued Authors.
                  CHAP. 3. That euen in diſeaſes of the Liuer and within the
veines, the vrine doth often deceiue the moſt skilfull Phyſitian.
                  CHAP. 4. That by the vrine onely it cannot abſolutely be
knowne whether a woman be with child or no, contrary to the
vulgar opinion.
                  CHAP. 5. That the ſexe cannot be diſcerned by the vrine.
               
            
            
               IN THE SECOND BOOKE.
               
                  CHAP. 1.
                  THat the regions of the vrine are not anſwerable to the regions
of the body of man, as alſo concerning the ſubſtance
of vrines thicke and thin; their manifold ſignifications,
and vncertaintie of iudgement by the ſame.
                  CHAP. 2. Of the accidents of vrine, the quantitie, ſmell, &c.
and that no certaine and aſſured truth can by them be preſaged
or knowne.
                  CHAP. 3. Of the colours of vrines, how deceitfull they

prooue, and firſt of the colour commonly called palew, & light
ſaffron.
                  CHAP. 4. Of red vrines; how eaſily one may thereby be
deceiued: of piſſing of bloud.
                  CHAP. 5. Of blacke vrines, and that they are not alwayes
ſo dangerous as they are deemed. Of blew, aſh-coloured, leaden
and greene coloured vrines, together with their ſeuerall ſignifications
and vncertainties.
                  CHAP. 6. The manifold ſignifications of white vrines, as alſo
the great vncertaintie of iudgement by the ſame.
                  CHAP. 7. Of the circle or garland, ſpume, and froth, bubbles,
ſmoke, or vapour, and fat in the ouermoſt region of the vrine,
and what certaintie from thence can be collected.
                  CHAP. 8. Of the cloud, ſwimme, or ſublimation, together
with diuerſe ſorts of reſidences, and the vncertaintie of their
ſignifications.
                  CHAP. 9. Of the manner of piſſing: the retention or ſtoppage
of vrine, totall or in part: of inuoluntarie piſſing, both in
ſickneſſe and in health.
                  CHAP. 10. Of the fond and fooliſh opinion concerning
diſtillation of vrines. Of the water of ſeparation, together with
the vncertaintie of iudgement by ſuch meanes.
                  CHAP. 11. The concluſion of the whole diſcourſe, where
ſomething concerning iſſue and euent, and of cauſuall cures.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE NAMES OF SVCH FAMOVS
Phyſitians as are alledged in this
preſent Tractate.
            
               
                  ACtuarius. Aetius. Ancient Greeke Phyſitians.
               
                  Alexander Benedictus. A learned Italian Phyſitian.
               
                  Alexander Trallianus. An ancient Greeke Phyſitian.
               
                  Amatus. A learned Portugall Phyſitian.
               
                  Ambroſius Paraeus. Surgeon to three French Kings.
               
                  Andreas Laurentius. Phyſitian to King Henry the fourth.
               
                  Andreas Libauius. A very learned Germane Phyſitian.
               
                  Antonius Ʋaletius. A learned French Phyſitian.
               
                  Archigenes. An ancient Phyſitian of Syria.
               
                  Aretaeus Cappadox: or of Cappadocia.
               
                  Beniamin Lobſhuts. A learned Germane Phyſitian.
               
                  Chryſtophorus à Ʋega. A Phyſitian to the high and mightie
Prince Charles, Prince of Spaine, and D. of the chaire in the
Vniuerſitie of Complutum.
               Claudius Galenus.
               
                  Diomedes Cornarius. Phyſitian to Maximilian Archduke of Auſtria,
and brother to Rodolphus and Matthias late Emperours.
               
                  Duncanus Liddelius of Aberdene in Scotland, Phyſitian to Henricus
Iulius, the late and laſt Duke of Brawnſwicke, and D. of
the chaire for Phyſicke and the Mathematickes in the Vniuerſitie
of Helmſtadt.
               
                  Felix Platerus. Phyſitian to the illuſtrious Duke of Wirtemberg,
and one of the D. of the chaire in the famous Vniuerſitie
of Baſil in Switzerland.
               
                  Franciſcus Emericus, D. in Phyſicke, and practicall profeſſor in the Vniuerſitie of Vienna.
               
                  Franciſcus Ʋalleriola. A learned French Phyſitian.
               
                  Gaſper Bauhinus. Phyſitian to the late mentioned Duke of

Wirtemberg, and D. of the chaire in the aforeſaid Vniuerſitie
of Baſil.
               
                  Guilielmus Adolphus Scribonius. A famous Germane Phyſitian.
               
                  Guilielmus Rondeletius. D. of the chaire in the famous Vniuerſitie
of Montpeliers in France.
               
                  Hieronymus Cardanus. A learned Italian Phyſitian.
               
                  Hieronymus Mercurialis. A learned Italian Phyſitian, and D. of
the chaire in the Vniuerſitie of Padua.
               
                  Hieronymus Montuus. Phyſitian to Frances the 1. French King.
               
                  Hieronymus Reuſnerus. A learned Germane Phyſitian.
               Hippocrates.
               
                  Iacobus Douinetus. A Germane Phyſitian.
               
                  Iacobus Holliricus. A famous Phyſitian of Paris in France.
               
                  Iacobus Syluius. A French Phyſitian of good account.
               
                  Iean Marinello, of Forli in Italie, an Italian Phyſitian.
               
                  I. Fleſher. A learned Engliſh Phyſitian.
               
                  Iodocus Willichius. D. of the chaire in the Vniuerſitie of Franckford
on the Oder in Germanie.
               
                  Iohannes Anglicus, or Gateſden, the Author of Roſa Anglica, a
famous Engliſh Phyſitian, who liued in anno 1320.
               Iohannes Belfortis.
               
                  Iohannes le Bon. A French Phyſitian of good note.
               
                  Iohannes Caius. A learned Engliſh Phyſitian.
               
                  Iohannes Crato a Kra
                        ••
                     theim. Phyſitian to three Emperours of
the houſe of Auſt
                     •
                  ia.
               Iohannes Damaſcenus.
               
                  Iohannes Fernelius. Phyſitian to Henry the 2. French King.
               
                  Iohannes Heurnius. A learned Low countrey Phyſitian, and D.
of the chaire in the Vniuerſitie of Leyden in Holland.
               
                  Iohannes Langius. Phyſitian to fiue Electors, Princes Palatines
of Rhene.
               
                  Iohannes Michael Sauonarola. Phyſitian to Borſius ſometimes
Duke of Ferrara in Italie.
               
                  Iohannes Montanus. A learned French Phyſitian.
               
                  Iohannes Renodaeus. A famous Phyſitian of the ſame nation.
               
                  Iohannes Schenckius. A learned Germane Phyſitian.
               
                  Laurentius Ioubertus. Phyſitian to Henry the 3. French King,

Chancellour in the Vniuerſitie of Mont-peliers, and D. of the
chaire there.
               
                  Leo Roganus. A famous Romane Phyſitian.
               
                  Leonardus Turnheiſſerus. A Germane Phyſitian.
               
                  Leuinus Lemnius. A learned Phyſitian of Zeland.
               
                  Ludouicus Mercatus. Phyſitian to Philip the 2. and 3. kings of
Spaine, and D. of the chaire in the Vniuerſitie of Vallad'olid
in Spaine.
               
                  Marcellus Donatus of Mantua in Italie, a Phyſitian of good account,
Knight and D. in Phyſicke.
               
                  Martinus Akakia. A learned French Phyſitian.
               Matthaeus de Gradi.
               Nicolus Florentinus.
               Paulus Aegineta.
               
                  Petrus Foreſtus. A famous Phyſitian of Holland.
               
                  Petrus Sphaererius. Phyſitian to the Archbiſhop of Mentz.
               
                  Rembertus Dodonaeus. Phyſitian to the Emperour Rodolphus 2.
Rhaſes. An Arabian Phyſitian.
               Rufus Epheſius.
               
                  Timotheus Bricht of Cambridge. A learned Engliſh Phyſitian.
               
                  Thomas Rodericus à Ʋega. A learned Spaniſh Phyſitian.
            
            Beſides theſe, many moe might haue bene to the ſame purpoſe,
not impertinently produced, which I thought might well
be ſpared, theſe being to an indifferent and vnpartiall Reader
ſufficient.
            
               SOME OTHER AVTHORS.
               Aelianus.
               Ariſtoteles.
               Bible.
               Carion.
               Catullus.
               Cicero.
               Henricus Ranzouius.
               Herodotus.
               Homerus.
               Ierome.
               Ioſephus.
               Iuuenalis.
               Lactantius.
               Martialis.
               Nicetas.
               Plinius.
               Polibius.
               Sabellicus.
               Statius.
               Terentius.
               Zonaras.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST BOOKE
OF THE ANATOMIE
OF VRINES.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  IN theſe two bookes is a continuation of the diſcourſe
concerning the vncertaintie of iudgement
in diſeaſes by the ſole and bare inſpection
of the vrine onely, without the concourſe of the
reſt of the other ſignes; whereunto the ſight of the patient is
altogether neceſſary. In the firſt booke and firſt Chapter, by
way of introduction, ſomething is ſaid of the antiquitie,
excellencie, and eminencie of phyſicke; as alſo concerning the
lawleſſe intruſion of ſome ignorant perſons vpon this profeſſion,
with the abſurdities of the ſame. Then in the next place
follow certaine authorities of ſome famous Phyſitians againſt
this abuſe in generall: and afterwards alſo in ſome ſuch
diſeaſes where it is thought to be of greateſt force and validitie.
And after ſhall fully be confuted that fooliſh, abſurd,
and inueterate opinion, of diſcerning whether a woman be
with child or no, by the bare inſpection of the vrine onely:
and that by vnanſwerable arguments, together with ſome
inſtances, both of mine owne and other ancient and late
Phyſitians of no ſmall note. And laſtly ſhall be plainly demonſtrated,
that the ſexe cannot by the vrine onely be diſcerned,
contrary to the vulgar opinion.
            
            
               
               CHAP. I.
               The introduction, whereſome thing concerning the antiquitie, excellencie,
and eminencie of phyſicke, and of the lawleſſe intruſion
of ſome ignorant perſons vpon this profeſſion, with the
abſurditie of the ſame.
               
                  OVr moſt great and omnipotent God, of his
great goodneſſe, hauing firſt created and framed
theſe glorious globes and orbes of the
vniuerſe, together with the earth and all the
ornaments and furniture of the ſame, at laſt
made man, that microcoſme, or little world, as
it were an epitome or abridgment of this great vniuerſall
world: and that according to his owne likeneſſe, and placed
him in earthly paradiſe. But not long after being by the ſerpent
that old inuetera
                     •
                  e enemie of mankind, ſeduced to ſinne, he
became a map of miſerie, obnoxious to death and eternall damnation;
and euen in this life ſubiect to innumerable ſickneſſes.
So farre notwithſtanding, did his makers bountie abound, that
not onely ſent he him a Sauiour to redeeme him from damnation,
but furniſhed him with innumerable remedies againſt his
manifold infirmities.Ioſeph. antiquit. Iudaic. l. 1. cap. 4. Zonaras annal. lib. 1. Theſe Adam taught his ſonne Seth; and
he againe (leſt water or fire ſhould deſtroy them) wrote the
principles of phyſicke in hieroglyphicke letters, vpon two pillars;
one of ſtone, againſt the rage of the water, the other on
bricke againſt the furie of the fire. Thus came the art to be
propagated to poſteritie: and Abrahams ſeed ſoiourning in
Aegypt that vnthankfull nation, yet for their hoſpitalitie to
Gods people reaped this benefit, that they were by them inſtructed
in the principles of this profeſſion, and many moe be
                  
                     •
                  ides.
The Greeks gained this knowledge of the Aegyptians,
who were not idle, but improuing the ſame, would willingly
haue aſſumed all the honour to themſelues.High account of phyſicke amongſt the Graecians. In great honour
and reputation was it amongſt this nation for many yeares, and
the profeſſors of the ſame in great credit and account with the
mightieſt Monarches: witneſſe the honour exhibited to Hippocrates
and his poſteritie, by the Athenians in particular. And the

account the Perſians made of it, may from hence euidently appeare,Amongſt the Perſians.
that the great Artaxerxes ſendeth to Hiſtanes gouernour
of the Helleſpont this meſſage.Hippocr. in epiſt. The fame and renowne of the
noble Hippocrates, of the race & linage of Aeſculapius, borne in
the Ile of Cos, together with his great skill and ſufficiencie, are
come to mine eares: beſtow thou therefore vpon him as much
gold as he ſhall demand of thee, and whatſoeuer he ſhall haue
need of, beſtow it vpon him in moſt plentifull manner, and
haue a care to ſend him to me: for he ſhall be equall in honour
and dignitie with the greateſt Princes of Perſia. And moreouer,
if there be any other wiſe learned man in Europe, let him
be enrolled amongſt the Kings domeſticke & familiar friends,
not ſparing for any coſt whatſoeuer: for ſuch men are not euery
where eaſily to be found.Vide Sabell ennead. 9. lib. 2. Zonar. annal. tomo. 3. alioſque neoter. After many yeares, the Turkiſh tyrannie
like a violent inundation ouerflowing the moſt part of
Aſia, together with no ſmall part of Europe, this profeſſion being
now baniſhed out of Greece its owne naturall ſoile, together
with the reſt of the Muſes, it ſought for ſhelter and ſuccour
amongſt the rude Arabians,Entertainment amongſt the Arabians. where it was welcomed with ſuch
entertainment, as ſuch a countrey could affoord it: where howbeit
it was enlarged by many ſuch ſimples as India and Arabia
would yeeld, yet haue their bookes bene ſo branded by barbarous
tranſlators, that they are not euen vntill this day freed from
the ſame.Amongſt the Romans. Amongſt the Romans likewiſe it was not a little reſpected,
where that worthy Emperour Auguſtus hauing among
many others, ſome intelligence of the great abuſes committed
by ignorant intruders vpon this profeſſion, together with the
great dammage redounding to the ſubiect, by meanes of this
lawleſſe libertie,The law of Auguſtus Caeſar againſt ignorant and vnskilfull practiſers of phyſicke. made a law as followeth▪ 
                  That no perſon, of what
eſtate or degree ſoeuer, within the Romane Empire, ſhould either
teach or practiſe phyſicke, vndertaking the cure of any ſicke perſons,
vnleſſe he were firſt licenſed and authoriſed by the Emperor himſelfe,
or by ſuch as ſhould by him be deputed or appointed for this purpoſe.
This law was long inuiolably kept by the ſucceeding Caeſars,
vntill ſuch time as the barbarousVide ſupra, & inter neoter. Chronic. Carion. aedit. 1608. in 8. Saracens & Turks, vnder the
conduct of that monſter of mankind Mahomet, did with fire &
ſword waſte and deſtroy a great part of Aſia, eſpecially Syria,

together with Greece and the countrey about Conſtantinople:
the Goths, Huns, & Vandals omitting no kind of crueltie in the
other parts of Europe,Mars enemie to Minerua. Italie in particular. Theſe, beſides many
other miſeries, did alſo ſubuert and deſtroy moſt of the Vniuerſities
and ſchooles of good learning, burning the bookes they
could come by, and bringing in by this meanes meere barbarouſneſſe
and ignorance. This great inundation and deluge
gaue no ſmall encouragement to all manner of cozeners to
practiſe their impoſture, ſparing neither the perſons nor the purſes
of the oppreſſed people.Lotharius firſt Emperour of the houſe of Saxony reſtored learning and learned men in the weſt. This wofull calamitie continued
vntill Lotharius Duke of Saxonie was crowned Emperour at
Rome. This worthy Emperour both erected a number of new
nurſeries of good learning, and repaired ſuch as were founded
before his time, adding and increaſing meanes for the maintenance
of theſe new erected ſchooles and Vniuerſities. Moreouer,De his vide orationem doctoris Beniamin Lobſchuts impreſſam cum obſeruat. medic. Diomedis Cornarij medicina Doctoris.
he cauſed to be ſent for out of euery countrey and kingdome,
the moſt famous and learned men that were to be found,
and ſuch as did moſt excell in euery art and ſcience. And for the
better furtherance of this his purpoſe, he granted many priuiledges
and immunities to the aforeſaid Vniuerſities & ſchooles,
the whole Profeſſors and Students in the ſame. And thus phyſicke
with the reſt reuiued againe; and being healed of her former
wounds, was drawne out of the darke dungeon and priſon
wherin ſhe had ſo long lien in thraldome and captiuitie, and by
meanes of this noble Emperour reſtored to her former dignitie
and libertie againe. Now to adde more grace and dignitie to
this noble profeſſion, he renewed againe that worthy law of
Auguſtus, inhibiting and diſcharging any perſon whatſoeuer,
either to practiſe or profeſſe this or any other art or ſcience,
vnleſſe he were firſt licenſed from the Emperours court. But
well foreſeeing the inconueniences which might from hence
ariſe, if all ſuch buſineſſes ſhould depend vpon his court; for
this cauſe he granted this priuiledge and authoritie to the aforeſaid
Vniuerſities throughout the whole Empire. This ſo
wholeſome conſtitution of Lotharius all the ſucceeding Emperours
to this day haue continued.Firſt originall of Doctors and other degrees in the Vniuerſities. And thus came firſt in theſe
titles of Doctor, Maſter, &c. not by the appointment of any

priuate man, but by the lawes of Emperours and Kings of
Chriſtendome. Now beſides the premiſſes, I would eaſily euince
both the eminencie and excellencie of this profeſſion
from the vtilitie and neceſſitie,Vtilitie and neceſſitie of this profeſſion. as being of neceſſarie vſe for
euery age, eſtate and degree; as alſo the worthy ſubiect thereof,
to wit, the body of man, ſo farre foorth as diſeaſes are expelled,
and health preſerued; it being alſo the ſhrine of the
ſoule, & the coſtly coffer wherein it is contained, do conciliate
no ſmall authoritie vnto the ſame. Neither yet is the skill in
this profeſſion ſo eaſily attained vnto, as many ignorant people
do perſwade thēſelues. But that there are many things required
in him who is to be called natures darling, and great Secretarie
of ſtate, at all times to helpe and aſſiſt her, when oftentimes ſhe
cannot helpe her ſelfe (vnto which this confuſed multitude neuer
hath attained, and therefore vnworthy to be admitted vnto
ſuch myſteries) hath euer bene receiued for an vncontrolled
truth. The cauſes of the diſeaſe muſt be exactly knowne before
the cure, and many other things beſides. And thus it is recorded
of Ariſtotle, that at a certaine time falling ſicke, his Phyſitian
there by him prating apace, anſwered very wittily after
this manner.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  Neither cure me like a cowheard, nor yet like a plowman;
but firſt of all let me know the cauſe, then ſhalt thou find me obſequious
to thy preſcriptions.
               
               The euer praiſe worthy Hippocrates, howbeit in few, yet in
effectuall words, ſetteth downe ſuch things as are requiſite in a
true Phyſitian.Aelian. lib. 9. cap. 23. Polib. lib. hiſt. 2. & 3. indeque Lang. epiſt. medicin. lib. 2. epiſt. 48. Hippoc. lib. 2. de lege. 
                  Whoſoeuer will exactly and diligently purchaſe to
himſelfe a firme knowledge in this profeſſion, muſt of neceſſitie be furniſhed
with theſe which follow. Nature (that is, a potentiall aptneſſe,
wit and vnderſtanding, with a certaine proneneſſe and
inclination to this profeſſion) precepts of art, a fit and conuenient
place for ſtudie; inſtruction in the ſame from younger yeares; diligent
and painefull ſtudie, together with a competent and conuenient time.
This likewiſe did the ancients paint foorth vnto vs in the armes
or enſeignes of Aeſculapius,
                  The armes or enſeignes of Aeſculapius. to whom were attributed all the
badges and enſeignes which do of right belong to a true Phyſitian,
and do all argue aſſiduitie and painfull induſtrie.
               The firſt was an Owle, to giue him warning of the watchfull

paines and care the learned Phyſitian ought to take in finding
out the ſeuerall ſignes and circumſtances of the diſeaſe, to the
end he may be the more able to foretell the ſeuerall iſſues and
euents of the ſame.A crooked ſtaffe. 
                  A crooked ſtaffe in his hand; which intimateth
vnto vs, that he ought with great care and diligence beſtirre
himſelfe, to attaine to the right and perfect knowledge,
not onely of the ſtructure of mans bodie, and euerie part of the
ſame, as well inward as outward: but alſo the ſeuerall qualities
and vertues of all manner of remedies appropriated for the vſe
of mankinde; whether they be aboue the earth, encloſed in the
intrals thereof; or yet contained in the vaſt dominions of the
endleſſe ocean: as alſo with carefull circumſpection, to obſerue
and marke the ſtrength of his patients, and their ſeuerall natures
and conſtitutions; applying to each and euery one of them in
due and conuenient time, ſuch proper and peculiar remedies,
as may beſt befit them, and that alwayes hauing a watchfull
eye vpon the ſeuerall indications in ſuch caſes required. In his
right hand he held a Dragons head,
                  A dragons head in his right hand and a dog hard by him. coming from the Greeke
word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſignifying a ſharpe and cleare ſight: and next vnto
the ſame was a watchfull dog; both of them declaring vnto
vs, that the Phyſitian ought with a certaine promptneſſe of dexteritie
of vnderſtanding foreſee the iſſue and euent of diſeaſes,
and then with as great eaſe and facilitie as is poſſible, and
without ſparing any paines, eaſe the patients griefe; preſeruing
likewiſe and maintaining, as much as in him lyeth, his preſent
healthfull ſtate of bodie, and preuenting to the vttermoſt of
his power,A pine apple in his left hand. the imminent danger of dolefull diſeaſes. In his left
hand a pine apple, thereby letting vs to vnderſtand, that the outward
ſhell of this profeſſion is very hard, the inward fruite and
marrow, notwithſtanding, being moſt pleaſant, delectable and
profitable.The winged picture of health with a pullet in her hand. At his right ſide was the winged picture of health, with
a pullet in her hand; & that to the end the Phyſitian might know,
that he ought to aime at the health and happie eſtate of his patient
principally, and not to become the ſlaue of baſe and filthie
lucre and gaine: in like manner manifeſting vnto vs, that by the
paines and induſtrious skill of the learned Phyſitian, health is
oftentimes maintained; as by his careleſſe negligence, ignorance,

& inſufficiencie it is eaſily ouerthrowne. A pullet, to ſhew
foorth the Phyſitians care, in preſcribing fit and conuenient
diet, according to his patients nature and conſtitution, as alſo
the qualitie and motion of the diſeaſe.How carefull the Phyſitian ought to be in preſcribing diet according to the nature of the diſeaſe and diſeaſed. For in acute diſeaſes,
and ſuch as are of a ſudden and ſpeedie motion, as the remedies
muſt be ſpeedie, ſo muſt the diet be ſparing, anſwering both to
the ſtrength of the patient, and nature of the diſeaſe; not being
in the meane time vnmindfull of his former cuſtome, countrey
or place wherein he liues, with many more circumſtances in
ſuch caſes required. In diſeaſes againe of a long and lingring
nature, we muſt not be ſo cloſe fiſted, but allow them more liberall
allowance; yet keeping alwayes in mind the former caueats
and cautions. In the end he muſt be armed againſt all occaſions
and ſudden occurrents, not forgetting to gratifie the
ſicke, ſo farre foorth as may ſtand with conueniencie. And laſtly
this Aeſculapian pourtraict was pictured with a beard:
                  Aeſculapius bearded. ſignifying
hereby, that ſuch as medled with ſuch abſtruſe myſteries,
hauing firſt bene trained vp in the grounds and principles of
this profeſſion, ought to be of a reaſonable mature iudgement
and vnderſtanding, to the end they may proue ſo much the fitter
to mannage ſuch weightie matters.
               But to what end and purpoſe (will ſome perhaps ſay) tendeth
this long diſcourſe? Euen to the end it may more euidently appeare,
into what diſgrace and contempt this noble profeſſion
is now growne, and that by meanes of the lawleſſe and vncontrolled
intruſion of ignorant and vnſufficient perſons. Let the
Reader iudge ingenuouſly, whether the offenders be furniſhed
with any ſuch ſufficiencie, and let this touch-ſtone trie them
all. Profeſſions farre inferiour to this, haue a number of yeares
allowed them to ſerue and learne, before any be ſuffered to exerciſe
the ſame.Liberty allowed ignorant Phyſitians, cauſe of great miſchiefe. But here, howſoeuer the Vniuerſities be not
depriued of their priuiledges, in granting the degrees to the
well deſeruing: yet is there no reſtraint of the moſt ignorant
and vnſufficient perſons, of whatſoeuer ſexe or calling. An ignorant
Empiricke that knoweth ſcarce the propertie of pepper,
whether it be hote or cold, yet may practiſe publickly. Now
that I ſay nothing of ignorant Apothecaries, Surgeons, &c.

the other ſexe will needs haue a ſhare in theſe buſineſſes alſo:
and yet in holy writ they are tyed to their houſwiuerie.Prouerb. 31. Terent. in Andr. And
the heathen Poet bringeth in women medling with their
ſpinning and carding. Their fraile ſexe is both vnfit and vnfurniſhed
with ſufficiencie for managing of ſo great matters. It is
no wayes ſutable to the modeſtie which ought to be ſeene in
that ſexe, to meddle with ſo publicke a profeſſion. And beſides,
there being no ſmall commerce betwixt the Phyſitian and his
patient,Hippocr. lib. de medico. as witneſſeth the worthy Hippocrates, who ſeeth not
the abſurditie of this their practiſe?Women altogether vnfit to practiſe phyſick. And as for their ſufficiencie,
it may eaſily, by that which hath bene ſaid alreadie, appeare.
My purpoſe is not to dwell vpon this ſubiect, nor yet to
vrge many arguments againſt it, the thing being ſo abſurd in it
ſelfe. I will relate but one tragicall ſtorie out of a late writer,
of a mother who made away her owne child,A tragicall ſtorie. with an intent, as
ſhe thought to cure him. A countrey woman (ſaith mine author)
hauing a young ſonne of cacheoticall diſpoſition, and now entring into
a dropſie,
                  Alexand. Bened. de curand. morb. lib. 15. cap. 25. 
                  by the aduice of her women-goſſips, thruſt him, ſore againſt
his will, his head foremoſt, into an ouen, immediatly after the drawing
of the bread, ſtopping vp againe immediatly the mouth of her ouen.
Her gabling goſſips were officiouſly attending a better euent then they
found, as alſo helping her to bring to paſſe this braue exploit. He being
once in, was preſently ſuffocated with the ſmoke for want of freſh
aire. The mother within a little ſpace calleth to her ſonne oftener then
once in an audible voyce, enquiring what benefit he found; who anſwered
her no more then Baal did his Prieſts.
                  1. King. 18. 26 27. 28. 
                  Theſe pratling goſſips
perſwaded this ſimple woman, that his ſilence was an aſſured ſigne
of the benefit he thereby receiued: the which this credulous woman,
ſtill hoping where no hope was, eaſily beleeued: but at length found
that which ſhe least looked for; drawing out of the ouen her dead
ſonne, cured not onely of this, but of all other diſeaſes alſo; and then
(but all too late) blameth as well her owne too too credulous ſimplicitie,
as the malapert boldneſſe of the ſhe-phyſitians, inducing her to vſe
a remedie farre worſe then the diſeaſe it ſelfe. As for you, Ladyes
and Gentlewomen (with your good leaues let me be ſo bold as
to tell you my mind in a word or two) howſoeuer I cannot but
much commend your great charitie and loue, in affoording

both your paines and your purſes for the relieuing of ſicke diſtreſſed
people: yet let me intreate you, not to be too officiouſly
buſie, the life of a man being no matter of ſmall importance,
and which being once loſt,Soles occidere & redire poſſunt▪ nobis cum ſemel occidit breuis lux, Nox eſt perpetua vna dormienda▪ Catull. can neuer till the reſurrection be
recouered. And remember, that there may be an ouerſight as
well in neglecting a fit and conuenient remedie in due time, as
in exhibiting a dangerous and deſperate remedie. And whereas
often it cometh to paſſe, that either your neceſſitie or importunitie
doth extort from the learned Phyſitian good and wholeſome
remedies either for your owne or others infirmities: yet I
intreate you, not to be ſo indiſcreete, as to make one ſalue ſerue
for euery ſore.A good remedy ignorantly or out of ſeaſon exhibited, may yet proue dangerous to the diſeaſed. The remedie indeed may be good, but (as often
cometh to paſſe) ill vſed, or rather abuſed. And that which you
haue ſometimes tried to be a ſoueraigne medicine for your
ſelues; yet another time, by reaſon of a number of new occurrents,
the ſame remedie may produce an effect farre differing
from the former: how much more then in another? The conſtitution
of the partie ſhould be conſidered, the ſexe, age, time of
yeare, yea and of the diſeaſe it ſelfe; as whether it be in the beginning,
in the increaſe, in the height, or declining, with many
moe circumſtances are here to be conſidered. But put yet the
caſe the remedie be good againſt ſuch a diſeaſe; yet may many
other circumſtances croſſe this iudication in any indiuiduall
perſon, which were here too tedious to relate. It may then eaſily
appeare, that this is a buſineſſe of an higher ſtraine then many
do well conſider: but of this matter no more. Now howbeit
this fretting canker (I meane of vnſufficient, vnlearned, and vnskilfull
Phiſitians) hath crept ouer the whole Chriſtian world,
yet the inconuenience is not in all alike. For howbeit in Germanie
Empiricks do ſo abound that they haue begun of late
yeares (ſuppoſing it may be that we are here vnfurniſhed) to
come and viſit vs here in this Iland,The laudable cuſtome of the Germane natiō in prouiding fit and learned Phyſitians, and allowing them good maintenance. yet can I not but much
commend and praiſe their care and induſtrie in prouiding for
the maintenance of the honeſt and learned Phyſitian. There
each ſeuerall Citie, towne, or corporation, hath certaine Phyſitians
entertained by ſtipends out of the chamber ſtockes
(which there by reaſon of their admirable induſtrie, as being

much addicted to the publicke good are very rich) a dwelling
houſe being likewiſe allowed them for their liues: and each
Citie or towne according to the proportionable bigneſſe, hath
moe or fewer of thoſe ſtipendiarie Phyſitians: and none among
them admitted, but ſuch as for their ſufficiencie, and long time
ſpent in the ſtudie of that profeſſion, haue taken their degrees in
ſome famous Vniuerſitie. All the Apothecaries and Surgeons
within the place where they liue are ſubiect to their cenſures,
and by them to be controlled;They often viſit the Apothecaries ſhops, and take a ſ
                        ••
                     uey of his drugs. and the midwiues likewiſe by
them muſt be admitted. And of all the Apothecaries drugs,
as well ſimples as compounds, they take a narrow ſuruey twice
a yeare; to wit, euery Spring and fall: beſides the viewing of
their drugs immediatly after the buying of them (which commeth
moſt commonly to paſſe twice a yeare, at Lerpzig or
Franckfort faire) not being lawfull for them to make vſe of any
of them vntill ſuch time as they be firſt viſited and allowed by
the aforeſaid Phyſitians. At the viewing and viſiting of their
wares, is appointed one frō the chiefe Magiſtrate of the Citie,
commonly called the Burger maiſter, to ſit in commiſſion with
the Phyſitians. If the Apothecarie ſhall be found faultie, or his
drugs any wayes vnſufficient, the aforeſaid perſons fine him at
their pleaſures; as alſo ſet a reaſonable rate or taxe vpon all his
drugs and compoſitions, and that according to the riſing or falling
of the prizes of the drugs. Neither yet may the Apothecarie
of himſelfe make, mixe, or compound any great compoſition
of many ſeuerall ingredients, vnleſſe the Phyſitians, one or
more being preſent, firſt ſee all the ſeuerall ingredients, and then
allow of the ſame. He can likewiſe take no apprentice into his
ſeruice, but ſuch as firſt ſhall be ſworne faithfully to make and
compound according to the Phyſitians preſcriptions, not altering
any thing in his bill without his knowledge and allowance:
the which oath the Phyſitians haue power to exact of
the aforeſaid apprentices.The great commoditie of this ſo laudable a cuſtome. Of this ſo laudable and praiſe-worthy
a conſtitution this benefit they reape, that firſt of all, the inhabitants
are neuer vnfurniſhed of fit and ſufficient Phyſitians, to
whom in time of need they may haue recourſe for good, and
wholeſome counſell: as alſo that the inhabitants in their extremitie

are preferred before ſtrangers. The moderation of fees
likewiſe, in regard of their ſtanding ſtipends, is ſome eaſe to the
purſes of priuate men, but eſpecially to the poorer ſort, to whom
by this meanes they are the better enabled to affoord their
counſell for little or nothing. The countrey round about findeth
likewiſe euery where learned Phyſitians to aduiſe with, as alſo
good and ſufficient ſtuffe, neither fuſtie not ſophiſticate, and
that at a reaſonable rate. Now how farre we come ſhort of this
ſo laudable and worthie pollicie, thoſe that know any thing are
not ignorant. We are apt enough to imitate that which is
naught in our neighbour nations, and why make we not vſe of
ſuch things as deſerue praiſe and commendation? From the aforenamed
nation we haue ſo well learned quaffing and carrouſing,
together with their vnhappy healths, indeed hinderers
of all health, that it ſeemeth now to be naturalized amongſt
vs: and why are we not as forward for this and ſuch other laudable
conſtitutions as tend to the benefit of the commonwealth?
But now to our purpoſe.
               One thing which doth principally encourage all manner of
cozeners,The idle inſpection of vrine, as it is at this day practiſed, openeth a gap to euery cozener & impoſtor. and euery ignorant and vnſufficient perſon, to aduenture
vpon this profeſſion, is the vaine and idle inſpection of
Vrines, as it is at this day euery where practiſed; by meanes
whereof moſt people are perſwaded that the Phyſitian is able to
find out, not onely the diſeaſe in generall, but euen euery ſigne
and circumſtance of the ſame. I my ſelfe haue often bene importuned
to tell that by this ſigne, which the wits of all the
wiſeſt Phyſitians in the world could neuer aſſuredly and certainly
find out. To inſtance but in one thing, to wit, the diſcerning
of the conception, whether a woman be with child or no:
there is not an Empiricke or quack-ſaluer in the countrey, that
will not make thee beleeue he can tell thee that aſſuredly. Our
ſhe-phyſitians (for ſuch monſters now this countrey yeeldeth)
will ſay no leſſe.Iohann. le bon. de therap. puerp. But heare the iudgement of a learned French
Phyſitian concerning this point: To abuſe the inſpection of vrine,
to know whether a woman be with child, or no, belongeth to a cozening
impoſtor, and not to an honeſt Phyſitian; howſoeuer ſome haue
not bene aſhamed to vent ſuch vanities. But of this at more length

hereafter: now let vs proceed to the maine matter, to wit, to
handle this ſubiect in order.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Of the vncertaine iudgement affoorded vs by Ʋrines in generall, together
with their limitation to certaine diſeaſes, and
that out of many learned writers.
               
                  IT is growne now adayes a common cuſtome,
by the ſole and bare inſpection of the vrine to
vndertake to declare and lay open the whole
diſeaſe,It is impoſſible to iudge of the diſeaſe, & what concerneth the ſame, by the inſpection of the vrine onely. together with the ſtate and conſtitution
of euery part of the body, without any regard
had to ſuch things as the moſt wiſe and circumſpect
Phyſitians haue left vs in this caſe to be conſidered:
the which notwithſtanding, is as impoſſible to bring to paſſe,
as by the heat or cold of an houſe to iudge of the perfection of
the ſame, together with the ſoundneſſe of the walles and timber
thereof: or yet by the rubbiſh of any houſe carried to ſome
other place, to find out the ſtatelineſſe of the former building.
To this end and purpoſe beſides the authorities produced in the
former Diſcourſe, I will yet bring in a cloud of witneſſes to confirme
this mine opinion. And in the firſt place, I will ſet downe
ſome famous authors condemning this vromantical coniecture,
and limiting and confining it within its lawfull liſts and limits.
Afterwards alſo ſhall appeare how our iudgement may erre and
miſtake, euen in ſome ſuch diſeaſes as may ſometimes by the
ſame be diſcerned: proceeding afterwards to inſtance in ſome
particular diſeaſes: where ſhall not be omitted the confutation
of the erronious opinion of the vrines of women with child, as
alſo of finding out of the ſexe thereby. Then will we proceed
to a particular confutation of all the parts of vrine; whereby
ſhall be ſet downe the true vſe of the ſame. Now the firſt author
that ſhall march in the auantgard of this batallion ſhall be the
learned Langius; and that both in regard of his great worth and

learning, as alſo becauſe our former author (Foreſt I meane)
had ſingled out theſe two following Epiſtles, as making for the
ſame purpoſe to ſet downe at the end of his diſcourſe of vrines,
which I haue thought good with ſome other authorities to inſert
into this place.
               
                  Concerning Phyſitian
                        •
                      who by the inspection of the Ʋrine onely, do
raſhly and vnaduiſedly pronounce their opinion concerning
the nature and ſubſtance of any diſeaſe.
                  It ſeemeth not a little ſtrange to thee (kind goſſip) how it
ſhould come to paſſe that the ſame and reputation of Germane
Phyſitians ſhould be ſo little ſet by either at home or abroad,Langius tom
                           •
                        . 1. epiſt. 11.
ſince notwithſtanding, praiſed be God, Germanie is a very
fruitfull ſoile, ſtored with moſt excellent wits, where the liberall
Arts and ſciences do not a little flouriſh (inſomuch as that
moſt noble and illuſtrius Picus Earle of Mirandole, truly praiſeworthie
and euer to be admired, as well for his high pedegree and noble
deſcent, as for his excellent and admirable gifts in good learning,
did witneſſe that the riuer of Tiber had now of late runne into the
Rhene:) and yet for all this, the noble facultie of Phyſicke lyeth
contemned and deſpiſed.In ſympoſio. de republica. The cauſes of the ſame I haue elſewhere
declared to be diuers, whereof this is the chiefe, to wit,
that the chiefe and principall part of Phyſicke diagnoſticke or
ſemioticke, which teacheth vs to know the nature, cauſes, and
ſubſtance of the diſeaſe by the ſignes and grounds of the ſame,
is either not knowne at all, or at leaſt altogether, in regard of
their idleneſſe, neglected; while as the ordinarie ſort of Phyſitians
do onely labour to know and diſcerne the nature and ſubſtance
of the diſeaſe by the ſole and fraudulent indication of the
ſtuckring vrine. But it is acknowledged of all true Phyſitians,
that the ground and beginning of finding out aright the true
method of curing diſeaſes, is the knowledge of the diſeaſe, together
with the place ſeiſed with the ſame, which is not
knowne by the bare inſpection of the vrine onely, being but a
doubtfull ſigne; but (as Galen ſaith well) the knowledge of the
diſeaſe is collected by meanes of the place affected, together

with the diſpoſition of the ſame beſides nature: which being
the internall cauſe of the diſeaſe (or the diſeaſe it ſelfe) annoying
the action, it is no maruell if the ſignes of each be common
to both: and thus is the diſeaſe and place affected diſcerned
and knowne, both by the parts of the ſubſtance therof, the contents,
adherents, the action intereſſed, together with the accidents
of the diſeaſe, from the parts of the ſubſtance of the part
affected: as if we ſhall perceiue any griſtle of the windpipe to
be ſpit vp with coughing, it doth argue and indicate to vs an exulceration
of the lungs, together with a conſumption of the
ſame. From the contents; as if thou ſhalt perceiue the chyle
(that is, the meate receiued into the ſtomacke and a little altered)
or the ordure iſſue out of a wound, thou mayeſt from
thence ſafely collect that either the ſtomack, or guts are wounded.
Such things alſo as do adhere or grow to the part, do both
declare the diſeaſe and the part annoyed therewith. For if vpon
a fracture of the ſcull there grow out little round lumps like vnto
little muſhromes, it doth argue the dammage and hurt of the
membrane or skin couering the braines. No leſſe doth the
hurt of the action bewray as well the hurt of the organe and inſtrument
of it, as the diſeaſe it ſelfe: as the retention of the vrine
doth argue an obſtruction in the pipes conueighing the vrine
from the kidneyes to the bladder: or the exceſſiue fluxe of
the ſame being crude and not concocted, doth argue the indiſpoſition
of the kidneyes. Ioyne yet with the former, as moſt
pregnant proofes and teſtimonies of the diſeaſe, theſe inſeparable
accidents of the ſame, commonly called pathognomonica, the
which the diſeaſe it ſelfe doth procure and beget: as a ſtinging
and pricking paine in the ſide, ioyned with a burning feauer,
doth argue not onely a Pleuriſie, but alſo that the skin or membrane
which enuironeth the ribs is inflamed. And vnto all the
aforeſaid ſignes thou mayeſt, if thou wilt, adde the intricate
knowledge of the pulſe of the arteries, rather then the vncertaine
iudgement by vrine: the which as we do not altogether
reiect,The great care of the ancient Phyſitians in ſearching out the ſignes of diſeaſes. ſo do we not attribute ſo much thereunto as theſe impoſtors
do. Now what extraordinarie paines ſome of the ancient
Phyſitians tooke in ſearching out any thing which might affoord

them any knowledge or inſight in the nature of the diſeaſe,
thou mayeſt from hence collect, that to the end they
might more eaſily find out the nature and qualitie of the humour
faulty and abounding in the bodie, they did taſt of the
very ſweare that was rubbed off the bodie in the hotehouſes,
as alſo of that ſuperfluous matter found in the eares: like as the
horſe-leaches were wont to taſte of the horſes dung, whom for
that cauſe that pleaſant Poet Ariſtophanes calleth 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
what if by the authoritie of Hippocrates I ſhould prooue, that
the colour of the tongue, and the reſt of the bodie, giueth vs
more aſſured and certaine knowledge of the ſtate of the humours
contained in the body and inward bowels, then the vrine?
And yet this the ordinarie ſort of vrine-monging Phyſitians
will neuer be able to diſcerne, as not being preſent with
the patient. For as in the yellow Iaundiſe, a yellow and ſaffron
like colour of the skinne doth better declare any obſtruction
of the gall-bagge, and an ouerflowing of choler ouer the
whole bodie, then the vrine: ſo doth in like ſort the leaden
colour of the face, and the reſt of the bodie, demonſtrate better
vnto vs ſome indiſpoſition of the Liuer and ſpleene then the vrine.
No leſſe alſo doth the colour of the tongue and taſt, it findeth
& performeth the like. For ſuch as is the humor aboūding
in the ſtomacke or veines, eſpecially when it groweth fierce
and vnruly, with ſuch a colour and taſt is the tongue moſt commonly
imbrued. Wherefore well and learnedly ſaid the worthy
Hippocrates 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that is, the tongue giueth
vs notice, as well of the ſtate and nature of the vrine, as of all the
reſt of the humours of the body. But if thou wilt yet further
contend and conteſt with me, behold I will appeale to Galen,
who ought to be as our common Maiſter, ſo Iudge alſo in ſuch
caſes of controuerſie.
                        Lib. 4. ſalub. The ſweat a more generall ſigne then the vrine. 
                     The ſweate (ſaith he) giueth vs notice of
the humours ſuper abounding in the whole bodie, but the vrine onely
of ſuch as are contained within the veines. And howbeit theſe be
the chiefe elements and grounds of the moſt principall part of
phyſicke, called diagnoſticke, without which the other part
called therapeuticke, or handling the cure of diſeaſes, cannot
ſubſiſt, and that they be conuinced by moſt pregnant proofes

and teſtimonies; yet will they neither giue place to the ſame,
nor yet obſerue and marke them: but truſting to the vrine onely,De Alexandrinorum medicorum deſidia. Gal. lib. 2. de natura humana. lib. 6. epid. & paſſim alibi.
loytering idle at home like the Phyſitians of Alexandria, and
ſitting in their chaires like Apolloes Prieſts, or ſome old wiſe fortune-teller
by her cryſtal looking-glaſſe, it is a wonder to heare
how doubtfully and perplexedly, without any ſight of the ſicke,
but looking on the vrine onely, they will with brazen faces
prate of the patients ſickneſſe: yea further yet, will pronounce
of life and death thereby; and that for ſo ſmall a gaine, as ſcarce
would the moſt common hedge-whore be hired for the ſame.
What great ambiguitie and doubtfull ſpeeches (good Reader)
need they here to vſe, leſt they be taken tripping? Now if it
ſhall happen that any old wife that bringeth the vrine ſhall find
them out, thou wouldeſt wonder to ſee theVictu Quintiliane colorem. changes of their
countenances. But as if this were yet a ſmall matter, to prate by
the ſight of the vrine onely,Thus do moſt of our practiſing Parſons and Vicars become ſuddenly Phyſitians. they are not aſhamed to preſcribe
phyſicke to the parties (whom they haue neuer ſeene)
and that by reading of bookes, of the which experiments they
haue neuer made any triall at all: to whom thou mayeſt moſt
iuſtly obiect the ancient Prouerbe.
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     A mariner by his booke or
ſea card. But Hippocrates and the ancient Phyſitians of the race
of Aſclepiades, not ſuperficially, but ſolidly learned, did neuer
ſettle their iudgements concerning the ſubſtance of the diſeaſe
vpon the vrine alone: no nor yet if ſome contents had proceeded
from the ſubſtance of the kidneyes, bladder, or parts contained
in them, and ſo iſſued out with the vrine: but did rather
by the colour, contents, ſwim or ſublimation, obſerue the
ſtrength of the naturall parts about the liuer and ſtomach, as
likewiſe the concoction of the humours in the veines; to the
end that in feuers they might find out the times of the ſame;
and ſo might more eaſily foretell the time of the future criſe,
whether the ſame were like to be hopefull and healthfull, or
dangerous and deadly; and withall to find out the fitteſt time
for purging. The which Galen, Hippocrates his true interpreter,
doth intimate vnto young Phyſitians in theſe words. The vrine
giueth notice of theſe parts, to wit, the liuer, kidneyes, bladder, and
the ſtrength of the veſſels which containe the bloud, and the weakeneſſe

of the ſame, as alſo that facultie which engendreth the humors:
but as concerning the infirmities of the braine, the chest, and lungs,
there be other ſignes and ſymptomes of the ſame, whereby their diſeaſes
are diſcerned. All theſe things therefore the wiſe Phyſitian is
to enquire, ſearch, and find out, from the ſicke himſelfe, and
not from the vrine.Damaſcenu
                           •
                         in Aphoriſm. For this cauſe well ſaid Damaſcenus in his
Aphoriſmes: Concerning diſeaſes pronounce not raſhly thine opinion,
neither yet looke thou vpon the vrine, vntill ſuch time as thou
haſt firſt ſeene the ſicke, and of him demanded and found forth euery
circumſtance belonging to the diſeaſe.
                     Rhaz. in aphor. With him doth Rhazes an
Arabian Phyſitian agree in his Aphoriſmes, in theſe words: It
becometh the Phyſitian to aske diuerſe queſtions of his patient, to the
end he may attaine to the internall cauſe of the diſeaſe, that by ſuch
meanes he may afterwards be able to pronounce ſound iudgement according
to reaſon: neither yet let him be aſhamed to aske of the patient,
whether the diſeaſe be within or without the veine. But our
Phyſitians, being like vnto the lazie ſedentarie Phyſitians of Alexandria,
leſt they ſhould be by the vulgar people (who do
commonly beleeue, that the Phyſitian knoweth all by the vrine)
taxed of ignorance, are aſhamed to aske of the patient
the cauſes and ſymptomes of his diſeaſe. And to the end they
may the better accommodate themſelues to the fooliſh humor
of the ſimple and more ignorant ſort, they are not a whit afrayed
to prate of diſeaſes by the inſpection of the vrine onely.
But would to God the truth were with them in greater eſteeme
then any popular applauſe, and that they would be warned by
the Poet Perſius:
                     Si quid turbida Roma eleuaret, &c. Perſ. ſat. 1. 
                     If troubled Rome do too much dispraiſe any
thing, then not to reſt and relie vpon her iudgement: and that they
would both ingenuouſly confeſſe, and tell the people how fraudulent
and deceitfull, pernicious and lying, is this manner of
inſpection of the vrine, brought in by ſome Phyſitians and impoſtors
of later dayes, to the great miſchiefe of mankind. Then
for certaine would they be more carefull and diligent in ſearching
out the natures of diſeaſes by their cauſes, the hurt and
hinderance of the action, as alſo by the Pa
                           •
                        hognomonicke
ſignes: and then without all doubt ſhould they cure a great
many moe, as alſo by this meanes ſhould their names become

a great deale more famous, both among their owne friends and
acquaintance, and among ſtrangers. And by this meanes alſo
ſhould theſe wandring and cozening rogues, impoſtors, apoſtaticall
monks, perfidious Iewes, enemies to all Chriſtians,
the ignorant Pariſh-Prieſts, alchymiſts, and all the rabble of
ſuch rake-hels, (but I had almoſt forgotten thoſe old trots, fortunetellers)
be thruſt out from profeſſing phyſicke: all the
which offenders not hauing learned ſo much as the firſt
grounds and principles of naturall Philoſophie or Phyſicke, do
without controll or puniſhment trie their deſperate remedies,
by the death of many a man. Wherefore there could nothing
be deuiſed more profitable and beneficiall for the good of the
commonwealth, then that at length all Chriſtian people were
freed from the tyrannie and miſchiefe of theſe cruell impoſtors,
who by meanes of the ſecret obſeruation of the vrine,
vnknowne to the vulgar ſort, do conceale their owne ignorance,
and haue, as drones do into the Bec-hiue, crept into this
profeſſion. By the premiſſes, I hope thou haſt heard what is
the cauſe that Phyſicke and the Profeſſors of the ſame are not
of ſo high an eſteeme in theſe our countries at this time.
               
               
                  Of the differences of ſignes, by the which Phyſitians do diſcerne
and know diſeaſes, and do preſage the future
iſſue of the ſame.
                  As I heare,Epiſt. 83. theſe barbarous and wicked perſons, falſly aſſuming
vnto themſelues the name of Phyſitians, do mutter and
grumble againſt me, becauſe of condemning their mad, raſh,
and foole-hardie finding out of diſeaſes, by meanes of the vrine
onely, for whoſe ſlanderous backbiting I care not a ruſh. For
ſuch as cannot helpe, I ſee not how they can hurt me. No more
can I conceiue what the Phyſitian can performe, as concerning
the cure of the diſeaſe, being ignorant of the nature and eſtate
of the ſame. For this cauſe the ancient Phyſitians did with
great labour, trauell, and induſtrie, ſearch out the cauſe, the
nature and ſubſtance of the diſeaſe, from the which the indications
of remedies are deriued, and not from the vrine onely, but

from the ſignes called Pathognomonicke, and from the whole
concourſe of the ſymptomes or accidents: who did likewiſe
deuide Phyſicke principally into two parts, to wit, that which
we commonly call Therapeuticke, whoſe moſt large and common
ſcope, is to cure diſeaſes by contrary remedies: and into
that part which we call Diagnoſticke; whoſe moſt common
ſcope is to diſcerne the whole and ſound from the like, and the
ſicke and infirme from the whole, being vnlike the one to the other.
And this part of Phyſicke doth farre excell the other, to
wit, the Therapeuticke, the which without the Diagnoſticke
is of ſmall vſe or profit. And becauſe it did lay open the perfect
and abſolute knowledge of the diſeaſe, by meanes of the ſignes
Pathognomonicke, proper and peculiar to euery diſeaſe, together
with the concurrence of accidents, which the Empiricks
called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      (which were nothing elſe but the collection
by obſeruation of certaine accidents and circumſtances of diſeaſes)
the later Phyſitians therefore gaue it the name 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
or that part of Phyſicke which handleth the ſignes of diſeaſes.
Wherefore we cannot but much wonder at Galen, a man of ſo
great learning, who beſides two hundreth and fiftie bookes
written of diuerſe ſciences, and of all the other parts of Phyſicke
aboue foure hundreth; all being likewiſe written in ſo good
order and method, that notwithſtanding he hath not brought
to full perfection this ſo noble a part of Phyſicke, called Diagnoſticke,
but onely diſperſedly here and there, eſpecially in that
booke called the Conſtitution or ordering of the Art of Phyſicke,
hath as it were ſowne ſome ſeeds of the ſame. But yet Auicenna,
Rhazes, and other Arabian Phyſitians, and ſuch among
the Greeks as haue written of late after Galen, as Paulus, Aegineta,
Aetius, Actuarius, and Alexander Trallianus, following
the footſteps of the ancient Empiricks, did collect and gather
together in euery ſeuerall Chapter which did diſcourſe of the
diſeaſe, a great number of the ſignes and ſeuerall accidents of
the ſame: but ſo confuſedly and indiſtinctly, that hardly couldeſt
thou diſcerne one manner of ſigne from another inſomuch
as thou mayeſt, not without cauſe, call their Diagnoſticke Phyſicke,
the confuſed chaos of Democritus. And further they do

not inſtruct vs ſufficiently what ſigne of the diſeaſe doth argue
or ſhew foorth the greater or ſmaller ſtrength. But there is in
Germanie at this day,And in England alſo. a ſort of idle prating fellowes, more fooliſh
then any others, who, as if all the ſignes of euery diſeaſe
were to be ſeene in the vrine, are not aſhamed, by the ſole and
bare inſpection thereof, to prate and pronounce ſentence concerning
the ſubſtance of the diſeaſe, and the life and death of
the diſeaſed, as hath bene ſaid alreadie. To the end therefore
that their impudencie may be made manifeſt, and layd open to
euery one, I purpoſe to inſert ſomething in this Epiſtle concerning
the differences of ſignes, to the end that I may miniſter
occaſion to ſome others more learned then my ſelfe, to handle
the ſame by an abſolute & exquiſite method: the which taske I
will alſo willingly vndertake for the good of the ſicke, if I may
obtaine ſo much time and leiſure, that at length this ſo hainous
a fault, and worthy of no ſmall puniſhment, may be baniſhed
from among the companie of all honeſt and ingenuous Phyſitians,
and a right and perfect method, as well for diſcerning as
for curing,Diuiſion of the ſignes. may be ſet downe. Now it is granted, as well among
Phyloſophers as Phyſitians, that the effects and accidents do
indicate and declare their cauſes. It is likewiſe well knowne,
that the accidents are nothing elſe but the effects of the diſpoſition
of the diſeaſe. No man therefore can deny, that the accidents
(of which number are alſo the actions intereſſed, and
ſome things which eſſentially do adhere thereunto) do indicate
and declare, as well the diſeaſe as the place affected, as being
the harbour and receptacle of the ſame, and vnto which the remedies
ought to be applyed. Now as concerning the accidents,
ſome of them are called by the Greekes Epiphaenomena, that is,
ſuch as do appeare indeed, but vaniſh away againe before the
diſeaſe be at an end: others againe called Pathognomonica, which
being of the eſſence of the diſeaſe, do both begin and end with
the ſame. And theſe be inſeparable and certaine ſignes of the
diſeaſe, the concourſe of which doth more certainly and truly
declare vnto vs, the nature, manner, and kind of the diſeaſe, then
any vrine can do. As a continuall feauer, together with a pricking
and ſtinging paine in the ſide, a great cough and ſhortneſſe

of breath, when as they concurre together, and come as
it were all at one inſtant, are euident and certaine ſignes of a
Pleureſie. But other accidents which do after ſucceed, are called
Epiphaenomena or Synedreouonta, as if thou ſhouldeſt ſay, aſſeſſors
or aſſiſtants to the diſeaſe, vnto the which alſo they are not
inſeparably annexed, nor yet haue their originall together with
the ſame; but for the moſt part, either ſeldome, or after a doubtfull
manner, do accompanie the diſeaſe, not making vp the ſubſtance,
but certaine differences of diſeaſes. As in a Pleureſie
a red, bloudie, or yet yellowiſh ſpittle, a paine extending it ſelfe
to the breaſt bone or neather part of the midriffe, watching,
deliberation, and terrible dreames: theſe accidents are called
aſſiſtant or accompanying, and do declare either the difference
of the diſeaſe; or elſe the mildneſſe or malignitie of the
ſame. Now it behooueth the Phyſitian to ponder and expend
with himſelfe in ſuch a concourſe of accidents equally, the
ſtrength of euery accident apart, and to compare together ſuch
as be dangerous, with the other which do promiſe greater ſecuritie.
For if thoſe which are dangerous do vanquiſh and ouercome
the ſtrength and vigour of nature, either by their force or
number, then mayeſt thou boldly pronounce, that danger is
not farre from the doore. And againe on the contrary, if ſuch as
do promiſe ſecuritie be of greater power then the former, then
ſhall the ſicke eſcape out of the deepe danger of Scylla and Charybdis,
and by the vertue and power of a happy Criſis, ſaile forth
into the hauen of health: and that yet more aſſuredly, if in the
meane time perfect ſignes of concoction ſhall appeare. Amongſt
ſuch ſignes ſome are called Decretorie, or Iudicatorie;
other ſignes of cruditie and concoction; others againe do foretell
the ſecuritie or danger of the diſeaſe.Signes of concoction. Now the ſignes of
concoction, after the beginning of the diſeaſe is paſt ouer, and
the humours by meanes of the naturall heate, well concocted,
ſequeſtred, and ſeparated from that which is putride and corrupt,
do appeare about the time of the increaſing or vigour
of the diſeaſe, in the vrine, ſpittle, ſuppuration of Impoſtumes,
(which is not vnlike vnto concoction performed in the veines) as alſo
in other excretions: for the excretions of euery part of the

body, as alſo of the humours, which are nothing elſe but the
ſuperfluities and relickes of concoction, do ſhew foorth the indiſpoſition
of the ſame. Wherefore in the infirmities of the
cheſt, and inſtruments of reſpiration, a ſpittle white, euen of an
equall conſiſtence, is alwayes a good and laudable ſigne of
concoction. But if the ſicke be not at all able to ſpit out any
thing, then doth it ſhew foorth abſolute cruditie; and if he
ſhould chance to ſpit a ſpittle without any mixture, being thin,
wateriſh, & of a leaden colour, or of the colour of verdigreaſe,
it doth not onely argue cruditie, but doth alſo portend the vtter
ouerthrow of the patient. But the vrine being an excretion of
the ſecond concoction, doth certainly ſhew foorth the crudity
and concoction of the humours contained in the veines, guts,
liuer, and places adioyning, the ſaid parts being annoyed, either
with feauer, inflammation, Scirrhus, or yet any other diſtemper
whatſoeuer. For if the ſame both in colour and ſubſtance be
like vnto ſuch vrines as are vſually ſeene in perfect health, hauing
a reſidence white, euen, and like vnto well concocted
matter, it doth truly witneſſe vnto vs, not onely the concoction
of the diſeaſe, eſpecially in feauers, but alſo that the naturall
force and power is a great deale ſtronger then the diſeaſe, and
therefore that it is like to obtaine the victorie in the conflict
with the criſis.Vrine no Pathognomonick ſigne of concoction, and yet to be obſerued. But by this meanes the vrine is no Pathognomonicke
ſigne, and yet a neceſſarie ſigne of concoction and
cruditie, and worth the obſeruing in feauers, diſeaſes of the
neather belly or intrails, and places adioyning to them. Wherefore
Galen in the expoſition of the predictions of Hippocrates,
doth grant, that the vrine doth ſhew foorth and demonſtrate
the ſtate and diſpoſition of the parts of the liuer, kidneyes, and
bladder; as likewiſe of the ſtrength or weakneſſe of the veſſels
containing the bloud, and of the naturall power and vertue
which is the ingenderer of the humours: howbeit the ſame
Galen againe affirmeth, that there are other Pathognomonicke
ſignes belonging to the braines, lungs, mother, ſinewes, &c.
And yet notwithſtanding, might one, not without cauſe, auouch,
that the vrine giueth notice of ſome infirmities of the
place through which it paſſeth, not primarily and principally,

but by accident, to wit, by reaſon of the contents thereof, which
are nothing elſe but excretions proceeding from thoſe parts
which do conueigh and carrie the vrine. Wherefore Hippocrates
witneſſeth,Praenot. lib. ex edit. Preſ. vel prognoſt. 2. ex edit. Heur. & lib. de natura hominis circa finem. that if any do void by vrine, either grauell, or little
thinne ſcurfe, or matter like vnto ſcales, or courſeſt dreſſings of bran,
little gobbets of fleſh, congealed bloud, matter or ſmall haires or
threeds, like vnto the ſmall veines knit together vnder the creuices
taile; theſe things declare that the bladder is annoyed with a
ſcab, and the kidneyes with the ſtone, ſuppuration, the rupture
of ſome veine, or ſome other infirmitie. But leſt any ſhould
raſhly apply the ſignes of vrine to any other then the aforenamed
diſeaſes, this famous father of Phyſitians doth adde immediatly:
Take heed therefore leſt thou be deceiued, the party making
ſuch an vrine when the bladder is amiſſe; for then ſuch vrines belong
not to the whole body, but ought to be referred to the bladder onely.
There is yet another fearefull and dangerous diſeaſe belonging
to the kidneyes,Diabete. called Diabete or Poldropſy; being an extraordinarie
fluxe of the vrine, called of the Greekes by reaſon of
this vnſatiable deſire of drinking Dipſacus. This diſeaſe is anſwerable
to the diſeaſe called Lienteria: and for this cauſe they
are continually forced to drinke, all which being nothing at all
changed, in colour, ſubſtance, or in ſmell, they do voide forth
againe as they receiued it, and that by reaſon of the imbecillity
of the returning and altering powers and faculties of the kidneyes.
Now that ſuch an vrine is the proper and pathognomonicke
ſigne of this diſeaſe, no man of vnderſtanding, I thinke,
will denie. Followeth now the third ſort of ſignes of concoction
of ſuperfluities, to wit, the excretions of the bellie, belonging
to the firſt concoction; the which being ſoft, faſhioned
according to the concauitie of the guts, and ſomewhat
faſtened or ſtiffe▪ being alſo voyded at the accuſtomed time,
and anſwering in proportion to the food receiued: then, as ſaith
Hippocrates, they do ſhew forth and declare the ſtrength of the
naturall faculties of the ſtomacke, together with the good digeſtion
thereof. Theſe three ſorts of ſuperfluities then giue particular
notice of the proper ſtate and diſpoſition of ſuch parts of
the bodie as they paſſe thorow, together with the ſtrength of

the naturall powers: and firſt the ſuperfluities of the meate do
argue and declare the force and ſtrength of the ſtomacke. For
this cauſe the Emperour Antoninus his groomes of his ſtable
did daily both taſte and ſmell to the ordure of his ſtately horſe,
knowne by his greene furniture, to know whether he had well
digeſted his food or not. Now the vrines are ſignes of the ſtate
of the bloud in the veines, and diſpoſition of the Liuer, which
is appointed to be the hote harth or kitchin for concoction of
the humours. The ſpittle in diſeaſes of the cheſt, is vnto vs a
ſigne and token of concoction or cruditie: and thoſe of the firſt
ſort, to wit, of cruditie, are for the moſt part euill, and often
proue very dangerous: the others againe are often meſſengers
of an healthfull and long looked for criſis: whence is this ſaying
of Hippocrates: Concoction doth portend and ſignifie both the ſpeedineſſe
of the criſe and aſſured health: but on the contrarie, cruditie
doth menace and threaten either the breaking forth of ſome tumour,
or great ſwelling, or elſe ſome great paine or griefe, or yet a relapſe
into the ſame diſeaſe againe. There are yet many moe decretorie
ſignes which concerne the future criſe, as alſo diuerſe prognoſticke
ſignes foreſhewing life or death, the full explication of
which would rather require a great volume then an Epiſtle (the
which haue bene exactly deſcribed by Hippocrates,) but eſpecially
the intricate ſignes of prediction by the pulſe, as alſo the
ſignes both of the diſeaſe it ſelfe, and of the place affected or
intereſſed; the which alſo I willingly paſſe ouer, by reaſon that
their power, force, efficacie, and ſignification, doth depend vppon
the ſignes of concoction; neither are there any amongſt all
the ſignes of concoction more neceſſarie for the Phyſitians vſe,
then theſe pathognomonicke ſignes. And tell me, I pray thee,
how ſhall the Phyſitian euer be able to cure vncouth and vnknowne
diſeaſes, vnleſſe the pathognomonicke ſignes firſt lay
them open to his view and conſideration; in the finding out of
which, the ancients tooke ſo great paines, as hath bene ſaid alreadie.
But ſince it is not the worke of the Phyſitian, but of nature,
to concoct and cure diſeaſes, it ſhall be very needfull for
the Phyſitian to know aſſuredly the vigor and ſtrength of the
naturall power and force, whether it be like to ouercome the

diſeaſe, or to faint vnder the burden of it▪ by which meanes we
ſhall attaine vnto more certaine and aſſured ſignes of life and
death, then euer did thoſe ſoothſayers and wizards, whom the
Romanes did maintaine for the benefit of their ſicke people;
whoſe prophecies and predictions no man of ſound iudgement
will euer beleeue to containe any matter of truth. But ſuch
prognoſticke ſignes as are collected from concoction, are ſo
firme and ſure, that Galen doth boaſt and brag, that he was neuer
by them deceiued. Now our piſſe-prophet Phyſitians are
either vtterly ignorant of them, or elſe notwithſtanding ſet
light by them▪ who, notwithſtanding, ſitting idle at home, are
nothing at all aſhamed, by the vrine alone to deliuer their Delphian
oracles concerniug all diſeaſes: who neuertheleſſe, haue
neuer ſo much as taſted of this ſo noble part of Phyſicke called
diagnosticke, without the which the other, to wit, therapeuticke,
can neuer ſubſiſt: yet are they neither aſhamed to aſſume
vnto themſelues the cure of vnknowne diſeaſes, nor yet to arrogate
and vſurpe the name of Phyſitians. Farewell, and write
backe vnto me againe, after what method and order this diagnoſticke
part of Phyſicke ought to be both written and taught.
Thus farre Langius.
                  
                  We will now proceed to ſome moe authorities, prouing the
impoſture committed by ſome, aſſuming to themſelues the
skill of diſcerning any diſeaſe by the inſpection of the vrine
onely; and then will we produce ſome authorities to tell vs
what diſeaſes may by the vrine be ſeene, and how in the verie
ſame we may ſometimes be deceiued.
                  From the premiſſes it may plainly appeare,Iohann. Michael▪ Sauonar. lib. de vrin. cap. 1. how eaſily ſuch Phyſitians
are deceiued, who truſt too much to the iudgement of the vrine
onely: for ſuch may well be compared to the vulgar ſort of people, who
are of opinion that not onely the diſeaſe it ſelfe, but euen the primitiue
or externall cauſe may alſo be ſeene in the ſame: as did appeare by that
clowne who reproched a very learned Phyſitian, becauſe he could not
diſcerne his cart and oxen in his vrine. Now that this our aſſertion
is true, it may eaſily appeare, in that the vrine may alter and change
vpon diuerſe occaſions: as by the quantitie and qualitie of diet: by
reaſon of exceſſiue motion: by plentifull euacuation, &c.
               
               
                  
                  Of the erronius and prepoſterous iudgement of
diſeaſes by vrine.
                  Georgius Rithamer a Gentleman of Ʋienna,Hiſtorie. being incited by the
great concourſe of people which did daily in ſo great abundance ſtocke
about this baſe roguing and c
                        •
                     zening Empiricke (who came hither of
late) to heare his opinion concerning their vrines,D
                           •
                        omedes Cornariu
                           •
                        , lib. conſil. medicinal. de hiſtor. admirand. ra
                           •••
                        . woulds needs likewiſe
in ſome matter heare his opinion. Hauing diſcourſed a little
with this Scoggia concerning the errand he came for, caſting his eyes
vpon the table, he espied a Greeke booke lying vpon the ſame, whereupon
he began preſently to ſmell out his knauerie.Of ſuch baſe ſtuffe we are not vnfurniſhed here at home. For this cozening
varlet was altogether ignorant of all manner of learning and good literature,
inſomuch that he could ſcarce ſpeake two Latine words: and
as for the Greeke, ſo farre was he from vnderſtanding the ſame, that
he knew not ſo much as one letter of that language, as being brought
vp vnder an Empiricke as ignorant as himſelfe. He afterwards confeſſed
vnto v
                        •
                     , that the ſto
                        •
                     e where he lodged had two doores, at one
of the which people ordinarily entred to talke with him: the other
ioyned cloſe to the kitchin, at the which a blind woman went out & in,
who asked people before they came to ſpeake with the Impoſtor, what
their errand was: and then hauing learned what ſhe would, returned
againe by the ſame way, acquainting the villaine with the whole matter
and ſeuerall circumſtances: by which meanes he did exceedingly
abuſe the ſimpler ſort of people. It came to paſſe another time, that a
certaine graue matrone did moſt earneſtly require that ſhe might haue
acceſſe to him (for he would not eaſily admit euery one to his preſence,
to the end his credit might ſeeme the greater) affirming likewiſe to
this blind woman, that her huſband was now readie to dye by reaſon
of his exceſſiue bleeding at the noſe, vnleſſe he had ſome preſent remedie
prouided. She being at length let in, he told her preſently without
asking her any queſtion, thy huſband bleedeth at the noſe, and ſo wrote
her downe ſome thing in a paper, with the which ſhe departed, & euery
where did magnifie and extoll the great skill of this notorius cozening
raskall. O moſt execrable fraud and impoſture! And yet now
adayes, not a few, not without great 
                        •
                     urt and preiudice to the poore
diſtreſſed patients, do thus increaſe their meanes, and by the like impoſture

poſture purchaſe to themſelues no ſmall gaine. Such a one is that notable
impostor, the Iew I meane, practiſing his impoſture at Ʋienna,
theſe many yeares by paſt. But heare againe the cunning impoſture
of another of theſe knaues, recorded by the ſame author.
                     Another.
                  
                  It is not vnknowne to many,Idem ibidem. how that a few yeares ago there liued
here a certaine cozening knaue, who by the bare inſpection of the vrine
onely did moſt boldly and confidently affirme, that euery one whoſe
vrine was brought to him was either ſurpriſed with that feauer cō
                     monly
called Synochus; or elſe would tell them ſome ſtrange and more
then ridiculous and monſtrous tales: as that ſome drop of bloud was
fallen downe from the heart into the neather belly, & ſo had produced
the diſeaſe; or elſe that the heart was enuironed about, as it were
with ſome bonds, which did bind it hard, with many other ſuch ridiculous
conceits. After the deliuerie of this his ſo ridiculous vrinarie
oracles, he preſcribed moſt commonly for euery one to ſweat; adminiſtring
to this end and purpoſe this medicine following, well knowne to
euery Apothecaries apprentice: to wit, a litle Ʋenice treacle, mingled
with a litle Campher: and after their ſweating, he cauſed them
bleed abundantly. In this age wherein we liue, there is euery where
in theſe our countries ſo great and ſo frequent a number of them, which
without any controll or puniſhment, euen in the best Cities and
townes, both wheres and Iewes, as alſo any deſperate villaine, and bold
ignorant Empirickes, do kill and deſtroy the ſimple and ignorant people.
And all of them by meanes of this ſo neceſſarie a ſigne doth nothing
elſe but practiſe their impoſture. Surely ſuch rogues ought moſt
ſeuerely and exemplarily to be publickely puniſhed, and to be baniſhed
out of all well gouerned Cities and commonwealths; like as we ſee robbers
and theeues by the high wayes to be driuen out of the thickets and
forreſts to be puniſhed. But alas, ſo farre are we from baniſhing this
abuſe, that many of good worth amongſt our ſelues, haue required,
and do yet require, not of my ſelfe alone, but of many others alſo both
iudicious and learned Phyſitians, that by the ſole inſpection of the vrine,
without any further inquiſition or artificiall coniecture going before,
we ſhould Prophet-like tell them, whether the vrine be a mans or
a womans; of what age the partie is, what is the nature of the diſeaſe;
as alſo what the antecedent and primitiue cauſe of the diſeaſe may be:
and whether they haue contracted the ſame by drinking of bad

wi
                        •
                     es, by eating too many puddings, or any ſuch like thing. Now if
thou ſhalt herein profeſſe thy ſelfe ignorant, and canſt not Lyncius-like
ſee all this and more in the vrine, thou ſhalt heare them reply,
thou art a dunce, knowing nothing, and that they haue bene with them
who haue told them wonders by the water. Thou ſeeſt then how abſurd
an opinion is crept in, not among the vulgar ſort onely, but euen
among many others alſo, who would ſeeme to be of a more refined vnderſtanding;
as alſo what great danger doth from hence ariſe. But
yet when as in ſome caſes, with certaine cautions, we do attribute ſome
certainty to the vrine, in giuing vs ſome notice either of the ſecuritie
of the diſeaſe, or yet the danger of the ſame: we are ſo farre from
maintaining and vpholding ſuch baſe b
                        •
                     ld varlets, that we deſire nothing
more, then the driuing of ſuch dunces out of all well gouerned
countries and commonwealthes.
                  But now let vs proceed to declare the vncertainty of this
ſigne, together with the limitation of the ſame to ſome certaine
diſeaſes, wherein it giueth vs beſt ſatisfaction: and we will
begin with the famous Fernel.
                  
                  Now the vrine if it be neither mingled with too much drinke,
                        
                           ••
                        rnel. Pathol. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 3. cap. 8. or
with ſome other mixture, giueth vs cleare and euident notice of the
qualitie of the humours contained in the Liuer and great veines: but
more obſcurely of ſuch as are contained in the ſmall veines and euery
part of the bodie. And a little after.
                  
                  It doth in like manner euidently declare and ſet forth the infirmities
of ſuch parts as it paſſeth through: as of the kidneyes, the vrine-pipes,
the bladder and the yard. For although it make no long abode
nor ſtay in thoſe paſſages, yet doth it cleanſe away any filth or vncleanneſſe
if any there be. For this cauſe doth it ſhew forth the infirmities
of ſuch parts as it doth immediatly touch. And againe afterwards.
                  
                  But now becauſe the cuſtome hath ſo preuailed, that beſides the
premiſſes, many there are who like Prophets will ſeeme to diuine and
coniecture by the ſole inſpection of the vrine, many things which concerne
the diſeaſe: whoſoeuer therefore for gaining of a little vaineglorie
and popular applauſe, will accommodate himſelfe to imitate
them, let him first of all reckon vp at once whatſoeuer he knoweth by
the vrine. For by the exchange of many words fooliſh wits are eaſily

entrapped, &c. And then concludeth thus: Whoſoeuer then ſhall
vrge the Phyſitian, as if he were ſome Prophet, by raſh aduenturing,
to deliuer his iudgement concerning the ſicke by the ſole inſpection of
the vrine, ſhall carrie backe but vncertaintie; and for the moſt part
nothing but doubting for their paines. But he or ſhe who after a wiſe
and diſcreete manner doth craue the counſell of an vnderſtanding
Phyſitian, ſhall reape for his paines the fruite of good and wholeſome
aduice.
                  Now let vs heare againe what the Italian Sauonarola ſayes to
this buſineſſe.
                  From the premiſſes then we may conclude,Sauonarolo loco ſupracitato. that the knowledge we
haue of the vrine doth principally concerne the Liuer; and the gibbous
or backe part of the ſame chiefly. Next, and in the ſecond place, concerning
the infirmities of the veines: thirdly, and last of all, the infirmities
of the other parts of the bodie. And a little after. From
whence we may inferre, that the iudgement taken from the vrine onely,
but eſpecially of moſt other parts of the bodie, excepting the Liuer,
is not of any power or efficacie. Mercatus a learned Spaniſh Phyſitian
attributeth as much to the ſweat as to the vrine. But heare
himſelfe ſpeake.
                  
                  
                     Now comming to the infirmities of the Liuer,
                     Mercatus tom. 2. lib. 3. pag. 25. edit. Pali
                           •
                        . 1608. 
                     we muſt declare and
lay open ſuch predictions as are taken from the vrine and the ſweat:
for theſe two do giue vs certaine notice and knowledge, not onely of
this part and the veines, but ſometimes alſo they prooue to be certaine
ſignes of the ſtate of the nouriſhing or vegetable power ouer the
whole bodie.
                     Tom. 2. pag. 492. The ſame author in another place giueth the pulſe
a great preheminence aboue the vrine in many diſeaſes, but eſpecially
in ſuch as concerne the vitall facultie; which place, as
many others to the ſame purpoſe out of many learned and approued
authors, for breuitie I will here paſſe by. But Liddel,
howbeit a late, yet a learned Phyſitian, and borne in our owne
Iland, becauſe he ſpeaketh ſo to the purpoſe in this point of vrine
now in hand, I could not nor would not paſſe by.
                  Wherefore ſince the vrines do chiefly proceed from the ſuperfluitie
of the parts of the bodie,Duncan. Liddel. art. med. lib. cap. 8. they can giue vs but a generall knowledge of
the diſeaſe, giuing vnto vs most euident notice of the good or bad diſpoſition
of the Liuer, the veines, the bloud, and humours contained

in them, as likewiſe of the concoction or cruditie of the humors within
the veines. Next, they ſhewforth the diſpoſition of ſuch parts as
they paſſe by, to wit, of the kidneyes, vreters, or vrine-pipes, and the
bladder: together with ſuch parts whoſe ſuperfluities they carrie with
them: but do nothing ſo well ſet foorth the ſtate and diſpoſition of ſuch
parts as they do not touch, and from the which they receiue no excretions
or ſuperfluities. Againe in the end of the Chapter: But we
muſt not raſhly pronounce our opinion concerning the diſeaſe, or yet
of the euent thereof, truſting ſolely to theſe ſignes of the vrine, except
we be firſt acquainted with the ſtate and conſtitution of the partie, and
other accidents and occurrences which do concerne him. For ſometimes
in diſeaſes void of danger, the vrines are farre vnlike to them
which do appeare in perfect health, and do ſhew themſelues in a moſt
hideous and fearefull forme, especially vpon the approaching of the
criſis; or when as vpon the ſudden, by the vigour and ſtrength of nature,
the obſtructions being opened, a great part of the faultie matter
is expelled forth by the vrine. On the other ſide againe, in dangerous
and deadly diſeaſes, as in Peſtilentiall and Hecticke feauers, the vrines
cannot be diſcerned from thoſe that are made in perfect health:
by reaſon that the malignitie of the diſeaſe hath ſeized vpon the ſolid
ſubſtance of the heart, and therefore the whole matter of the diſeaſe
hauing the courſe thither, there is no portion nor part of the ſame to
be ſeene in the vrine.
                  It were no hard matter for me to make an enumeration of
many moe authors, tending all to the ſame purpoſe, and ſo to
fill vp many moe pages, the which, I thinke, would be but to
ſmall purpoſe, ſince theſe 
                        •
                     ew may ſuffice in ſtead of many moe,
all being of the ſame mind. Now howbeit the vncertaintie of
this ſigne hath ſufficiently bene proued by the preceeding diſcourſe,
and it were eaſie for me to make vp a large volume concerning
this particular onely, the which howbeit it be not my
purpoſe, yet before I proceed to the vncertaintie of the ſame in
diſeaſes of the Liuer, and within the veines, I will inſtance in
two or three particular diſeaſes. The firſt ſhall be of an impoſtume
in the head.
                  In the yeare 1617. in the beginning of Ianuarie,Hiſtorie. a young Gentlewoman
vnmaried, and daughter to a Gentleman of worth dwelling

not farre from NORTHAMPTON,
                     Deceitfulneſſe of the vrine in an Impoſtume and paine of the head. the ſeaſon being very cold,
and ſhe before of a craſie conſtitution, was ſuddenly ſurpriſed with
ſwounding fits, which ended with an extreame paine, especially about
the crowne of her head, being accompanied with a ſuppreſſion of her
monethly diſeaſe. The paine was for certaine dayes without intermiſſion,
howſoeuer ſometimes ſome remiſſion might be obſerued: as
likewiſe both in her pulſe and vrine ſignes of a feauer did plainly appeare.
After I had vſed diuers meanes of diuerſion, as well by Phlebotomie
and attractiue gliſters, as by other meanes, not neglecting hypnoticke,
cordiall, and deoppilatiue medicines, according to the ſeuerall
occurrences, the diſeaſe gaue her ſome reaſonable time of intermiſſion,
with ſome alleuiation of the accidents. The vrine alſo after a
few dayes, began to flatter vs with a faire and laudable colour, ſhortly
ſeconded with contents anſwerable. The pulſe played his part alſo,
and diſſembled as well as his neighbour. The Gentlewoman to any
outward appearance, the very day before her death, was like to haue
liued many, not onely dayes but yeares alſo: mouing and ſtirring
with great alacritie and chearefulneſſe vp and downe her chamber,
buſied about her ordinarie employments. When behold, he who ſpareth
not the mightieſt Monarchs, on an euening knocking ſuddenly, demands
his debt long before his day, and would ſcarce allow her full
two houres respit for the payment of the ſame. After death iſſued out
of her mouth and noſe great abundance of corrupt bloud and matter,
as was afterwards told me; giuing vs intelligence of an Impoſtume in
the head, which had occaſioned, not the former accidents onely, but
euen death it ſelfe alſo.
                  About the ſame time in this towne and countrey about vs,
diuerſe were ſurpriſed with Impoſtumes, both in the head and
other parts, whereof diuerſe died, among the reſt my counſell
was craued for a maid about twentie yeares of age, ſuddenly
ſuffocated by an Impoſtume in her ſtomach, which after her
death did appeare, by the great abundance of bloud and matter
caſt out of her mouth. At my coming to her, I found her
depriued as well of ſpeech, as of ſenſe and reaſon, and ſcarce
liued aboue 2. houres after my departure. But I will now relate
a true hiſtorie of the deceitfulneſſe of the vrine in a conſumption
of the Lungs.
                  
                     
In Aprill 1622. my counſell and perſonall preſence for a Gentlewoman
in Bedfordſhire being deſired,Another. I repaired thither, where I
found her infirmity to be a Quotidian feauer,In an vlcer of the Lungs. accompanied with ſome
accidents which did ſomewhat amaze her. During my abode in that
place, there was brought to me the vrine of a young Gentleman dwelling
hard by, to haue my opinion of the ſame. Hauing well viewed it,
I found it both in colour and contents, anſwerable to the moſt healthfull
mans vrine. But after certaine interrogatories, I found that he
had bene for a long time troubled with a cough. Being deſired to ſee
the partie, I found that he had bene for a long time vexed with this
cough, accompanying an vlcer in the lungs: and ſeeing in him ſtrength
now decayed, with anOf the Hippocraticall face ſee our arraignment of vrines. lib. 3. cap. 3. Hippocraticall face, deaths truſtie meſſenger,
I left him to the Prognoſticke, which within leſſe then the ſpace of
three weeks was verified.
                  Now would I willingly demand of the moſt cunning Piſſe-prophet,
what could he haue found out by either of theſe vrines?
or could he euer haue attained to the height and depth
of theſe diſeaſes, by the bare inſpection of the vrine onely? And
if he had bene beholden to the vſe of the beſt perſpectiue glaſſe
that euer was made, could he euer haue ſeene any ſuch matter
in the vrine? But concerning this point we will here ſurceaſſe,
and proceed to the diſeaſes within the veines.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               That euen in diſeaſes of the Liuer, and within the veines, the vrine
doth often deceiue the moſt skilfull Phyſitian.
               
                  NOw it may ſeeme a ſmall matter to inſtance in
diuerſe diſeaſes without the veines, the vncertaintie
of iudgement in diſeaſes by the vrine
onely; but it will, perhaps, ſeeme more pertinent
to declare, that the like vncertaintie ſometimes
is found in ſome ſuch diſeaſes as ſeeme
to affoord vs greater certaintie, as in feauers, &c. Now that the
vrine is not alwayes a certaine ſigne in euery feauer, may from

hence appeare,Leo Rogan. lib. 3. de prouid▪ ex vrin. cap. vlt. that often in that feauer commonly called Synochus
cum vel ſine putredine, that is, that kind of continuall feauer
which proceedeth from the abundance of bloud, with or without
putrefaction, the vrine differeth little or nothing from the
vrines of ſuch as liue in perfect health,Paulus Aegineta lib. 2. cap. 27. as witneſſeth Paulus Aegineta.
The reaſon why ſuch vrines proceeding of ſo hote a
cauſe, yet do not appeare of ſo high a colour, is becauſe of the
ſame immoderate and exceſſiue heate, which being increaſed
by meanes of the feauer, conuerteth the bloud it ſelfe into the
nature of choler: and thus are ſuch vrines not of ſo high intenſe
a colour, as thoſe which proceed of choler. Hence alſo may
the error of ſuch Phyſitians eaſily appeare,Dangerous errors. who neuer admit of
Phlebotomie, but when the vrine is of high and intenſe red
colour; thinking that this doth alwayes argue abundance of
bloud, which neuertheleſſe is moſt falſe, as hath bene ſaid. And
beſides, in that the vrines affoord vs but ſome generall notice
of the cruditie and concoction of the diſeaſe, they can neuer
informe our iudgement, whether the feauer be primarie or a
principall gueſt, or ſymptomaticall accompanying the diſeaſe
as the ſhadow doth the bodie, as is to be ſeene in Pleureſiet
and diuers other internall inflammations: which is, notwithſtanding
of no ſmall moment for the methodicall curing of the
diſeaſe. And y
                     •
                  t moreouer, how canſt thou euer tell whether
it be an intermittent or continuall feauer by this vncertaine
ſigne? Neither Hippocrates nor Galen did euer preſume to
know ſo much; howſoeuer A
                        ••
                     uarius in this, as in many other
things concerning this point, hath troubled himſelfe more then
he needed. But againe, what if the feauer be compoſed of diuers
humours, melancholy being one, which will not alwayes
colour the vrine?Galen lib. 2. de criſ. cap. 3. & 6. 
                  Galen himſelfe inſtructing vs what vrines accompanie
a Qua
                     •
                  tane in the beginning of the ſame, ſaith, they
are thin, white, and wateriſh: and a little after, he aſcribes the
like vrines to the beginning of a Quotidian. And I know for
certaine, that ſometimes in the beginning of a Qua
                     •
                  tane, the
vrine cannot be diſcerned from a ſound and healthfull mans.
And handling hereafter the colours of vrines, I ſhall make it appeare,
that theſe thin, white, wateriſh vrines, do often accompanie

other diſeaſes. It is alſo worth the obſeruation, that Galen
himſelfe, where as of ſet purpoſe he handleth both the differences
and ſignes of ſeauers, maketh ſo ſmall account of the
vrine, that he neither nameth it among the ſignes of the Quotidian,
Tertian, Quartane, nor yet of ſuch as are continuall or
without intermiſſion.Timoth. Brichius Cantabrig. lib. de m
                        •
                     d. the. 1. aph. pag. 94. And a learned Phyſitian borne in this
kingdome, ſetting downe all the ſignes of a Tertian, not omitting
the pulſe, yet maketh no mention of the vrine. But what if
any malignitie be ioyned with a feauer, may it not marre thy
iudgement? It hath euer bene ſo agreed vpon by the learned,
and daily experience teacheth vs this truth, that when greateſt
danger is neareſt, it is then there leaſt of all to be diſcerned. But
concerning this point, heare yet the authoritie of a learned
man borne within this land,I
                        •
                     hannes Caius Britannus de Ephemera Britannica, pag. 136. ſpeaking of that fearefull and
terrible feauer, called commonly the ſweating ſickneſſe.
               The vrine in this diſeaſe was ſomewhat coloured, thicke in ſubſtance,
variable and inconſtant in the ſwimme and ſublimation (for
nature kept no certaine rule or order by reaſon of the violence of the
venome) and in all other parts kept within compaſſe.
               Now to any vulgar eye, ſo great danger in the like vrine
could neuer haue appeared. I my ſelfe haue viewed many more
dangerous to the outward appearance, and yet neither death
nor danger was to be feared.The vrines in maligne and peſtilent feauers very deceitfull. The vrines in maligne and peſtilent
feauers are very variable and hard to lay hold on. In ſome the
vrine differeth nothing from a healthfull mans: ſometimes againe
but a little, as in this laſt inſtance. Againe, in others it followeth
the nature of the humour, ſhewing onely the abundance
and putrefaction of the humours; as I my ſelfe obſerued
1610. at London in a luſtie young fellow, ſeruant to a Gentleman
a friend of mine, and dwelling in the Strand neare to Charing-croſſe.
               This fellowes vrine was very high coloured,Hiſtorie. with a copious reſidence
of red and ſome yellow contents: and the feauer kept the peri
                     •
                  d
of an intermittent Tertian ague, as was related vnto me; and
was accompanied with a painefull ſwelling in the throate: his bodie
plethoricke and cacochymicke, and of a ſtrong conſtitution, and in the
Aprill of his age. For this cauſe I preſcribed both phlebotomie and

other euacuations. But the noiſe of the neighbours about, affirming
it to be the Plague (as it proued indeed, many of them dying ſhortly
of the ſame diſeaſe) was the cauſe that meanes were by his friends
neglected, and he after a few dayes dyed of this diſeaſe.
               But before we go out of our owne Iland,Iohannes Anglicus, vulgo Gateſden, in opere practico communiter Roſa Anglica nuncupato. let vs yet heare the
authoritie of another learned Phyſitian, who liued in this land
about 300. yeares ago. Heare therefore his owne words concerning
Quartanes and other diſeaſes.
               Now becauſe the Quartane ague is engendred of diuers humors,
therefore the vrine is many wayes changed.What the vrines do here declare vnto. vs. And thus ſaith Richardus
concerning the predictions by vrines: I take God and all the
Saints in heauen to witneſſe, that neither by skill and art, nor yet by
vſe and long experience in practiſe, I could euer attaine to any certaine
knowledge of the vrine, either in the conception, a Quartane
ague, the Falling ſickeneſſe, &c.
               Now although I might be a great deale larger in this point,
yet will I content my ſelfe with that which hath bene alreadie
ſaid. Let it then not any more be doubted, that the vrine is
not alwayes a certaine and infallible ſigne of the eſtate of diſeaſes
contained in the vrine, as feauers &c. But what then (may
one reply) doth it declare? The cruditie or concoction of theſe
diſeaſes, together with the length or ſhortneſſe of the ſame, according
to the appearance, and the early or late appearing
of the ſignes of the one or of the other (I meane cruditie or
concoction) in the vrine. Now omitting alſo many things
which might be ſaid concerning diſeaſes proceeding from the
ſame, I will inſtance onely in one, to wit, that loathſome diſeaſe
of Leproſie. Now as our ſenſes do teach vs, that in all the ſorts
of the ſame, the
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , id eſt, vitiligo, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſiue pruritus aut prurigo, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , id eſt, impetigo, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , nomina ſunt affectionū, in quibus omnibus male afficitur cutis, à vinoſo aliquo ſucco, qui neſcit aſſimulari, &c. Holler. ſchol. ad cap. 64. lib. 1. de morb. intern. skin is euer infected: ſo whether thou vnderſtandeſt
that which the Greekes or yet the Arabians ſo called,In quouis horum affectuum (lepra ſcilicet & morbo Gallico) membra nutrimentalia (praecipue iecur, à quo omnes corporis partesſuum recipiunt alimentum) ſere habitualiter laborant. Mercat. oper. praedict. tom. 2. pag. 126.
it is agreed among all our Phyſitians, that as well the Liuer,
which is the fountaine and roote, as the maſſe of bloud,
which is as the branches or ſtreames proceeding from the
ſame, are much intereſſed and endammaged in this diſeaſe: and
therefore by right the vrine here ſhould carrie a great ſtroke, it
being alſo the opinion of diuers Phyſitians, that as well the
bloud as the vrine of ſuch as are infected with this loathſome

diſeaſe do much differ from other mens. And yet heare I pray
thee what a learned late writer of no ſmall experience witneſſeth
concerning this matter.
               But as for my ſelfe,Felix Plater. oper. pract. tract. 3. cap. 4. who haue theſe thirtie yeares and vpwards,
moſt diligently viewed, and carefully obſerued and marked the bloud
of a great number of ſuch as were infected with this loathſome
plague of Leproſie, I do moſt conſtantly and aſſuredly auouch, that
neither I my ſelfe, nor yet ſuch Surgeons as aſſiſted me, could euer in
the bloud find out any aſſured marke or infallible token of Leproſie:
but in euery reſpect like vnto the blond of ſuch as enioyed their perfect
health: or if at any time it hapned to ſwerue from the foreſaid
perfection, that it then appeared no more corrupted or infected
then ordinarily we do behold it in the 
                     •
                  aundiſe, feauer, or any ſuch
like diſeaſe. The like alſo I may truly pronounce of the vrine, on
the which the vulgar ſort doth ſo much dote. In the ſame ranke
may I alſo with good right place the pulſe, whoſe change and
alteration to enquire after, were to ſearch for a knot in a ruſh, &c.
               But now let vs proceed to a point ſurpaſſing vulgar capacitie,
and which will ſeeme to many a ſtrange Paradox, or a
tale of Robin Hood: my meaning is concerning women with
child, whether by the vrine onely conception may be diſcerned:
the which point, howbeit it hath bene touched in our
former diſcourſe; yet becauſe this is ſo inueterate an error
that hardly can it be expelled out of the minds of many, I will
inſiſt a little the longer vpon the ſame, intreating a little thy
patience (gentle Reader) and I hope thou ſhalt not afterwards
repent thee of this paines.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               That by the vrine onely, it cannot abſolutely be told, whether a
woman be with child or no, contrary to the
vulgar opinion.
               
                  AS in many other things, ſo in this point alſo concerning
the conception, ignorance and error
haue ſo farre preuailed, that he who cannot vpon
the bare inſpection of the vrine onely, tell whether
a woman be with child or no, and whether of
a male or female, is thought by many not to merit the name of
a learned and skilfull Phyſitian. The which hath made many,
leſt they ſhould be diſcredited among the vulgar, cunningly
ſometimes to learne what they could concerning other ſignes
of conception, and vpon the ſight of the vrine, make them beleeue
they had found out the whole truth by meanes thereof:
and others againe, when as they could learne nothing, haue
vpon ſome preſumptions and probabilities put all to the venture,
and told them that which they moſt longed after: and if
the prediction happened right, then was this perſon admired
as more then a mortall man: but if otherwiſe, then might he
looke for a mocke or flout for his paines, beſides the imputation
of ignorance and inſufficiencie. Howbeit ſome are yet
more cunning then others, to impute the fault to ſome other
accident, by this meanes ſtill maintaining the ignorant in their
former error. This hath bene a great meanes that hitherto the
people hath bene gulled, hauing conceiued a ſiniſter and wrong
opiniō of the honeſt & learned Phyſitian, who would not ſooth
them vp in the ſame errour.Arguments euincing that by the ſole inſpection of the vrine, it cannot be diſcerned whether a woman be with child or no. For the better confutation of this
point, my purpoſe is, firſt to propound ſome reaſons againſt the
ſame: and in the next place ſhall march ſome authorities of the
learned: and in the laſt place ſomething ſhall be added out of
mine owne experience. Now in the firſt place, according to
the common rule ſet downe, and confirmed by a number of
learned writers, That the vrine ordinarily giueth vs notice of ſuch
diſeaſes as are contained within the veines, as alſo of ſuch places

through which it paſſeth, it is apparent, that the conception participateth
of neither. For in the firſt place, it is apparent and
manifeſt, that the matrix or wombe is none of thoſe parts contained
within the veines: neither yet in the next place, doth
the vrine paſſe through the ſame. How then is it poſſible to perceiue
any infirmitie of this part by the vrine? Now beſides,
the bladder and the wombe are two diſtinct and ſeuerall parts,
appropriated to ſeuerall ends and vſes. And put yet the caſe
that ſometimes ſomething might be, by reaſon of the neareneſſe
of the two orifices, conueyed through the common paſſage,
yet this would but ſeldome come to paſſe. And moreouer
in women with child this conueyance could not be granted, in
regard of the exact ſhutting vp of the aforeſaid paſſage during
the whole time of this burden, inſomuch that the leaſt ſuperfluitie
can then haue no paſſage,In aphor. 51. & 54. lib. 6 & 3. de natur. facult. cap. 3. 6. de locis affect. cap. 5. 15. de vſu part. as witneſſeth Galen in diuers
places. Now if any will deny the truth of this point, in the firſt
place I anſwer, that as I grant that ſometimes there my be,
notwithſtanding that which hath bene ſaid, ſome euacuation
during that time, and that ſome part of the ſame matter might
be conueyed into the bladder, yet this cometh to paſſe but very
ſeldome, and in a few. And againe, this would make more
againſt them: for all that is by the learned at the moſt granted
in this caſe is, that the vrine may ſometimes declare a retention
and ſtopping of the menſtruous fluxe, whereof if any part during
their being with child is voyded foorth (as ſometimes
ſome women haue ſome to ſpare) the vrine can no more declare
any ſtoppage of this fluxe, and by conſequent nothing
concerning the conception, vnleſſe thou wouldeſt imagine
that there be certaine ideas or ſhapes and pictures of young
children conueyed at that time into the vrines of women with
child. And yet if this were true, who told theſe vrine-mongers
that the wombe daunced attendance on the bladder, to voyde
their ſeuerall excretions at one and the ſame time? But put yet
the caſe that ſome part of this menſtruous fluxe, now and then
iſſuing out at the common conduit with the vrine, might ſhew
vs ſomething, yet could it not follow, but that a number of other
ſignes were alſo neceſſarie, as hereafter ſhall appeare.

Their chiefe ring-leader Actuarius himſelfe, confeſſeth that
the vrine alone is not able to leade vs vnto this truth. Moreouer
Ariſtotle acknowledgeth,Ariſt. 4. de gener. anim. cap. 6. that the vrines of women with
child do differ according to the time that is paſt ſince the conception;
ſo that there is not one certaine vrine whereon to repoſe
our iudgement. And according to the opinion of diuerſe
others, the vrines of women with child alter almoſt euery day.
One of theſe vrines therefore ſhall neuer giue notice of the conception,
although it might be ſometimes diſcerned by the vrine.
And is not this abſurditie, to preſume to know that by one
ſigne, which many ioyned together can hardly declare vnto vs?
Diuerſe contents are ſet downe by ſome authors following
Auicenna, which are ſaid to be found in ſuch vrines, which neuertheleſſe,
haue bene often obſerued as well in the vrines of
citizens as countrey people of the malekinde, who I am ſure,
were neuer ſo much as ſuſpected to be with child. A certain practicall
Profeſſor of the vniuerſity of Piſa in Italie (ſaith Scribonius)
a graue ancient Phyſitian,
                  Gu
                        •
                     l. Adolph. Scribon. lib. de vrin. inſpect. 
                  was wont to ſay, that ſuch as truſted moſt to
this prediction, were moſt of all deceiued; and yet he neuer yet in his
life time had obſerued any ſuch vrines in women with child, as Auicenna
deſcribeth: and that moreouer he had often obſerued ſuch
contents in mens vrines. Adde yet this argument to the former,
that the conception, as alſo the further growth of the child in
the wombe, is properly a naturall action, and no diſeaſe at all:
for this cauſe their vrines ought to differ little or nothing from
other healthfull womans waters, eſpecially in the firſt moneths,
as I haue my ſelfe often obſerued. Againe what if a woman with
child be ſurpriſed with ſome acute diſeaſe, as commeth often to
paſſe, will this then thinke you, make no alteration in the vrine?
And if there were any certainty in this ſigne alone, what
needed our Phyſitians trouble themſelues with ſo many? and
oftentimes all will not ſerue the turne. Let it therefore remaine
firme and 
                     ••
                  able, that no certainty can be collected by
the ſole obſeruation of this ſigne, and that to maintaine the
ſame, is nothing elſe but meere impoſture and coz
                     ••
                  age. But
that this is not mine owne priuate opinion onely, I will now
make it appeare: heare therefore ſome of our learned Phyſitians

deliuer their owne minds, that out of the mouth of many
witneſſes this truth may be confirmed. Let Rondeletius firſt
ſpeake.
               It would ſeeme (ſaith he) iuſtifiable,Rondel. lib. de vrin▪ cap. 40. de vrina praegnantium. as well by reaſon as by experience,
that the vrine may giue vt certaine and aſſured notice of a womans
being with child. And D. Gabride ſaid, he knew it as aſſuredly
as if he had ſeene a child in the vrine. But of another opinion are all
the ancient Phyſitians, who haue left vs no ſignes of the ſame in the
vrine: as alſo reaſon it ſelfe teacheth vs no leſſe. For ſince the birth or
conception is without the veines, and the vrine chiefly giueth vs notice
of ſuch diſeaſes as are contained within the veines, it can giue vs
no certaine aſſurance of this matter, vnleſſe we ioyne therewith all other
ſignes, as the retention of her monethly diſeaſe, ſwelling of her
bellie, ſhe, notwithſtanding enioying her perfect health. &c.
               Heare now the opinion of ſome of our Italian Phyſitians, and
firſt of all let the learned Mercuriall vtter his mind.
               Be it knowne,Mercur. lib de vrin. cap. 7. notwithſtanding, that I am not altogether of the
Arabian Phyſitians mind, who haue deuiſed certaine contents which
are not to be found in vrines, to wit, certaine grounds like vnto carded
wooll, little motes, &c. No more am I of that opinion, that a Phyſitian
may aſſuredly know by the vrine whether a woman be with child
or no; by reaſon that of all the ſignes which Hippocrates hath in diuers
places ſet downe, there is not one that we can certainly truſt to.
               The ſame opinion is by his countrey man Sauonarola yet ſeconded.
               But here we muſt be very circumſpect,Sauonarola libr. de vrin. cap. 2. rubr. 10. de vrin. praegnantium. in regard that all theſe
ſignes of conception may ſometimes be without the ſame, as in the ſtoppage
of her monethly courſe, ioyned with a falſe conception; in which
caſe many famous Phyſitians haue bene deceiued, and their too forwardneſſe
hath turned to their great diſgrace and infamie: as it befell
two learned and skilfull Phyſitians in the Ʋniuerſitie of Pauie, Marſilius
de ſancta Sophia, and Petrus de Tuſſignano, both in my time.
Let yong Phyſitians therefore be carefull, that with the vrine they
ioyne all the other ſignes belonging to conception; amongſt which one
is chiefe, which belongeth to the midwife to find out, &c.
               And Leo Roganus, a learned Romane Phyſitian, is of no other
opinion.
               
                  
The vrines of women with child (ſaith he) differ nothing but by
accident from other womens,Leo Roganu
                        •
                      lib. 2. de cauſ. vrin. cap. 15. de vrin. v
                        •
                     ero gerentium. to wit, that then in ſuch women, as well
the action of the ſtomacke, as the appetite and concoction vſe ordinarily
to be troubled. And yet ſuch is the block
                     •
                  ſhneſſe and ſtupiditie
of ſome Phyſitians, that they are perſwaded women with child make
vrines differing from other womens. It is true, that in women with
child, that bloud which was wont to be voyded monethly, is now ſtayed
and kept in, wherefore becauſe the ſame in the firſt moneths eſpecially,
not being wholly ſpent on the nouriſhment of the child, as being then
but ſmall, it commeth to paſſe that the action of the ſtomacke, as likewiſe
the appetite, together with the concoction are not a litle troubled.
And therefore being often, by reaſon of their longing deſires, carried
away with a deſire of ſuch things as engender little good nouriſhment,
they engender great ſtore of crudities, which may plainly be ſeene by
their vrines, the which are alſo common to all ſuch as abound in crudities.
               To the former we will adde yet a late writer of the ſame nation,Iean Marinello de Formie lib. 3. chap. 5. de maladie des femmes.
becauſe he ſpeaketh ſo plainly and to the purpoſe. The
booke was firſt written in the Italian tongue, and ſince tranſlated
into French, out of the which I haue tranſlated this parcell.
               Truth it is, that we muſt not altogether relie vpon the vrine, to
know whether a woman be with child or no. For the vrine can giue
thee no further aſſurance of the ſame, then by the retention of her accuſtomed
monethly courſe, and by the which we do commonly collect
ſome preſumption of conception. Now it may eaſily come to paſſe, that
a woman may be ſurpriſed with many infirmities, which may hide and
darken the principall ſigne of conception (if any there were) in the vrine:
ſuch as be headach, any cold, eſpecially being accompanied with
a cough, cruditie, or indigestion of the ſtomacke, great paine in the
kidneyes, &c. And which is yet more, the eating of raw fruite, ſallets,
milke, porke, peaſe, ſperage, cabbage, artichocks, muſhromes, and
many other ſuch kind of food, not being ordinarie or vſuall to the partie,
are ſufficient to alter and change, not the colour onely, but the
contents of the vrine alſo. Moreouer the vrine doth moſt properly and
aſſuredly declare vnto vs, the infirmities of the parts from whence it
commeth, and through the which at length it paſſeth. For the which
cauſe it is more then manifeſt, that there is no aſſured knowledge to be

had by the vrine concerning the conception, no more then by the retention
of her monethly courſe, ſin
                     •
                  e that without conception the foreſaid
retention and ſtopping is found, as well in maides as in married
women. The laſt and moſt certaine ſigne of conception is, when as the
child beginneth to ſtirre and moue.
               
                  Mercatus a learned Spaniard,
                  2. Mercat. tomo. 3. lib. 3. pag. 669. after he hath ſet downe a number
of other ſignes, at length addeth theſe words.
               As concerning the vrine, howbeit in this caſe it doth affoord vs but
a very vncertaine iudgement, yet may we ſometimes draw ſome certainty
out of the ſame. But how I pray thee? By obſeruing her ſeuerall
vrines at diuerſe times, beginning with the firſt moneth of ſuppoſed
conception, and ſo obſeruing the ſeuerall alterations vntill the
time of her deliuery approach. Then withall ſetteth he downe all
the ſeuerall trials which the famous Hippocrates hath left vnto
vs, all which were needleſſe and ſuperfluous, if the vrine of it
ſelfe were ſufficient for this purpoſe. Now let vs adde yet one
ſtorie of the deceitfulneſſe of this ſigne in conception, recorded
by a learned Germane Phyſitian.
               
               Franciſcus Emericus Doctor in Phyſicke,Hiſtorie. and of the chaire in the
Vniuerſitie of Vienna,Diomedes Cornarius in lib. conſil. medicin. inter hiſtorias admirandas, hiſtoria tertia, & prima de pe
                        •
                     uerſo vrin. in 
                        •
                     icio. in his diſcourſe entituled, whether the obſeruation
of the pulſe or of the vrine doth affoord vnto the Phyſitian more
certaine and aſſured foreknowledge of the life or death of the patient,
and printed anno 1557. relatet
                     •
                  , that in the yeare 1555. in the Citie
of Ʋienna, a certaine friend of mine (ſaith he) called Georgius Rithamerus,
a man of ſingular learning, being very deſirous of iſſue, came to
one of the Phyſitians of the Colledge of beſt note, bringing with
him his wiues vrine, to know whether ſhe were with child, as he deemed,
or no. The Phyſitian vpon the bare ſight of the vrine onely, did
peremptorily affirme, that ſhe was for certaine with child, and that of a
boy. After the which time Rithamerus began quite to diſtaſte me;
and that onely by reaſon that vpon the ſight of her vrine, together
with diuers other ſignes and circumſtances thereto belonging, I had
deliuered my opinion, that ſhe was not at all with child. And beſides,
he prouided with all expedition both midwife, nurſe, and all other
things belonging to that buſineſſe. It was afterwards constantly and
confidently euery where noyſed abroad, that ſhe was with child. The
women her attendants by reaſon of ſome accidents wherewith ſhe was

now and then troubled, appointed her diuerſe baths, by meanes whereof
being ſurpriſed with the falling ſickneſſe, ſhe was in a very ſhort
time freed from all the miſeries of this mortall life. Of whoſe death
being aduertiſed, I did very earneſtly intreate the aforeſaid Rithamerus,
that both in regard of that ancient bond of loue and amitie betwixt
him and me, as likewiſe to finde out the whole truth of this
matter, he would be pleaſed to giue way to the opening of the dead
corps. The which at length, being ouercome, as well by my earneſt
ſuing vnto him, as for the great and earneſt deſire he had to be reſolued
of the truth of the matter, he did willingly yeeld vnto. In making
the inciſion, we began firſt with the muſcles of the neather bellie, diſcouering
ſuch parts as before were hid, & afterwards ripping vp the peritonaeum,
we proceeded to the place where the wombe was ſituate; and
although we did perceiue it to be but very ſmall, and to containe nothing
within it; yet to the end we might the more clearly ſee the truth
with our eyes, we ript it vp alſo, and found it cleane, and empty of any
thing within it. Now in her life time ſhe was of a whitiſh bleake colour,
and of a cachecticall diſpoſition, and had neuer in all her life time borne
any child: from whence I did by very probable coniccture collect, that
ſhe was troubled with ſome other infirmitie. For the which cauſe we
proceed ſtill in our inciſion towards the ſtomacke; whereas betwixt the
peritonaeum, and the guts we found good ſtore of water, which did according
to the motion of the body, fall ſometimes to the right and
ſometimes to the left ſide; and from hence aroſe this erronius opinion
of the ſuppoſed motion of a liue child. This being after this manner
finiſhed, I ſpake after this manner, My good friend George, you ſee
now after what manner your wife proueth with child. And he, ſeeing
the caſe ſo plaine, did ingenuouſly acknowledge, that he had wrongfully
and vndeſeruedly bene offended with me, and withall did freely
acknowledge his errour. Witneſſes with me at this inciſion, were Doctor
lacobus Walch, companion with me in my Italian ſtudies; as alſo
Andreas Perlachius, a great Mathematician, being alſo the onely
man who had ſo ſtedfaſtly maintained that ſhe was with child.
               Now with two inſtances of mine owne experience I will finiſh
this point.Hiſtorie of a woman with child in the firſt moneths.
               
               A Gentlewoman dwelling neere Northampton ſome yeares ago,
ſent me her vrine, which in euery reſpect, as well in colour as contents,

reſembled the vrine of an healthfull yong man. Hauing found out by
ſome circumstances that it was a womans, I began to ſuspect that
which afterwards proued true, that ſhe was with child. The meſſenger
demanding whether ſhe was not entred into a Dropſie: I replied,
I rather enclined to the opinion that ſhe was with child, the which
proued to be true. The ſeruant confeſſed, another Phyſitian had before
put her in needleſſe feare of a Dropſie. The Gentlewoman afterwards
conceiued a better opinion of my skill in this point, then I confeſſe
it deſerued.
               The ſame Harueſt,Another of one in the latter moneths. within ſeuen miles of this towne of Northampton,
a Lady great with child, being now within two moneths at moſt
of her deliuerie, ſent me firſt her vrine, and then deſired mine owne
perſonall preſence for ſome infirmitie whereof ſhe then complained.
The vrine ſent reſembled, as the former, the vrine of a luſtie young
man in the Aprill of his age: I obſerued it very narrowly, and yet
could I diſcerne none of thoſe Arabian contents, neither cardedwooll,
flaxe, nor huſwiues cloth. Being afterwards with her, I found no alteration
in her vrine, ſaue that it was paler coloured which was made
in the night, and higher coloured which was made in the day time,
contrarie to that which we commonly obſerue; and yet neither of them
exceeding the colour of a cholericke mans vrine. The Gentlewoman
had bene for a long time, euen before her being with child, much
troubled with a hote and feauer-like diſtemper.
               This point then being cleared, we proceed now to the ſexe,
where we ſhall find no leſſe vncertaintie then in the former.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               That the ſexe cannot be diſcerned by the Ʋrine.
               
                  NO leſſe abſurd an opinion then the former,Abſurditie of this opinion proued.
is it to hold that the ſexe may abſolutely
by the vrine be diſcerned. As for the ſexe in
the wombe, the ſame reaſons which were
brought againſt the diſcerning of the conception
by the vrine, will here take hold alſo. As
for the diſcerning of the ſexe in thoſe of riper yeares, the reaſon

would ſeeme to be more fauourable. The chiefe and principall
reaſon alledged for this is, becauſe men are commonly of
an hoter conſtitution then women, which is the cauſe that their
vrines are dyed of an higher colour; and moreouer, that the
contents in womens vrines, in regard of their idle and ſedentarie
life, do often exceed mens in quantitie. But this muſt not
ſimply be conſidered, but as we commonly ſay, caeteris paribus:
that is, a man of a good and laudable conſtitution of body, vſing
diet anſwerable both in quantitie and qualitie, and auoiding
idleneſſe: a woman likewiſe of a colder complexion, as
often they are, vſing moderate diet, a ſedentary and lazie life,
auoyding hote diet. If, I ſay, one ſhould bring thee two ſuch
vrines, demanding to know which were the mans and which
the womans, then without great difficultie mighteſt thou giue
out a right verdict. But if one ſhold bring vnto thee two vrines,
the one of a man, the other of a woman, the one not differing
from the other, and the womans perhaps higher in colour and
thinner in ſubſtance, (which may by diuerſe meanes come to
paſſe) thou ſhouldeſt giue wrong ſentence, then being thus
gulled, thou mighteſt be made a gazing ſtocke to thy neighbours,Some women of an hoter conſtitution then men.
by reaſon of thy peremptorie opinion. Now that ſome
women are of an hoter conſtitution of bodie then ſome men, I
thinke who ſo denieth, deſerueth rather to haue his pate purged,
then to be dealt with with by any reaſon. I my ſelfe haue alſo
knowne many a man make paler vrines, with greater quantitie
of contents, then women: which may eaſily come to paſſe, by
reaſon of great quaſſing, daintie fare, and abundance of eaſe
and idleneſſe, the engendrers of all manner of crudities. Haue
we not now adayes more then a good many whoſe God is their
guts, Fruges conſumere nati, on whoſe vrines thou mighteſt long
looke, before thou couldſt diſcerne any thing materiall or to
the purpoſe? As for out women, what if their Liuer and Kidneyes
be hote, as I haue not ſeldome obſerued, may not this
bring forth an high water? and will not obſtructions eaſily depriue
it of contents. But eſpecially if theſe women be well acquainted
with a pipe of Tobacco, a cup of good ſherry Sacke,
Malago, or Canary, or yet a cup of good 
                     •
                  appy Ale well brewed

with ſugar, nutmegge and ginger, may it not now and then not
onely colour the vrines, but make their faces flouriſh with ſome
orientall carbuncles and rubies? Beſides the former reaſons,
will not faſting, watching, perturbations of the mind, diet in
quantitie and qualitie, with diuerſe other things moe, alter the
vrine as well in man as in woman? It were, perhaps, an eaſier
matter to obſerue this difference in ſome hoter climat then our
owne, to wit, in France, Spaine, or Italy, where women drinke
more water then with vs; eſpecially in Italie, where the women
are caged vp like linnets to ſing, and are not ſo buſie with the
fruite of the grape, nor with the ſtrong barley water as our Britiſh
women. If I ſhould inſtance alſo in our virgins, more manlike
then many men, how were any able to contradict it? But
if I ſhould ſend to the cunningeſt piſſe-prophet in this kingdome
the vrine of ſome Hermaphrodite or man-woman, what
would or could they ſay? and to which of the ſexes would they
aſcribe the vrine? Now that ſome ſuch are to be found, cannot
be denied. It hath bene holden for a truth in all ages: and of late
yeares a learned Phyſitian hath written a booke concerning
that ſubiect,Gaſpar. Bauhinus de Hermaphroditis. where he bringeth in a number of hiſtories of ancient
and later times. I haue bene alſo credibly informed of
ſome ſuch who haue liued here in theſe parts of the countrey.
But if the woman ſhall be ſurpriſed with any hote and acute
diſeaſe (as the vrine is ſeldome ſent to the Phyſitian but in ſickneſſe)
will not theſe confound thy iudgement? Now if the ſexe
cannot be diſcerned by the vrine in perſons of yeares, what abſurditie
is it to demand the knowledge hereof in a woman with
child, where the conception it ſelfe cannot be thereby diſcerned?
as alſo where there are ſo many rubs in the way. It is alſo
worth the obſeruation, that whereas that learned Mercatus
diſcourſeth of all the ſignes whereby one may know whether
a woman be with child of a male or female, where he omitteth
not ſo much as the blowing of the wind, yet ſpeaketh he not ſo
much as one word concerning the vrine: no more do many other
authors of beſt note.
               
                  Iean Marinello among many moe, ſetteth downe many ſignes
to diſcerne the ſexe in the wombe, yet ſpeaketh he not ſo much

as one word of the vrine. Other authors for breuitie I will paſſe
by. I cannot but wonder what ſhould moue our vrine-mongers
to be ſo peremptory in this their opinion of diſcerning the
ſexe by the vrines, as though there were ſome ſpecificall difference
alwayes to be obſerued in theſe vrines: are not the humours
alike, and the parts as well femilare as organicall alike
in both theſe ſexes? But I will acquaint thee with one hiſtorie
concerning the prediction of a Parſon-phyſitian, who would
certifie a Gentlewoman with child of what ſexe it was.
               A Gentlewoman dwelling within a few miles of Northampton,Hiſtorie.
left with child of her late deceaſſed huſband,Of a peremptory Parſon determining of the ſexe in the wombe. was very deſirous to be
certified of the ſexe if it were poſſible. The reaſon was, becauſe that
if a ſonne, then was he to be heire to great lands and poſſeſſions, which
otherwiſe were entailed to the next heires male. This Parſon being
by many reputed famous in vromancie, this Gentlewoman had recourſe
to his oracle. The Parſon is peremptorie that ſhe is with child
of a ſonne. The Gentlewoman and her friends reioyce not a little. But
the worſt is yet behind: the Parſons prediction proues falſe, and he a
lying Prophet: ſhe is brought to bed of a daughter, and her mirth turned
into mourning. If he had euer learned his Phyloſophie, he might
haue learned that, De futuris contingentibus non eſt determinata
veritas: Of future things not yet come to paſſe, being contingent,
no man can aſſuredly foretell the iſſue and euent. But thou
mayeſt here ſee ex vnguibus Leonem: what manner of men theſe be.
               The yeare 1622.Hiſtorie. a patient of mine of good account dwelling in
Northampton,Of a womans vrine higher in colour and contents then a mans. purpoſing (according to his vſuall cuſtome) to take
ſome preuenting Phyſicke in the Spring of the yeare, wiſhed his vrine
to be ſent to me. The vrine which was ſent was of an high and deepe
dyed red colour, of a meane ſubſtance, a copius red reſidence. Meeting
with him the ſame day, I asked him whether he complained not of
ſome heate: who replyed, he fel
                     •
                   no manner of diſtemper at all. I wiſhed
him yet once againe to ſend me his vrine, which if it ſhould ſo continue,
I doubted Phlebolomie would be requiſite. The next vrine was of a
pale ſtraw coloured yellow, with ſome whitiſh reſidents, ſuch as ſometimes
accompanie crudities. Enquiring afterwards into the cauſe of
this diuerſitie of vrines in ſo ſhort a ſpace, his wife told me, that her
vrine had the firſt day bene ſent in ſtead of her huſbands. I required

of her, whether ſhe did not complaine of any inward diſtemper of
heate; who replyed, that ſhe complained of no diſtemper at all. But
within a few dayes ſhe found that diſtemper in ſuch a meaſure, as ſhe
was glad to admit both of Phlebotomie and other fit and neceſſarie
remedies. The conſtitution of her bodie is hote, and her vrine anſwerably
high coloured, vnleſſe it be accidentally hindered. And this I
dare boldly affirme, that during her huſbands ſickneſſe, being a long
and tedious, firſt Tertian, then double Tertian feauer, yet neuer ſaw
I his vrine of ſo high and intenſe a colour as that of hers lately
mentioned.
               And now I hope it doth plainly appeare, that neither the
conception, nor ſexe can be by the vrine onely diſcerned.
Let vs now proceed to the examination
and Anatomie of the vrine it
ſelfe, together with the ſeuerall
parts of the ſame.
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOOKE
OF THE ANATOMIE
OF VRINES.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  IN this ſecond booke is ſet downe a more
particular ſuruey or Anatomie of vrines,
& their ſeuerall parts in particular: beginning
firſt with the common diuiſion of the
vrines into three or foure regions, with the
idleneſſe of that ſuppoſed correſpondencie thought to be betwixt
them and the regions of a mans bodie. Then followeth
the vncertaintie of iudgement by the ſubſtance, and afterwards
by the accidents of the vrine, and firſt of the quantitie:
the ſmell followeth, and if any be in loue with the laſt,
he may trie it in the next place. Then follow the chiefe colours,
their ſeuerall ſignifications, and doubtfull predictions
thereby. The confutation of the crowne or garland is handled
in the next place, and after it in order, the bubbles,
ſpume, fat and froth, fume and vapour in the vrines. The
great varietie of other contents challenge to themſelues the
next place, where we will begin with the cloud, ſwim or
ſublimation, then proceed to the grounds or reſidences of vrines:
where beſides varietie of contents commonly called
difforme, are alſo contained diuers prodigious hiſtories of
ſeuerall ſorts of wormes reiected by vrine. The obſtruction
and ſtopping of the vrine, either totall or in part, the ſeuerall

cauſes of the ſame, and diuers predictions, as alſo the
inuoluntarie excretion of vrine, ſhall not be omitted: and
then a word with the Alchymiſts concerning diſtillation of
vrines. And finally ſhall follow the concluſion, where ſhall
be anſwered the obiection concerning euent and caſuall
cures, with ſome inſtances of this error. And for the confirmation
of my opinion, I proceed on ſtill in my former method
of reaſons and authorities both of ancient and late
writers, adding here and there ſome of mine owne obſeruations.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               That the regions of the vrine are not anſwerable to the regions of
the body of man; as alſo concerning the ſubſtance of vri
                     •
                  es,
thicke and thinne, their manifold ſignifications, and
vncertaintie of iudgement by the ſame.
               
                  IT hath bene an inueterate opinion,Actuarius the firſt inuenter of theſe regions, &c. and which
hath taken deepe roote in the minds of many,
and firſt brought in by Actuarius, that the ſeuerall
regions of the vrine, are anſwerable to the
principall regions or parts of a mans body. Of
theſe regions in the vrine ſome make three, the higheſt part
anſwering in proportion to the higheſt part of the body, to
wit, the head and ſuch other parts as adioyne to it: the middle
region repreſenting the middle parts of man, as the breaſt, the
bowels, and the parts about them: the neather region of the
vrine, the loweſt parts from the bowels downewards. Others
againe make foure, appropriating the circle in the vppermoſt
part of the vrine, called otherwiſe a crowne or garland, to the
animall parts contained in the head: the ouermoſt part or ſuperficies
to the pectorall parts, heart, lungs, &c. the middle region
to the parts ſeruing for nutrition or nouriſhment, to wi
                     •
                  ,
the ſtomach or maw, the liuer, ſpleene, guts, &c. the loweſt or

neathermoſt part in the bottome of the vrinall, to the parts appropriate
to generation.Iodochus Willichius de probat. vrin. part. 4. c. 1. 
                  But this opinion (ſaith one) is more
curious and ſuperſtitious then true. Meaning of the foure regions
of the vrine, &c. And yet the ſame Author maintaineth the
three regions of the vrine to be anſwerable to the three principall
regions of the bodie, which I will here confute as moſt
falſe and erronious.Hieron. Reuſ. ſchol. ad cap. praedict. prope finem. Now to this purpoſe I thinke it will not
be amiſſe, to ſet downe the words of his interpreter, which may
ſerue ſufficiently to ouerthrow this error: Hence may it euidently
appeare, in how great an error thoſe Phyſitians are inuolued, who
hold a proportion betwixt the height of the vrine and of a mans bodie.
Hence alſo cometh it to paſſe, that they affirme that the contents
of the vppermoſt region do declare and lay open the griefes of
the head, &c. Did thoſe men euer ſee fat fall to the bottome or middle
region of the vrinall? Doth not oyle and any fat thing commonly
and of its owne accord ſwim vpon the top of the vrine? Neither yet
doth it therefore neceſſarily follow, that the head is principally affected;
but doth declare and ſhew foorth, either the waſting of the
whole bodie, or ſome diſeaſes of the kidneyes. Let them ſhew vs the
reſidence called hypoſtaſis, in the garland or vppermost part of the
vrine. The like may be ſaid concerning the bubbles which do alwayes
ſtay vpon the top of the vrine,
                  Aphor. 34. lib. 4. 
                  and according to the doctrine of Hippocrates,
do Prognoſticate ſome long and lingring diſeaſe of the kidneyes.
To what end and purpoſe then keepe they ſuch aprating, that
the bubbles which do in order compaſſe the whole crowne or garland
about, do declare ſome great paine in the whole head: and if they
compaſſe and enuiron but the halfe of the circle or garland, then do
they argue a paine but in one ſide of the head? How often are ſuch
people pained with the wind Colicke or Hypochondriacke melancholy?
In which caſe howſoeuer ſome wind may aſcend vp into the
head; yet is not this axiome alwayes of vndoubted truth. The like
iudgement may we pronounce concerning other things of the like nature,
which moſt commonly follow the condition of their owne naturall
inclination and matter, and not the altitude or ſituation of this
or that part of a mans bodie. Thus farre our Author. And the troubled
vrine ſo continuing, of the which ſhall be ſpoken in the
next Chapter, may ſerue to ouerthrow the ſuppoſed proportion

betwixt the regions of the vrine and the body of man; this
headach being diſcerned by the whole body of the vrine, and
neither by the circle or garland, nor yet by any bubbles, ſpume,
or froth in the top of the ſame. But concerning the vncertainty
of theſe particulars, as alſo concerning the crowne and garland,
hereafter when we ſhall ſpeake of the contents of vrines,
I purpoſe to diſcourſe at greater length. It is now time we
come to the ſubſtance of vrines, and then to all the parts of
the ſame.
               I will with the learned Mercuriall,
                  Diuiſion of the vrine. diuide the whole vrine
into three parts, the ſubſtance, the accidents, and the contents.
In the ſubſtance againe we are to conſider, whether the vrine be
thicke or thinne,Of the ſubſtance of vrines. and whether cleare, or troubled and muddie.
And this we vnderſtand of the whole bodie of the vrine. Thin
vrines according to 
                     Ʋaſſeus haue manifold ſignifications.Diuerſe ſignifications of thin vrines. Firſt
a failing of naturall heate. Secondly, a ſtoppage of the Liuer,
kidneyes,Iohannes Vaſſeus Meldenſ. lib. de vrin. iudicijs. pag. 30. &c. and the vrinarie veſſels. Thirdly, weakneſſe of nature.
Fourthly, that the attractiue power of the paſſage or pipes of the
vrine is endamaged. Fiftly, extreame coldneſſe ioyned with
drought. In acute diſeaſes it argueth: Firſt the weakneſſe of the
concocting facultie. Secondly, the cruditie of the diſeaſe, and
of the humours contained in the veines. Thirdly, if it thus continue
for a long time, death, if nature be not able to hold out:
& if ſtrength continue, ſome abſceſſe or Impoſtume in the neather
parts. And in a Criſis threateneth a relapſe, as in Hermocrates
3. Epid.
                  Hippocr. 3. Epid. Now how ſhall any by the bare inſpection of
theſe vrines, be able to know whether it hath long thus continued
or no, which neuertheleſſe maketh much for a true prediction?
The partie ſeldome taketh notice of it, vntill ſuch time
it be ſent to the Phyſitian. The meſſenger employed, oftentimes
hath not ſeene the partie ſince the beginning of his ſickneſſe,
much leſſe his vrine. Thinne vrines which afterwards turne
thicke in an acute diſeaſe,Sauonar. lib. de vrin. cap. 3. ſaith Sauonarola, without any eaſe or
alleutation enſuing, ſignifieth a waſting away of the whole bodie,
&c. But concerning thinne vrines, which afterwards turne
thicke, ſomething ſhall be further ſaid, when we ſhall ſpeake of
thicke vrines. And concerning thinne vrines in generall, becauſe

I ſhall haue ſome further occaſion to ſpeake hereafter
when I ſhall handle the colours, I will not dwell ſo long vpon
this point. But now come we to the thicke vrines.
               The ſame Vaſſeus giues vs fiue ſeuerall ſignifications of thicke
vrines in generall.Of thicke vrines Idem Vaſſeus ibidem.
                   Firſt the combat or fight betwixt nature and
the humour. Secondly, abundance of humors. Thirdly, the thickening
ſlime and the other parts next vnto it, by reaſon of cold,
if thinne vrine went before.Significations of thicke vrines. Fourthly, the beginning of concoction,
ſuch in the fit of an Ague ſo continuing. Fiftly, the weakneſſe
of the ſtrength, and no ſmall ſtore of humours. The ſame
Author againe diuideth theſe thicke vrines into two ſorts:Diuiſion of thicke vrines. 
                  into
thicke transparent, pellucide, and troubled, called by him turbida.
This firſt ſort ſignifieth (ſaith he) a diſſoluing or melting of
glaſſie phlegme, as we ſee in the vrines of Epilepticke perſons
proceeding of phlegme. If it be of a citrine or yellowiſh colour,Of thicke troubled vrines.
it ſignifieth choller, like the yolkes of egges. But becauſe
the other ſort of thicke vrines called turbida, or troubled and
muddie, is more obuious to the eye, and eaſilier diſcerned, I
will inſiſt a little the longer vpon the ſame.Their ſeuerall ſignifications. The ſame Author
aſſigneth three ſignifications to ſuch vrines. Firſt, a great agitation
and ſtirring of crude and vnconcoct humours, together
with no ſmall ſtore of windineſſe. Secondly, abundance of humours,
which neuertheleſſe are by nature expelled. Thirdly, the
great trouble and encombrance nature hath in the expelling
and ſequeſtring ſuch humours.Diuiſiō of thick troubled vrines. But theſe troubled thicke vrines
are yet diuided into three ſeuerall ſorts. Firſt, ſome being thinne
at the firſt making, do afterwards thicken: others are made
thicke, and after a while ſettle: and finally, ſome are made thick,
and do ſo continue, being like vnto horſe-piſſe. Such vrines
(ſaith Ranzouius) as are made thinne,Henricus Ranzonius lib. de conſerannda valetud. cap. 19. ſometimes ſuddenly thicken
and grow troubled: this in health cometh often to paſſe
after exerciſe, and to others after ſickneſſe. And after I haue
drunke hard (ſaith the ſame Author) I make a cleare vrine, which
in a very ſhort time groweth thicke, and ſo ſetleth to a great reſidence.
Others hold that it ſignifieth, that nature now beginneth
to ſet vpon the humor, and to concoct it. I haue often obſerued
ſuch an vrine, both in perfect health and before and after ſickneſſe.

Cold winter weather alſo often altereth thinne vrines into
thicke. Such as are made thicke at firſt, and after ſettle to a
thicke reſidence, and become cleare, ſignifie and declare vnto
vs, that the diſeaſe waſteth away; as declaring nature now to
make a ſeparation, after which it expelleth at a place conuenient.
Vrines made thicke at the firſt, and ſo perſiſting, are generally
accounted,Aph. 10. lib. 4. and that not without cauſe, the worſt of the
three: which according to Hippocrates, argue great headach, either
preſent or imminent, being eſpecially ioyned with a feauer.
But this is not perpetuall,
                  In lib. 1. Prorrh. comment. 1. (ſaith Galen) for a troubled vrine generally
is an accident of the abundance of raw humours, either concocted
or turned into wind, and not of a phrenſie; and yet ſuch an vrine
may both accompanie a phrenſie, and be without it, as all other ſuch
accidents as neither are contrarie to phrenſie, nor yet proper thereunto.
                  Leo Roganus de prouid. ex vrin. lib. 3. cap. 2.
                  Of theſe vrines which do not ſettle (ſaith a learned Author)
but yet much more of ſuch as being at firſt made thinne do afterwards
thicken, we can giue no certaine prediction: for ſuch vrines do
ſometimes onely ſignifie cruditie, and ſometimes againe they are very
bad. But the diligent and carefull Phyſitian may by other ſignes diſtinguiſh
the ſame.
                  Hieron. Reuſn. in cap. 6. part. 1. Iodochi Willich. de probat. vrin. Another Author maketh vrines ſo perſiſting
to be alwayes very dangerous. Such an vrine (ſaith he) doth declare
vnto vs, that naturall heate is ſo weake, that it cannoe ſeparate
the good from the bad. But yet muſt not this be abſolutely vnderſtood,
but with a caution and limitation, common to many
ſuch other ſpeeches: to wit, that with ſtrength perſiſting, they
ſignifie that the diſeaſe is like to be of long continuance, and
without the ſame to ſignifie death. In ſuch thicke vrines therefore
(ſaith Roganus) we muſt not alwayes be afrayed,
                  Loco nuper citato. 
                  as ſome ordinarie
Phyſitians are, but muſt likewiſe obſerue ſome other ſignes. In
young children (ſaith Reuſner) if theſe vrines be exceeding thicke,
                  Loco iam citato.
                  (which oftentimes cometh to paſſe, howſoeuer ſeldome obſerued) beſides
the head-ach proceeding of windineſſe, they do alſo ſignifie the
paine of the heart, (as they call it commonly) that is, of the mouth of
the ſtomach. Such an vrine may proceed alſo from the windineſſe of
the paſſages. Thinne vrines afterwards becoming thicke and troubled,
if ſtrength decay, it is an infallible token of death: and that by reaſon
of the agitation and motion of the matter within the bodie, and

the abundance of windie vapours from thence, which nature is not able
to ouercome.
                  Conſutation of an erroneous opinion of the vulgar ſort concerning the ſtaining of the vrinall. But before I proceed any further, I cannot paſſe
by a common error, which many as well in towne as countrey
do hold, to wit, that when they ſee ſuch a thicke vrine ſtaine
the vrinall, they are incontinent conceited all the danger of
the diſeaſe is paſt. But this to be moſt falſe, I haue often my
ſelfe obſerued, and no doubt ſo haue a many moe beſides my
ſelfe. Reuſner maketh this one of his ſignes to know whether
the vrine were thinne at the firſt making or no: for if it were ſo,
then when it thickeneth, it commonly ſtaineth the vrinall.
Now when the ſtrength holdeth out, the patient may recouer,
and not otherwiſe. I will inſtance in one onely, in whom I obſerued
the vanitie of this opinion, and ſhall ſerue in ſtead of a
many to iuſtifie my aſſertion.
               Some nine or ten yeares ago,Hiſtorie. I was ſollicited to affoord my preſence
and beſt counſell to a Parſon, dwelling within ſome foure miles of the
towne of Northampton, ſurpriſed with a burning feauer. Hauing
diligently enquired what remedies he had hitherto vſed (for if I remember
right, it was the tenth day of his diſeaſe) and by whoſe preſcription,
I learned that no leſſe then three at leaſt, if not foure Parſon-Phyſitians
had adminiſtred to him, and then the moſt famous for
Ʋromancie of all the countrey about: howbeit ſince that time ſome
others are alſo crept into that ſocietie. I enquired moreouer whether
Phlebotomie had bene as yet vſed. They replyed that Phlebotomie
had not bene ſo much as once mentioned by any of them, but that they
had purged him, as I thinke with Diaprunum, and I remember not
what elſe, and appointed him ſome cooling drinkes. His wife added
moreouer, that one of them thinking to purchaſe himſelfe ſome praiſe
beyond his fellowes, would haue bribed Death with foue pounds worth
of Aurum Pot
                     •
                  bile, which ſhe willingly payed for, in hope of her huſbands
recouerie.This Parſon a chiefe proctor for au
                        •
                     um po
                        •
                     abile in Northampton ſhire. But this importunate ſuter would haue no nay; but
vrged ſtill the payment of the debt he came to demand. I told them
that Phlebotomie, in due and conuenient time adminiſtred, had proued
a more ſoueraigne medicine for this diſeaſe, then all the gold of Ophir
and both the Indies. I being by them much importuned to let him
bloud, abſolutely refuſed, his ſtrength being now well nigh ſpent, and
ſome ill ſignes (the vndoubted harbingers of death) offering themſelues

to my eyes, adminiſtring onely ſome cordials. The next morning
I find all waxe worſe and worſe; howbeit his wife, ſhewing me his
vrine, which before had bene thinne, and now ſetled to a thicke reſidence,
a part whereof did ſticke to the ſides of the vrinall and ſtaine
the ſame, which ſhe, beleeuing her neighbours, began to conceiue
ſome better hope of his recouerie, and that onely vpon this falſe
ground. I aſſured her of the contrary, which ſhortly afterwards proued
too true, and the ſame day, being Saturday I departed. The
Monday after comes one of his former Phyſitians (not the Parſon
who miniſtred Aurum Potabile; for after the ſame he had no moe arrowes
left in his quiuer) who, if faire buttered ſpeeches and peremptorie
promiſes could cure diſeaſes, he might cure more then euer did the
Apoſtles: who then all too late letteth his patient bloud, who ſuruiued
not long after the loſſe of this liquor of life, but dyed either that
night, or the next morning very early, being about the fourteenth day
from the beginning of his diſeaſe. One thing I muſt yet adde concerning
the ſignification of thicke vrines, which deſerueth reprehenſion:
                  Abſurd opinion of a Phyſitian, affirming one to be bewitched by the vrine onely.
                  to wit, That a Phyſitian maintained, that he could
know by the vrine that any were bewitched: to wit, that ſuch a ones
vrine was thicke and muddie, and could not by any heate be
turned, as they terme it. To whom it was no leſſe learnedly
then truly replyed, Did you neuer reade in Hippocrates of vrina
confuſa? I cannot but much maruell, that any man that had euer
ſuckt in the principles and grounds of Phyſicke, ſhould be ſo
farre ouerſeene, this being a peculiar propertie of ſuch vrines,
that they will not be turned by any heate whatſoeuer. It is then
apparent, how little certaintie is to be collected concerning
the iudgement of diſeaſes, by the ſole inſpection either of thick
or thinne vrines: to wit, that after many cautions and diuers
interrogations, if thou meete with an vnderſtanding meſſenger,
and the vrine ſent at a conuenient time, and all other circumſtances
obſerued (which neuertheleſſe, ſeldome or neuer concurre
altogether) and thou thy ſelfe being wiſe and vnderſtanding,
mayeſt perhaps, learne ſomething concerning the ſtate of
the diſeaſe, as cruditie and concoction; and it may be, ſome
moe circumſtances, and yet the ſtrength of the patient (which
is moſt materiall, and the vulgar neuer able to iudge of the

ſame) together with many other circumſtances, not to be neglected
ſhall be concealed from thee: many of our countrey people,
being ſo ignorant that they thinke their neighbour not a
whit amended, vnleſſe he be able, as at other times, to fill his
bellie with bag-pudding & bacon. And moreouer the ordinary
ſort of people are ſeldome able to lay open either their owne
or their neighbours infirmitie, they taking chiefly notice either
of ſome accident common to many others,
                  Many things alter the iudgement of the vrine. 
                  or elſe of ſome
griefe moſt affecting them. But beſides the premiſſes, may not
the thickneſſe of the vrinall, the dimneſſe of thy ſight, the exceſſe
or defect of light, or yet if it be brought to thee at candle
light (ſo ſottiſh and abſurd is the vulgar ſometimes) make thee
to faile in thy iudgement? That I ſay no thing of the time of the
yeare, according to the which as well the ſubſtance as the accidents
do often alter in one and the ſame indiuiduall partie. Others
adde alſo the ſexe, the age and many moe, which I here omitting,
will haſten to the accidents of vrine.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Of the accidents of vrine, the quantitie, ſmell, &c. and that no
certaine and aſſured truth can by them be
preſaged or knowne.
               
                  THe accidents of vrine are all reduced to two generall
heads,Accidents of vrine twofold. the quantitie and the qualitie. The
quantitie is either great, ſmall, or meane, which
is the beſt.Diuerſe ſignifications of great abundance of vrine in health. Abundance of vrine in health ſignifieth,
1. that the partie hath drunke ſtore of
Rheniſh or other ſearching wine. 2. abundance of moiſt meats.
3. little euacuation by ſtoole. 4. too liberall vſe of diuretickes,
or ſuch things as prouoke vrine. 5. the concoction of crude
and vndigeſted food. 6. the retention of ſweat, menſtruous
fluxe, or other moiſture detained within the cheſt or ſtomacke,
vnburthening themſelues this way. Concerning the retention
of the like humidities, it may not ſeeme ſo ſtra
                     •
                  ge that they

may be turned towards the paſſages of the vrine, but it may
ſeeme ſtranger that the faecall excrements ſhould produce this
effect;Aphor. vltimo lib 4. and yet Hippocrates witneſſeth the truth hereof: and beſides,Lib. 4. degeneratione an
                        •
                     m cap. 4.
                  Ariſtotle relateth, that in Pirinthus there was a cow, which
neuer had the paſſage for her excrements open, but that the
ſame were conuerted into a ſtatuous or windie ſubſtance, and
then into vrine,In ſickneſſe. and ſo expelled. In ſickneſſe this abundance is
likewiſe diuers wayes produced. 1. By meanes of the exceſſiue
heate of the kidneyes, which draw abundantly ſuch humidities,
as in the Diabeticall diſeaſe, called by ſome a Pot-dropſie. 2. Great
euacuation of ſuperfluous moiſture. 3. The waſting away of the
whole bodie,Hiſtorie. which commeth to paſſe in burning feauers, and
which was obſerued by that famous Phyſitian Marcus Gatinaria
in that maide of Millan about ſome eighteene yeares of age,
                  Mercur. lib. de vrin
                        •
                      cap 6. ex Marco Gatinaria.
                  who voyded euery day for fortie dayes together, fifteene pounds of
vrine, whereas the quantitie of euery dayes meate and drinke ioyntly
did neuer exceed the weight of foure pounds. 4. The ending of the
diſeaſe. And in acute diſeaſes, the abundance of vrine is procured
ſometimes, 1. by meanes of the feauers relenting. 2. By the
change thereof into an Hecticke. 3. By a Conuulſion. And beſides
the premiſſes, it may be yet procured by diuerſe other
meanes: as I remember a yong woman then vnmarried, who in
the diſeaſe called the mither, voyded abundance of vrine, eſpecially
during the time of her fits, being in the afternoones, and
that for the ſpace of foure dayes together, as hereafter ſhall appeare
when we ſhall ſpeake of the colours of vrines. And often
in the criſes of acute diſeaſes the vrine is multiplied.Guil. Adolph. Scribon. devrin. inſpect. pag. 41. 42. 
                  A man of
Sena (ſaith Scribonius) euery day did piſſe foure or fiue iugs of vrine,
who ſcarce dranke halfe an Engliſh pint all the ſaid ſpace: what
could a Phyſitian haue iudged by this quantitie?
                  Another. Thus then when
thou ſeeſt ſo many cauſes or one and the ſame effect, to which
of them canſt thou aſcribe it, vnleſſe thou be well acquainted
with the particular circumſtances from the patients owne
mouth?Small quantitie of vrine by diuers meanes. Small quantitie of vrine is likewiſe procured, 1. By
dry diet. 2. By the vſe of tough and 
                     ••
                  mie meates. 3. By reaſon
of obſtructions. 4. By reaſon of plentifull euacuation. 5.
By meanes of a violent feauer. 6. By ſome hurt of the vrinarie

veſſels, as commeth ſometimes to paſſe by reaſon of the cold
diſtemper of the bladder, procuring a palſie to that part. 7. By
the decay of naturall heate, as commeth ſometimes to paſſe in
ſuch as are readie to dye. 8. Becauſe the moiſture is detained
in ſome other part, as commeth to paſſe in a Dropſie. 9. By
reaſon of ſome impoſtume in the fundament, the necke of
the bladder, or in the wombe, which may ſtraiten the ſaid
paſſage, that the vrine cannot come away in any great quantitie.
10. The abundance of crude and raw humours may be
a meanes of this ſo ſmall a quantitie. But I will yet adde ſome
more out of the aforenamed Scribonius,
                  Idem ibidem. becauſe his words are
ſo ſutable for our purpoſe, The like verdict may we alſo giue forth
(ſaith he) concerning the ſmall quantitie of vrine, taking often its
originall cauſe from the defect or ſcarcitie of meate and drinke; as alſo
by meanes of ſome other euacuations: ſuch as are ſweat, excretions
by ſtoole, and ſuch like, which carrying the matter of the vrine another
way, hinder the paſſage thereof into the bladder, and by conſequent
the expulſion from thence. For this ſame cauſe ſuch as be troubled
with any laskes or fluxes do voide but a ſmall quantitie of vrine,
                  Aphor. 83. lib. 4.
                  as Galen himſelfe declareth. Againe a little after, he addeth theſe
words: In the obſtruction of the Liuer and meſaraicke veines, experience
it ſelfe doth often teach vs, that a very ſmall quantitie of vrine
is voyded. Now if any ones ſeruant ſhould bring vnto thee ſuch
an vrine, not acquainting thee with any other circumstance, why
wouldeſt thou giue ſentence for an obſtruction rather then a laske? or
for a laske rather then an obſtruction? Beſides the premiſſes, in the
Stone, the Dropſie, and ſuch other diſeaſes which hinder the generation
of vrine, no certaine iudgement can be collected from the ſmall
quantitie of the ſame.
                  Another. 
                  And that thou mayest yet be more rauiſhed
with admiration, Rufus Epheſus in his booke of the infirmitie of the
reines, maketh mention of one, who (as ſaith Praxagozas) aboue the
ſpace of twelue yeares voyded all his vrine by the bellie, and not by the
ordinarie paſſage. What then could a man haue iudged concerning this
mans bladder, and the other parts depending thereupon? And this
ſhall ſuffice for the quantitie of vrines, with the vncertaintie of
the ſame: now come we to the qualities obſerueable in them.
               
                  The next accident of vrine is the qualitie: and the qualities,

as witneſſeth Mercuriale,Mercur. lib. de vrin. cap. 6. 
                  according to the doctrine of the Arabian
Phyſitians,Of the ſmell of vrines. 
                  are fiue: the ſmell, the taſt, the ſound, the touch,
and the colour. As for the ſmell, vrines haue little or no ſmell, or
elſe a ſweet and pleaſing ſmell,
                  Vrines without ſmell. 
                  or finally a ſtinking ſmell. No
ſmell, ſaith Mercuriall, proceedeth from no other cauſe then from
the extinguiſhing of naturall heate: howbeit it may ſometimes proceed
from drinke of a cold qualitie, like as we ſee in cold countries, and
the like complexions,Vrines ſmelling well. the ſmell of the vrine is not ſo much to be diſcerned.
Ʋrines ſmell well, either in regard of diet or drugs: but eſpecially
by meanes of a temperate heate concocting well.Stinking vrines with their ſeuerall ſignificatiōs. Stinking vrines come
by foure ſeuerall meanes. 1. By meanes of cruditie and indigestion
of the food. 2. By reaſon of putrefaction. Galen witneſſeth, that
whatſoeuer thing is putrified hath an euill fauoured ſmell.Galen lib. 5. de ſimplie. med. facult. Wherefore
in Peſtilentiall feauers the vrines are moſt commonly of a ſtinking
ſmell. As alſo if the vrines paſſe through any place oppreſſed with putrid
vlcers; or yet if any purulent matter be mingled with them, they
become ſtinking. 3. The too long retention of vrine in the bladder
may make it to ſtinke. 4. The qualitie either of diet or drugs, (as
hath bene ſaid of the good ſmell of vrines) may likewiſe procure vnto
it an euill ſmell.Lib. de vrin. cap. 3. rub. 1. 
                  Looke at large what Sauonarola ſaith of this
point, if thou be diſpoſed to ſee further. But what certaintie
doth the ſmell of the vrine affoord vs? whoſoeuer ſhall thinke
to helpe his vncertaine coniectures by the ſame, ſhould leape out
of the frying pan (as the prouerbe ſaith) into the fire. In the firſt
place it is to be obſerued, that as well in ſickneſſe as in health,
vrines may offer no pleaſing ſmell to the noſe, and yet the party
may be free from any danger at al. But becauſe healthfull folkes
ſeldome ſend their vrines to the Phyſitian, we will let them
paſſe,
                  Loco prius citato. 
                  and come to the ſicke. I will let Scribonius ſpeake for me.
Concerning the ſicks vrine (ſaith he) moſt do teach vs that ſtinking
vrines ſignifie putrefaction of humours, in ſo much that by the difference
of the ſmels, they take vpon them to iudge of the ſeuerall humours
ſo putrified. O wiſe woodcockes! I willingly yeeld to them,
that ſtinke or ſtrong ſmell doth argue putrefaction in ſuch vrines: but
of which parts ſhall this putrefaction be? whether of the bladder onely,
or of the Liuer alſo, of the chest, or other members? Nay ſo farre off
is the ſtinking ſmell from giuing vs any particular notice of the diſeaſe,

that it cannot ſo much as affoord vs any certaine generall knowledge
of the ſame. For many ſweet ſmelling ſimples (ſaith Montanus) may
cauſe a most ſtinking vrine. Cholericke and hote complexioned men
void often very ſtrong ſmelling vrines, howſoeuer free frō any diſeaſe,
as I haue often obſerued in my ſelfe. And by what meanes, I pray thee,
ſhouldſt thou from the ſtinking ſmell of the vrine know putrefaction?
or how can this putrefaction procure this ſtinking ſmell? If this were
ſo, then would it neceſſarily follow, that whoſoeuer were ſeiſed with a
feauer proceeding from putrefaction of humours, ſhould voyd ſtinking
vrines, the which is most falſe. The truth of this aſſumption may
from hence appeare, that for the moſt part among an hundred ſicke of
ſuch feauers, ſcarce ſhalt thou find one of their vrines ſo to ſmell, nor
yet their bloud at the opening of a veine. And for this cauſe well ſaid
Sauonarola in his treatiſe of Vrines, that there are other ſignes alſo
to be obſerued in the annoying of putrified members, if we purpoſe well
and orderly to examine, trie and finde out any skill concerning vrines.
And indeed a thouſand cauſes there are which may alter and change
their ſmell. By the ſmell then onely there can neuer be any certaintie
collected to informe our iudgements concerning any diſeaſe. But I am
afraid the Reader will take it ill, that I ſo long detaine him among
ſo vnpleaſing ſmels;
                  Medici certe de hac iudicandi ratione ſcribentes digni eſſent, qui in dies lotium potare cogerentur. Vpuparū potius quam Medicorum haec tractatio erit. 
                  and my ſelfe begin to waxe wearie
of ſo vnworthie a thing, and as I neuer tooke any pleaſure in
the ſame, ſo here I leaue it to them that like it better. But if I
ſhould yet enter vpon the taſt, I feare I ſhould be worſe taxed.
I can tell no man their taſt by mine owne experience. Salt they
haue alwayes bene counted; as the teares likewiſe: If any be
incredulous I will not hinder him. If our vrinemongers had no
better beere allowed them, they would not ſo much adore the
piſſepot as ſome of them do.
                  Idem ibidem. 
                  But yet if any purpoſe to practiſe
this point, I wiſh him to go to the Arabians, who haue written
ſo curiouſly concerning this point; and it may be, in regard of
their aromaticall drugs, their vrines may be of better taſte then
thoſe of our Europaeans, who feed on groſſer food. As for the other
two qualities, the ſound and touch, we will ſend them all
in one ſhip to Arabia with their fellowes: and now we come to
the colours.
               
            
            
               
               CAAP. III.
               Of the colours of Ʋrines, how deceitfull they proue, and firſt of
the colour commonly called palew or light ſaffron.
               
                  IF euer vrine proued a ſtrumpet,Vrina meretrix. it is of all other
parts of the vrine moſt apparently to be ſeene in
the colour. For as ſometimes ſome of the moſt
infamous ſtewes ſtrumpets, infected it may be,
with the poxe, do moſt curiouſly decke and adorne,
by curious painting, ſumptuous apparell, and ſuch other
enticing trickes, their lothſome and filthie carkaſſes, to the end
they may more eaſily deceiue ſuch as will be caught in their
ſnares: doth it not often fare euen ſo with the colour of the vrine?
For oftentimes when they make the faireſt ſhew, doth not
euen death knocke at the doore? My purpoſe is not here to
make any phyloſophicall diſcourſe concerning the cauſes of colours
in generall, and then to apply the ſame to vrines in particular,
and ſo to inſiſt vpon each ſeuerall colour: for this might
proue too tedious, and perhaps, not ſo pertinent to the purpoſe
we haue in hand. And yet, notwithſtanding, I will ſay ſomething
of each of the chiefe and principall colours; by the which
it may more eaſily be conceiued, that the like deceit may be
ſeene in the others like vnto them.Palew and light ſaffron colour. Now my purpoſe is to begin
with that colour which is the beſt of all others, being as it were
the rule and ſquare whereby we do diſcerne and iudge of the
failings and defects of all the reſt. This colour is called in Latin
Subrufus, ſubaureus, or ſubcroceus: and in Engliſh, palew, or
light ſaffron. This colour our Phyſitians do generally account
the beſt of all others, and that it beſt betokeneth exact concoction.
Neither yet muſt this firſt and beſt colour arguing good
concoction, be ſimply and in it ſelfe ſo conſidered, but reſtrained
to flouriſhing age. For in old men, women and children,
(whoſe vrines, eſpecially childrens, do commonly decline towards
white and pale) it doth betoken that their bodies are too
hote, either by reaſon of diet, exerciſe or ſome other meanes.
But if one ſhould bring vnto thee ſuch an vrine, how couldſt

thou tell whether it were an old or a yong mans, a womans or a
childs, the meſſenger not acquainting thee with the particular
circumſtances? It may be thou wilt ſay, the contents will make
the caſe cleare. I anſwer, that many cauſes may depriue them of
contents in part or altogether, as hereafter ſhall appeare in the
contents: and how the ſubſtance may alter, hath bene ſaid alreadie.
The common opinion is, the higher the colour is, the greater
heat is argued; which opinion to be moſt falſe & erronious,
ſhall hereafter in other colours appeare. Beſides, may not a little
extraordinarie watching, faſting, rheubarb, ſaffron, madder roots,
or ſuch like, colour the vrine without any exceſſe of heat? And
will the ſeuerall ſeaſons of the yeare produce no alteration in
the vrine? that I ſay nothing of an infinite number of other cauſes,
which may in like manner alter them. But one ſignification
of ſuch a coloured vrine I cannot here paſſe by, which I remember
I once read in an Engliſh vrine booke:Called the key of vnknowne knowledge, or a ſhop of fiue windowes. to wit, that a maide
which maketh an vrine of this colour, deſireth the companie of
a man. Doth not our maiſter vrine-monger now diue into the
depth of the matter? But good man, I know what, I can aſſure
thee that Tom and Dicke in the countrey can tell as well, that
Maud the dairy maide would be married, by the reflected rayes
and benigne aſpects of her ſuperiour orbs vpon their hemiſphaers,
and the ſuffering ſome ſyllibub; and ſome other commodities
committed to her cuſtodie, now and then to come
into their poſſeſſion; by this meanes hindering her miſtreſſe to
further her ſelfe in her ſuite: as the moſt cunning piſſe-prophet
in all the countrie ſhall do by the vrine, if he had as many eyes
as euer had that watchfull Argus, or his noſe weighed downe
with ſpectacles. The ſanguine and beſt complexioned (which by
conſequence ſhould produce the beſt vrines) are not alwayes
the moſt amorous. Many as ill coloured drabs as euer any hath
ſeene, haue not ſometimes bene behind the beſt complexioned
Gentlewoman in the land in ſuch a caſe. And it is held by many
that ſuch are for the moſt part ſolaces. But now let vs proceed
to ſome inſtances of theſe outward glorious appearances of vrines
of the beſt note,Leuinus Lemnius de occuitis naturae mirac. lib. 2. cap. 37. which neuertheleſſe falſified the truſt repoſed
in them. And firſt I will inſtance in one taken out of a

learned Germane author,
                     Hiſtorie. Iacob. Douinetus apol. lib. 1. cap. 8. and then I will adde one of mine own
experience.
               The iudgement of diſeaſes by the ſole inſpection of the vrine, is hard
to attaine vnto, and of great difficultie: for ſometimes it commeth to
paſſe that the vrine, as well in colour as in all other points, doth ſhew it
ſelfe of a very laudable conditiō to the view of any indicious eye, when,
notwithſtanding, death ſtandeth at the doore: the reaſon of this being,
that all diſeaſes are not eaſily diſcerned, nor yet the dangers of
them perceiued by the vrine alone; but ſuch eſpecially as haue their
being in the bladder, veines, kidneyes and Liuer. As it came to paſſe
anno 1581. in a yong man about 24. yeares of age newly married.
This yong mans vrine being, as well in colour as contents, moſt like vnto
an healthfull vrine, he being neither depriued of his accuſtomed
appetite, either to meate or drinke, neither troubled with exceſſiue
headeach, thirſt, watching, anxiety and toſſing of his body too and
fro; nor yet diſtempered with any noyſome heate which might by feeling
be diſcerned. The pulſe notwithſtanding, being weake, frequent
and ſwift with great inequalitie and feebleneſſe, gaue vs ſome
coniectures of I know not what kinde of feauer, the which now and
then was not without ſome exacerbations. Hence was I of opinion,
that the vitall facultie did then by little and little decay; the vſe and
neceſſitie whereof in euery action of this life is, not without great cauſe,
thought to be of ſuch weight and moment, that not onely doth it ſuffice
as matter for the reſt, but doth alſo ſtirre vp and perfect the ſame, in
cheriſhing them after a moſt kinde and effectuall manner, in ſo much
as no part of the body can enioy the benefit of nouriſhment without the
influence of this vitall facultie. This yong man therefore, being now
wholly depriued of the ſaid ſpirits, it was no maruell if nature now decaying,
and win
                     •
                  , by the counſell of a certaine Phyſitian, being denied
him now for certaine dayes, he did vpon the eight day make an exchange
of this cottage of clay for a farre better and happier inheritance.
               But to omit many other ſtories by my ſelfe and others obſerued,In the yeare 1617. many dangerous maligne feauers.
which would yet moſt pregnantly prooue and confirme
the ſame, yet eſpecially in the yeare 1617. did this moſt manifeſtly
and plainly appeare. In the foreſaid yeare, being generally
moiſt for the moſt part; the Winter not Winter like, furniſhed

with ſuch froſts and tempeſtuous ſtormes, as are not vnſeaſonable
for that time of the yeare: it came to paſſe that beſides
the ſmall poxe, meaſels, and diuers other diſeaſes, there reigned
not onely in Northamptonſhire, but in many other places
of the kingdome, a certaine kind of maligne, if not peſtilentiall
feauer, the which, by reaſon it ſweept away the luſtieſt
people of either ſexe, we may, and that not without good reaſon,
call it Stoup gallant. In this diſeaſe, as cometh often alſo
to paſſe in others of the like nature, the vrines of ſome, ſuch as
liued not long after, did appeare to the eye, both for colour
and contents, of as laudable a condition as the vrine of the
ſoundeſt and healthfulleſt man in this kingdome. But among
many I will mention but one, whereof I my ſelfe was an eyewitneſſe.
               Theſe foreſaid feauers in the towne of Northampton,Another. and places
adioyning, in the Spring of the yeare were very frequent, fierce and
furious: towards Sommer they began ſomewhat to relent, reaſſuming
their former fierceneſſe towards the Harueſt quarter. In the
aboue named yeare and quarter, about the latter end of September, a
married woman of good account and reputation, liuing within this
towne of Northampton, was ſurpriſed with the foreſaid feauer: of
the which, becauſe at the firſt it aſſaulted her after the manner of an
intermittent Tertian ague, ſhe made but ſmall reck
                     •
                  ning but after
the ſpace of three or foure dayes, fearing that which afterwards came
to paſſe, being alſo hereunto perſwaded by ſome of her friends, ſhe
vſed the aduiſe of another Phyſitian and my ſelfe. In a few dayes
were by vs adminiſtred all ſuch meames, as either in reaſon or our
daily experience we thought fitteſt to expell the cauſe of her diſeaſe,
and reſtore her to her former health againe. But contra vim mortis,
non eſt medicamen in hortis. Wherefore at length diſcharging
that debt which all the ſonnes of Adam owe, ſhe was freed from
the miſeries of this mortall life, and entred into the poſſeſſion of a better.
Two or three dayes before her death, her vrine might both for
colour and contents, haue giuen ſuch ſatisfaction and content to the
moſt eagle-eyed Phyſitian, that none by the ſight of the ſame could
euer haue ſuspected any imminent danger. In like manner if any one
had felt her pulſe, without due conſideration of the former dangerous

accidents, which could not be concealed from a iudicious eye, obſeruing
withall ſenſibly approach the diſſolution of this craſie cottage, he
would no doubt with old. Agag haue concluded:1. Sam. 15. 32. 
                  Surely the bitterneſſe
of death is paſt.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               Of red vrines, and how eaſily one may thereby be deceiued,
and of piſſing bloud.
               
                  PAſſing by many other colours of vrine which
Authors do here mention, attributing to each
of them a ſeuerall ſignification; of all which, it
were too much this ſhort Treatiſe ſhould take
vpon it to diſcourſe; conſidering alſo that the
vncertaintie of the ſame may be partly collected
from that which hath bene ſaid alreadie, and partly by
ſome things yet to be handled hereafter: now I will cleare this
point concerning red vrines. This colour of vrine, howbeit it
hath many degrees, ſome being of an higher, and ſome againe
of a lower coloured red: yet (ſaith Galen) all are coloured with
a greater or ſmaller portion of bloud therewith mingled. Neuertheleſſe,
that this ſame colour of vrine is procured by the
mixture, more or leſſe, not of bloud alone, but alſo of an high coloured
choller, ioyntly or ſeuerally according to the greater or
ſmaller quantitie thereof, is not by a ſmall number of learned
Phyſitians maintained: as alſo that this ſame colour of vrine is
often and vſually ſeene in hote and acute diſeaſes, is not vnknowne
to the very vulgar and vnlearned ſort of people. Now
a many cauſes may bring foorth this effect: this colour of vrine
higher or lower appearing in a many hote and acute diſeaſes;
which would puzzle a good Phyſitian, by the bare ſight of ſuch
an vrine,Dangerous to let bloud vpon the bare ſight of an high red coloured vrine. to know what diſeaſe it were. But yet is not this rule
ſo infallibly true, that it admitteth of no exception, as is the opinion
of many. And therefore moſt erroneous and dangerous
is the practiſe of ſuch, as vpon the bare ſight of an high coloured

vrine, preſently without any further deliberation or enquiry
of circumſtances, both preſcribe Phlebotomie, and adminiſter
all maner of cooling medicines, to the great & ineuitable danger
and preiudice of the patient: from the which errour alſo
the learned Arabian Auicenna is not free, as our learned late
writers haue well obſerued. And as I deny not but that this
may often prooue true; ſo on the other ſide, it is moſt certaine,
that the vrine may be of ſuch a colour, and yet either proceed
from a cold cauſe, or elſe from ſome imbecillitie and weakeneſſe,
as cometh ſomtimes to paſſe in Dropſies, &c. But leſt this
ſhould ſeeme ſtuffe of mine owne braine, and hatched at home,
heare from the mouth of a worthie Author,Rhamb. Dod. obſeruat. medic. cap. 32. ſomething concerning
the ſame purpoſe. It is not ſeldome obſerued, that the vrine,
by reaſon of a commixtion of bloud with it, doth appeare of a red colour:
but by reaſon that it is either thicke or clotted, it is no great
difficultie to diſcerne the ſame. But that ſo thinne a bloud ſhould bemingled
with it, that not the ſubſtance of the vrine, but the colour
onely ſhould be altered, is but ſeldome ſeene. Such a caſe befell a young
man of 28. yeares of age or neare by.
               
               This young man voided an vrine of an high red colour,Hiſtorie. and thinne
ſubſtance for many dayes together, being very like to the vrines made
in hote acute feauers. The aforeſaid patient had vſed the aduice of
diuers ancient learned Phyſitians, who had appointed him ſuch
meanes as are vſed for the cooling of hote Liuers. At length he repaired
to my ſelfe, at that time but a young Phyſitian. Looking on
his vrine, and withall ſeeing it of ſo high a red colour, as alſo perceiuing
him, who was there preſent, free from any feauer, I asked him
whether heretofore he had complained of any: which he denyed, adding
moreouer, that for ſome moneths by-paſt he had felt a chilneſſe
and coldneſſe, together with a great extenuation or leanneſſe, and
ſhortneſſe of breath, ioyned with a generall decay of ſtrength; as alſo
that hitherto he had found no benefit by ſuch meanes as he had vſed.
All which hauing attentiuely heard, I thought good to keepe by me
the ſaid vrine vntill the next day, and then to view the reſidence
thereof, the which was of a colour like vnto bloud, as being indeed nothing
elſe but bloud, the vrine aboue it, being but very little, dyed
with a pale yellow colour; ſhewing no ſigne or token at all of any feauer.

For the which cauſe I did then collect, that there was no exorbitant
heate in his Liuer, but a great weakeneſſe in the kidneyes, by reaſon
whereof the ends of the ſmall veines being opened and looſened, let
ſome part of the bloud paſſe away. And therefore I tooke a new courſe
for curing of the ſame, by vſing ſuch meanes as were fit for the corroborating
and ſtrengthening of the kidneyes and veines, not omitting
fit and conuenient diet, and among other things, goats milke. And ſo
at length the vrine came to its owne naturall colour againe, his bodie
alſo enioying the benefit of nouriſhment as it was wont in former
times: and thus in a ſhort time recouered his vigour, ſtrength, and
former perfect health againe.
               Such an excretion of bloud,Idem D
                        •
                     d. in ſchol. which cometh thus to paſſe by
reaſon of the looſeneſſe and wideneſſe of the mouthes of the
ſmall veines, or yet of the thinneſſe of bloud, is commonly called
Diapedeſis: that is, as much as a ſtreining through. It cometh
alſo to paſſe, that ſome bloud is voyded by vrine many other
wayes: ſometimes ſome great ſtone fretting the paſſages betwixt
the kidneyes and the bladder, called Vreteres, bloud doth
alſo accompanie the vrine, but withall it is blacke and clotted.
The ſtone continuing for ſome certaine ſpace in the bladder,
prooueth likewiſe ſometimes the cauſe of this inconuenience,
and that eſpecially after riding, or ſome other violent motion of
the bodie. In women alſo ſome part of their menſtruous fluxe
is ſometimes intermingled with it. Sometimes againe the
bloud iſſuing out of the gummes, being ſuddenly ſtopt, doth
ſearch for it ſelfe a paſſage through the bladder. The kidneyes
being wounded, firſt doth bloud iſſue out by the vrines, and
afterwards matter mingled with it: as it befell that woman
which was ſtabbed in the loynes with a dagger, firſt voyding
blouddie vrines; then afterwards mingled with matter, vntill
ſuch time as both the wound and the kidneyes were cured. And
that this was a wound in the kidneyes, did plainly appeare, by
ſome portion of the ſame taken out of the wound. The exulceration
of the kidneyes is alſo accompanied with bloudie vrine,
after the which (vnleſſe remedie be in due and conuenient time
procured) matter doth follow. It is likewiſe ſometimes ſeene,
that decrepit old men do voyd vrines mingled with bloud,

which are of a blackiſh colour, accompanied with ſome red, the
which doth declare, that the vigour and power of the kidneyes
is almoſt quite aboliſhed.
               But I wiſh thee yet to lend thine eare a little to the ſame Author,Idem obſeruat. medicin. cap. 31.
yet againe in a ſtorie or two more, which will adde not a
little light to this matter.
               The vrine doth appeare of a reddiſh colour, not onely when
the Liuer is ſurpriſed with a Gangrene, or the bodie with any
hote or acute diſeaſe, ſuch as are Tertian agues, burning feauers,
inflammation of the internall parts: but often alſo in the
debilitie, weakeneſſe, and coldneſſe of the Liuer or ſtomach,
proceeding from long and lingring diſeaſes. The like tincture
it receiueth now and then in the extreame pinching Collicke
paſſion, when as ſome tough and clammie humours poſſeſſing
the guts, do hinder the paſſage of the faecall excrements.
               A Gentleman of account (ſaith he) voyded vrine of a very high
red colour,Hiſtorie. howbeit free from any feauer: being at the ſame time
much tormented with the Collicke, accompanied with a retention of
the faecall excrements. After the iniection of an anodine, or mitigating
gliſter, the paine was much eaſed, and withall the vrine became of a
remiſſe and light colour, ſuch as it was wont to be in his former
health. After a ſhort ſpace his vrine reaſſumed againe its former high
colour, vntill ſuch time as by frequent reiteration of gliſters, the vrine
at length perſiſted in that laudable ſtate and condition once before begun,
the bodie alſo without any artificiall meanes performed its ordinarie
functions.
               A Citizen of good account,Another. about fiftie yeares of age, being freed
from a Quartane ague,Idem Ibidem. which had held him for the ſpace of foure or
fiue moneths, fell into that kind of laske which we commonly call Lienteria.
His excretions by ſtoole were very liquid and crude, and
no remainder of the heate of the Ague to be diſcerned. His vrines alſo
were of as high a red colour, as is at any time to be ſeene in the moſt
violent burning feauers, or inflammations of the inward parts. But
yet did I not build vpon any ſo rotten a foundation, but hauing a more
watchfull eye on other matters, I thought it neceſſarie in the firſt
place to haue a care of the ſtomach, and in the next place of the Liuer,
both being by meanes of the former Quarterne ague, not a little

weakened. For this end and purpoſe I preſcribed his diet in qualitie
hote and drie, allowing him for his drinke the beſt and ſtrongeſt wines,
ſuch as are Sacke and Canarie. Phyſicall meanes were Diagalanga,
Diatrion-pipereon, and ſuch like. By continuance of which meanes,
this much at length was obtained, that the ſaecall excrements did
now ſhew forth good concoctiō, the vrines alſo as in his former perfect
health. After all the premiſſes the aforementioned patient aſſuring
himſelfe of perfect health, did ſecretly fall againe to the too liberall
drinking of beere. Immediatly after this diſorder, the colour of his
vrine was againe altred into an high deepe red, vndoubtedly declaring
vnto vs, that ſometimes the vrines receiue an high and deepe colour,
by reaſon of the cruditie and coldneſſe of the ſtomach.Vrine ſometimes red by reaſon of the cruditie of the ſtomach. After that time
therefore he refrained againe from beere, vpon the which his vrine
returned to its former laudable condition, neither did he after that
vſe any beere, vntill ſuch time as he had perfectly recouered his former
health againe.
               Theſe things haue I related, becauſe of the ignorance and
error of many, who are perſwaded, that the vrine cannot be
died with ſo high a colour, any other way then by heate, who
whenſoeuer they ſee ſuch an vrine brought to them, the patient
being tormented with the Collicke, they very vnaduiſedly and
raſhly haue recourſe to the cure of a feauer, neglecting the cure
of the Collicke, which by theſe meanes they are ſo farre from
curing, that they do rather much increaſe the paine of the ſame.
But if theſe men had read Galen to Glauco,
                  Lib. 1. cap. deſignis quotidianae intermitt. they could not be
ignorant y• vrines ſometimes do appeare of a reddiſh colour in
cold diſeaſes, or at leaſt ſuch as are not very much diſtempered
with heate. For writing of the Quotidian ague, which hath for
materiall cauſe, crude and raw humours, thus he writeth: In
Quotidian agues the vrines are either white, or thicke and muddie,
or elſe of a red colour.
                  In comment. in praedict. locum. 
                  Martinus Akakia in his Commentarie
addeth, that the vrines then become of a reddiſh colour, when
as by weakneſſe of the Liuer or the veines, the red wateriſh
ſubſtance iſſueth out with the vrine.Hieron. Reuſner. in ſchol. ad cap. 22. Ioh. Willich. de prob. vrin. 
                  Fernelius alſo, lib. 6. pathol.
cap. 13. writeth that they are not a little deceiued, who do aſcribe
bloudie vrine, or that which is of a red windie colour,
reſembling the waſhings of raw bloudie fleſh, vnto the imbecillitie

and weakneſſe of the Liuer: for he cannot conceiue
how that bloud can come from any other part of the bodie
without ſome indiſpoſition of the kidneys. But yet (by the
leaue of ſo learned a man) many things there be which make
againſt this aſſertion. For oftentimes by experience we ſee many
plethoricke young men, feeding on abundance of daintie
diſhes, & liuing in eaſe and idleneſſe, to piſſe bloud by meanes
of a relaxation of ſome veine,Per 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . who by the onely meanes of
Phlebotomie, together with the application of ſome Emplaſticke
remedie to the region of the Liuer, (about the which
place they ſay, they find ſome weight ioyned with ſome diſtention,
reaching vp to the right ſhoulder) are perfectly cured.
And who can here I pray thee, accuſe the kidneyes, there being
no paine nor trouble at all felt in the making of his
vrine?
               And thus may the deceit and vncertaine iudgement had by
the varietie of theſe red vrines in hote or cold diſeaſes eaſily
be conceiued, for the which cauſe I will here ſurceaſſe from inſiſting
any more vpon them: but now, becauſe mention hath
bene made of ſome ſmall quantity of bloud iſſuing foorth with
the vrines, we will ſay ſomething of the abundant piſſing
of bloud, illuſtrating it by ſome authorities, as heretofore we
haue done.
               Now as theſe vrines of an high and intenſe red colour,Of piſſing of bloud. do
ſtrike a terrour often in the beholders, much more doth this liquor
of life (the bloud it ſelfe I meane) iſſuing out of the vrinarie
pipes and paſſages, cauſe no ſmall amazement to the eyes of
the ignorant, and ſometimes of the more iudicious beholder
of it. And yet doth not this alwayes portend ſo infallible and
vndoubted danger, as by many is deemed. Sometimes indeed
the danger is ſo great, that not onely a meane and ordinarie
vnderſtanding, but a more refined iudgement, may iuſtly feare
the future danger: as in the rupture of ſome great veine neare
the Liuer, or the kidneyes, after which doth an vlcer often enſue,
and after a long torturing and tormenting paine, Death
moſt commonly maketh an end of their ſo miſerable and painfull
life. Sometimes againe this fluxe prooueth very ſafe and

ſecure, as in criticall and periodicall excretions. But heare, I
pray thee,Aretaeus Cappadox. lib. 4. cap. 3. diuturn. morb. an ancient Author deliuer his opinion concerning
this point.
               Some men there are, who by certaine turnes, and at certaine
times do piſſe bloud abundantly, being a diſeaſe not vnlike to
the haemorrhoides or piles. The ſtate and conſtitution of their
bodie alſo is not vnlike: for they are very pale, dull, ſluggiſh,
and lumpiſh: they loath their food, and after this excretion of
bloud, there followeth a certaine reſolution and faintneſſe of
their ioynts, their head notwithſtanding becometh much
lighter and better. But if at this accuſtomed and wonted period
of time, there ſhall happen a ſuppreſſion or ſtoppage of
the aforeſaid fluxe, they are preſently ſurpriſed with a great
head-ach, their eye-ſight waxing dim, ſeconded with a giddineſſe
and ſwimming in the head. Vpon which occaſion it commeth
to paſſe, that many of them fall into the falling ſickneſſe:
ſome of them againe being puffed vp and ſwollen, with their
eye-ſight ſomewhat darkened, do reſemble Hydropicke perſons:
others are oppreſſed with melancholicke diſeaſes, and
ſome againe with Paralyticke paſſions. All theſe inconueniences
do follow vpon the ſuppreſſion of any former fluxe of
bloud.
               Sometimes piſſing of bloud (ſaith Hollerius) is criticall,Holler. Schol. ad cap. 52. lib. 1. de morb. and commeth
by certaine turnes and ſet times: and with ſuch a one was troubled
a certaine Nun mentioned by Muſa, who euery moneth vpon
the ſuppreſſion of her monethly diſeaſe,Vde ibidem plura, vt & apud Schenck. obſeruat. medicin. lib. 3. tit. de ſang. mictu. did piſſe bloud in abundance.
Archembault the Counſeller, by turnes did ſometimes caſt
vp by the mouth, and ſometimes did voyd it downewards by ſtoole,
and againe at other times by the yard. Some at the paſſing away of
the Spring do piſſe bloud; and this I find written by Archigenes, that
ſome do by certaine turnes voyd great ſtore of bloud by the yard, being
firſt collected in and about the kidneyes, and that they find themſelues
much eaſed thereby.
               I am very familiarly acquainted with one Donatus Arrigonius,Hiſtorie. a
merchant of our towne,Marcell. Donat. lib. 4. cap. 29. hiſt. med. who in his iourney to the faire of Bohan,
which is held three or foure times a yeare, in his iourney obſerued,
that he was ſurpriſed with the Iaundiſe. Afterwards as he was

vpon his iourney homewards to Mantua, and faſt aſleepe in his Inne,
being accompanied with another friend, who lay in the ſame bed with
him, vpon the ſudden there iſſued out at his yard, of its owne accord,
great ſtore of blackiſh bloud; in ſo much that his companion being all
wet with the bloud wakened him, being almoſt halfe dead; and with
much ado, at length brought him home to Mantua againe; but withall
quite freed from his Iaundiſe.
               A certaine yong man,Another. after the eating of great ſtore of garlicke,
piſſed afterwards great abundance of bloud; and after a little while
ſignes of an impoſtume in the kidneyes might be obſerued: to wit, ſome
matter iſſuing forth from the ſame: from whence I did collect, that the
ſharpneſſe of the humour had cauſed an excoriation in theſe parts, by
meanes of the opening of ſome veine.
               I did ſee at Mothon a man who with a fall off a ladder filled halfe
a chamber pot with the bloud he piſſed;Another. who immediatly after the
taking of a little Lemnian earth did recouer: the bloud came without
any vrine; and that, perhaps, becauſe the contuſion was not farre diſtant
from his yard.
               About ſome nine or ten yeares ago,Another. an Inne-keeper of Northampton,
a fat and corpulent man, hauing now and then voyded ſome ſmall
quantitie of bloud with his vrine, did, notwithstanding but little regard
the ſame; vntill ſuch time as he fell into a totall ſuppreſſion of vrine;
the paine whereof made him caſt forth ſuch pitifull cries and
complaints, that his ſorrowfull neighbours did much commiſerate his
diſtreſſed eſtate. His wife no leſſe perplexed then amazed, at this ſo
ſudden and vnexpected accident, at his deſire ſent to intreat my ayde
and counſell in this his ſo great extremitie. Some halfe an houre or
leſſe after the adminiſtration of a diureticke drinke inwardly, and a
Cataplaſme outwardly applyed to his ſhare, he filled almoſt a chamber
pot with bloud, ſome ſmall quantitie of vrine being mingled with the
ſame: whereupon followed immediatly caſe and alleuiation of all his
former annoyance. The ſame night, about an houre after, he ſent me
a little wooden diſh almoſt halfe full of gobbets of congealed and clotted
bloud, reſembling the ſubſtance of the Liuerie ſelfe. The next
morning againe he ſent me an vrinall almoſt full of bloud voyded at
the ſame place, no vrine to the iudgement of the eye at the firſt to be
diſcerned mingled with the ſame I cauſed him bleed oftner then once,

beſides other fit and conuenient remedies, as well in diet as otherwiſe;
and yet this fluxe continued leſſe or more for ſome few dayes after. In
the ſpace of one weeke he loſt in all aboue a gallon of bloud. For preuention
I wiſhed him, beſides gooddiet (hard to be obſerued by people
of that profeſſion) with corroboratiue and other medicines fit for that
purpoſe, with ſpeciall regard to the Liuer, not to neglect Phlehotomie,
at leaſt euery Spring and Fa
                     •
                  l, which he duely put in practiſe for the
firſt yeare: and, for anything I could euer heare, was litle or nothing
troubled after that time with this infirmitie. After this he liued at
leaſt three yeares, and then dyed ſuddenly; of the cauſe whereof here
to diſcourſe, were beſides my preſent purpoſe. Diuerſe others haue
now and then by me bene obſerued, troubled with the like euacuation,
without any great hurt or hinderance to their health;
whom, to auoide prolixitie and tediouſneſſe, I here willingly
paſſe by: onely one I will touch but in two words.
               
               A little child aboue fiue yeares of age,Another. vſed at diuerſe times to
piſſe pure bloud, not keeping any certaine times or turnes. This the
Gentlewoman her ſelfe the childs grandmother, dwelling not farre
from the towne of Northampton told me; who did likewiſe affirme,
that ſhe had not diſcerned any hurt he had ſustained by the ſame: yet
notwithſtanding for feare of ſome future inconuenience, and after enſuing
danger, was deſirous to vſe ſome meanes for preuention: which
being by ſome occaſions then deferred, the child afterwards departed
out of theſe quarters into another countrey, where what ſince befell
him I cannot tell.
               But now let vs proceed to ſome other colours of vrines; for
here I thinke hath bene found as ſmall certaintie as in the former.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               Of blacke vrines, and that they are not alwayes ſo dangerous as they
are deemed: as alſo of blew, aſh-coloured, or leaden and
greene coloured vrines, together with their ſeuerall
ſignifications and vncertainties.
               
                  THe higheſt and intenſeſt of all other colours,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . is
the blacke; the which when it preſenteth it ſelfe
to the view of the eye in any vrine, it ſtriketh no
ſmall feare and terror in the minds of moſt men;
yea and ſometimes of thoſe of no ordinarie vnderſtanding.
That this feare was not altogether without ſome
ground,Hippoc. prognoſt. lib. 2. aph. 29. may be ſeene by ſome paſſages of our old father Hippocrates,
who doth peremptorily affirme, that as well in men as
in women,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . blacke vrines are alwayes dangerous. And of the
like opinion and iudgement was once his truſtie interpreter
Galen, confidently auouching that he neuer knew any one recouer
whoſe vrine was altogether blacke;Idem in coac. ſect. 27. aph. 16. 1. de criſ. cap. 12 & alibi. howbeit the danger
was the leſſer if the reſidence onely were blacke: leſſe againe if
the middle part or ſwimme, and leaſt of all if the cloud onely
were of this colour.Comm. 3. in lib. 3. epid. Howbeit the ſame Galen in another place
affirmeth, That if there be a retention of a womans monethly fluxe
of melancholicke bloud, there is no cauſe of feare, if in ſuch a caſe the
vrine appeare blacke to the eye.
                  Comm. 3. in lib. 1 epid. And againe, in the ſtorie of that
woman who being ſurpriſed with ſickneſſe the ſecond day after
ſhe was brought to bed, the third day ſhe voyded thinne blackiſh
vrines. Galen ſpeaketh of no further inconuenience to enſue vppon
the ſame, but maketh onely mention of a certaine commotion
and agitation of the humours of the body, ioyned with a
a certaine conflict:Of blacke vrines. and yet of all ſorts of blacke vrines this thin
blacke is counted the beſt. Blacke vrines may be voyded both
in health and alſo in ſickneſſe,Hiſtorie. eſpecially by way of criticall excretion.Iohann. Bel. for comm in lib de vrin.
And firſt in health let this enſuing hiſtorie ſpeake.
               I cannot well approue of the opinion of Chriſtophorus a Ʋega, who
maintaineth that it is altogether impoſſible that any liuing in perfect
health ſhould voyd a blacke vrine:Gal. attrib. p
                        •
                      72. his reaſon is, becauſe ſo great a

quantitie of that humour as may thus colour the vrine, can hardly
be collected within the veines of an healthfull man. But howſoeuer
in a laudable and healthfull conſtitution of body, it doth not ſo much
abound in the veines as do the other humours, yet is it on the other
ſide moſt certaine, that this humour doth abound in that temperature
of body which is cold and drie, ſince that from thence the cold and dry
conſtitution taketh its name. And this did I my ſelfe obſerue in a certaine
Monke of the order of the Carmes, and Spaniard by nation, of
the coldeſt and drieſt conſtitution of body that euer I did yet know,
who for the ſpace of ſixe whole yeares, during his abode here with vs,
and that in perfect good health, made alwayes a blacke vrine: and being
yet further demanded of vs concerning the continuance of it, did
confidently affirme vnto vs, that ſo had he done the whole courſe of
his life. And why not? May not a blacke and melancholicke bloud,
ſupplying the place of the haemorrhoides or piles, being expelled by vrine,
dye the ſame with the aforeſaid colour? As alſo the like excretion
of vrine ſo colored hath bene obſerued in one Tardanellus and Italian,
who did all his life time (liuing notwithſtanding in perfect health)
continually voyd ſuch an vrine. Neither yet is it without reaſon, that
the noyſome humour is ſo ſcoured away, to the end that the ſtate and
conſtitution of the body, compoſed of, and cheriſhed by ſuch an humor,
may be preſerued ſound and in perfect health.
               I did once ſee a Knights vrine of a very blacke colour,Another. who notwithſtanding,Guil. Adolph. 
                        •
                     cribon. lib. de 
                        •
                     rinar. inſpect.
was not ſicke at all, and much leſſe in danger of death.
Againe a little after. There was alſo a yong ſcholler, who being free
from any diſeaſe, voyded ſometimes vrine of ſo blacke a celour, that
whoſoeuer did ſee it, did ſuppoſe it to be inke.
               The ſtorie of Actuarius his ſeruant,Actuar. lib. 2. cap. 20. de iudie. 
                        •
                     rin. doth alſo confirme, that in
perfect health the vrine may be died with a blacke inkie colour
without any further danger, as it came to paſſe in this partie,
whoſe vrine after the drinking of a medicine againſt melancholie,
at firſt was of a blackiſh colour like vnto inke, comming
afterwards to a blewiſh, and at laſt to its owne naturall colour
againe.
               I was my ſelfe very familiarly acquainted with a reuerend and
graue Diuine,Another. who liued ſometime in this towne of Northampton, who
did at diuers times, yet liuing in perfect health, voyde great abundance

of blacke vrine. And yet a long time before his death, nor yet
during the time of his ſickneſſe, I neuer knew him voyd any of that colour.
               That this blacke vrine may prooue a criticall excretion,Blacke vrines critical in diuers diſeaſes. not
in acute diſeaſes, but euen in ſuch as are not partakers of that
violence; as in diſeaſes of the ſpleene and kidneyes, cannot be denied,Thomas a Vega comm. ad lib. 6. Gal. de loc. affact. pag. 342.
&c. But I produce my authorities. We muſt not vnaduiſedly
and without any limitation, iump with the iudgement of
Galen in condemning of blacke vrines. For howſoeuer he did
neuer perhaps ſee any ſaued after the voyding of ſuch an vrine,
yet haue diuerſe other of no ſmall note and fame ſince his time
ſeene and obſerued the ſame: for the which cauſe it ought not
ſo much to be condemned; nay not if thou wouldeſt euen tye
thine aſſertion to acute diſeaſes: yea though thou ſhouldeſt yet
further ſuppoſe many other bad and dangerous ſignes to concurre
with the ſame. For beſides Rhaſes, Auicenna, and Actuarius,
Hippocrates himſelfe, in his epidemicall hiſtories, did obſerue,
that ſome with ſuch vrines did recouer. The vrine therefore
may be often of that colour without any imminent danger
to the patient, and that vpon the taking of any meate,
drinke, or medicine, of a blacke colour, & perhaps indued with
a diureticall qualitie; concerning which there is a prettie ſtorie
in Actuarius. It proueth alſo often a criticall excretion in Quartane
agues, in diſeaſes of the ſpleene, as alſo in the ſuppreſſion of
womens menſtruous fluxes, and of the Hemorthoides or piles
in both ſexes. And yet moreouer according to the minde of
Auicenna, it cureth ſometimes feauers of long continuance,
whether they take their denomination from the day or from
the night.Nocturnae 
                        〈◊〉
                      diurnae febre. And yet further, in ſome infirmities of the kidneyes,
or yet a ſtone congealed in the bladder, the vrine ſometimes
preſenteth it ſelfe in the foreſaid habit and colour. And finally,
it doth ſometimes preſage the happie iſſue and euent of feauers
by bleeding at the noſe or ſweating. Since therefore ſometimes
it is a foretunner of extreme danger, to wit, when it doth proceed
from extreme hear or cold, and ſometimes againe ſecure
and without any danger at all, Rhaſes and Auicenna do thus accord
them. If the foreſaid vrine be voyded in a great quantitie

and thinne, ſucceeding a cleare and wateriſh vrine, as alſo if
eaſe and alleuiation do follow vpon the voyding thereof, it
doth preſage nothing but good: and on the contrarie, without
the foreſaid circumſtances, a blacke vrine is very dangerous;
and in the ſtoppage of womens monethly diſeaſe, it is an vſuall
and accuſtomed, howbeit not a perpetuall and certaine ſigne.
But now I will inſtance in ſome hiſtories the proofe of theſe
criticall euacuations.
               I am very familiarly acquainted with a Church man,Another. who ordinarily
three or foure times a yeare complaineth of the ſwelling of his
ſpleene to an exceſſiue bigneſſe,Anton. Valet exercit. 40 ad Holler. de morb. intern. especially towards the Spring and Fall:
and vpon the approaching of the foreſaid diſeaſe, then doth he complaine
of great griefe and paine in his ſides, his bodie becomming all
ouer of a leaden colour, and in this caſe daily waxing worſe and worſe,
vntill at length by voyding abundance of vrine blacke like vnto inke,
and that during the ſpace of ſixe or ſeuen dayes, the foreſaid ſwelling,
as alſo his great paine vaniſhing quite away, he recouered againe his
wonted and accuſtomed health. It is now twelue, if not fifteene yeares
ſince he was firſt acquainted with this criticall excretion by vrine, hauing
before that time bene troubled with the piles or hemorrhoides,
which notwithſtanding did yeeld but little matter.
               I haue of mine owne experience obſerued (ſaith the learned Laurentius)
ſuch as haue bene troubled with the Spleene,Another. by meanes of a
plentifull euacuation by blacke vrine to haue bene cured.Andr. Laurent. anat. lib. 1. quaeſt. 38. Now it is
alſo to be obſerued, that ſuch vrines were blacke, not by generation,
by reaſon that ſuch vrines in Hippocrates his Prognoſt. Praedict. and
Aphoriſm, are alwayes deadly. For ſuch vrines do ſhew forth and declare,
either an extraordinarie great parching heate, or elſe a totall
extinction or ouerthrowing of naturall heate. But theſe vrines were
blacke by permixtion of a melancholicke humor, the which the Spleene
did ſend forth through the kidneyes into the bladder.
               Howbeit blacke vrines be by Hippocrates condemned as deadly
(ſaith Ʋaleriola) or at leaſt very dangerous,Franciſe. Valer. comm. ad libr. Gal. le constit. art. med. pag. 355 especially in acute diſeaſes;
yet doth experience teach vs, that this manner of vrine may
proue criticall in ſome diſeaſes; as namely, in inflammations, or inueterate
obſtructions of the Spleene: as I did my ſelfe obſerue in a yong
youth called Iohn Ruffus,Another. ſonne to our Apothecary Anthonie Ruffus,

who being once (as was ſuppoſed) readie to yeeld vp the ghoſt, by reaſon
of an inflammation of the Spleene, did vpon the twentieth day, by
way of a criſis, voide aboue twelue wine pints of vrine as blacke as
inke, the which I haue often alſo obſerued in Quartane agues.
               But now I will inſtance in ſome agues, and ſome other infirmities.
               Vpon a time I went to a Canon who lay ſicke of a triple Quartane
ague,Another. being troubled alſo with a ſcirrhus or hardneſſe both of his
Liuer and Spleene,Iacob Douin
                        ••
                     . apol. lib. 3. cap. vlt. who neuertheleſſe did recouer of the foreſaid infirmities,
and that by meanes of thicke blacke vrine, together with ſuch
fit and proper remedies as are appropriated to the Spleene, exhibited
and applyed both outwardly and inwardly. Syluius hath ſeene diuers
who haue had euery yeare ſuch fluxes of vrine, and that without any
griefe or moleſtation whatſoeuer.
               But I will inſtance in a Tertian ague, ſuch vrines being more
ſeldome obſerued in this diſeaſe then in Quartanes and the like:
in the which my ſelfe being the patient, I cannot much be miſtaken.
               After I had continued about the ſpace of two yeares in France,Another. and
liuing at that inſtant in the towne of Fontenay le compte,Of a baſtard Tertian in my ſelfe. in the Prouince
of Poictou, about the latter end of Iuly, I was ſurpriſed with a
baſtard Tertian ague, which thus continuing for the ſpace of three
weekes, yet without any violent accidents, I did at the first contemne.
After the foreſaid pace, the enemie aſſaulting me more fiercely then
at firſt, and that by redoubling of the former fits, being now of a ſingle
Tertian become a double, I armed my ſelfe with ſuch weapons as were
fit to encounter with ſo furious an aduerſarie. After the vſe of diuers
fit and proper remedies for the extirpation of the foreſaid infirmitie, I
voyded for the ſpace of three or foure dayes together great ſtore of
thicke blackiſh vrine like vnto inke, at the first ſight whereof (hauing
read ſomething before in Hippocrates, concerning the danger of
ſuch vrines) I was ſomething afraid; but after more mature deliberation
I reſted better ſatisfied. I remember I had for certaine dayes
together drunke of an infuſion wherein was ſome quantitie of Sene
leaues, which as it ſeemeth by the attraction of the humour of that
colour did dye the vrine therewith. Ʋnto this criticall excretion was
ſhortly after added another: to wit, a violent laske, not without the

mixture of ſome bloud, which lasted at leaſt for the ſpace of a full
forthnight, and which did at length waſt away the mateer of the diſeaſe
before the approaching of Winter; howbeit the imbecillitie of my
bodie was ſuch that I recouered not my full former ſtrength againe
vntill the Spring following.
               I gaue vpon a time to a patient of mine (ſaith Crato) much troubled
with the blacke laundiſe,Another. ſome Bezoar ſtone,Iohann. Crato conſil. medicin. col. 446. aedit. Hanou. in fol. 1612. and after a little
while he voided great ſtore of vrine as blacke as inke; by which meanes
the patient found great eaſe.
               
                  Rhaſes reporteth an hiſtorie of a woman that came to him, who
voyded blacke vrines, and withall complained much of a paine in her
loynes, and alwayes vpon the voyding of ſuch an vrine ſhe found immediatly
eaſe. But after a while ſhe fell into a night feauer accompanied
with ſome ſhiuering. This woman was of a melancholicke
complexion, whom I perfectly cured by ſuch meanes as prouoke vrine.
               The ſonne of Angelus borne at Ancona (as relateth Amatus)
being but fiue yeares of age,Another. ſomewhat fat of body, being,Amatus Luſitanus centar. 5. turat. 54. as his parents
ſuppoſed, carefully looked vnto both for diet and other things
called not naturall; became notwithstanding full of hard ſcabs, accompanied
with an vlcer-like matter all ouer his head and necke, and for
diuerſe dayes did runne great ſtore of this putrid matter from the
foreſaid ſores. But after a moneths ſpace, this child voyded abundance
of thicke blacke vrine for the ſpace of three dayes together, not without
ſome acrimonie and ſharpneſſe, accompanied with a paine in his
yard, yet without any feauer. This child did in a very ſhort time after
recouer; neither would I ſuffer any thing to be applyed to his head
for curing of his ſcabs, which did very ſhortly heale of it ſelfe. Now
this vrine proued to be in this child criticall for the remouall of this
infirmitie.
               It may then plainly appeare, how little truſt we are to repoſe
in theſe vrines more then any other, either in ſickneſſe or in
health; and how eaſily the Phyſitian may be deceiued, who ſhall
giue too much credit thereunto. And who can tell by the ſight
of ſuch a blacke vrine onely, whether it be criticall as we ſay, or
ſymptomaticall, denouncing danger in an acute diſeaſe? This
the other circumſtances, eſpecially the ſight of the patient,

(whereby thou mayeſt more eaſily conſider of his ſtrength
then by the ſight of a thouſand vrines) muſt bring to thy conſideration.Mercur. lib. de vrin. cap. 6.
And beſides all the premiſſes. Mercuriall mentioneth
out of Rhaſes and Auicenna, that if any annoint his bodie
with the iuyce of the berries of the hearbe Halcana, he ſhall vndoubtly
voyd blacke vrines. The ſame Author affirmeth, that
blacke vrine after great trauell end exerciſe, doth prognoſticate
a conuulſion, and that a gliſter made of the decoction onely of
high coloured red wine, hath produced a blacke vrine. And
againe, out of Rufus Epheſius, who liued about the time of the
Emperour Traian, that blacke vrine, voyded for a long time together
in the time of health, prognoſticateth the ingendring
of a ſtone in the kidneyes. But I proceed now to ſome other
colours of vrines, which by our Authors are all referred to
the former colour, and not much alſo diſagreeing in ſignification.
               Blew vrines,Of blew vrines. called commonly veneta & caerulea, being as it
were a more remiſſe blacke, and not dyed with ſo great a quantitie
of that humour, hath alſo diuerſe ſignifications. For being
thicke withall, it ſignifieth that blacke choller, proceeding firſt
from yellow choller very aduſt, doth colour the vrine: or elſe
ſo great cold of the inward parts, that they are almoſt quite
mortified. It ſignifieth moreouer, extraodinarie exerciſe of the
bodie by running. In ſuch as do recouer out of any diſeaſe, it is
a ſigne of a laudable criſe, eſpecially if it come in any great
quantitie: for by this meanes the a duſt parts are voyded foorth.
In old men, if ſuch an vrine perſiſt long, it argueth that the naturall
conſtitution of the bladder is altered and changed by bad
and corrupt humours. In ſuch as are ſubiect to the ſtone, it is a
ſigne of the approaching of the Strangurie. The ſame vrine is
alſo ſometimes obſerued to be thinne, then ſignifying the melting
of melancholy, which doth but a little colour the vrine.
And ſometimes alſo it ſignifieth blowes and ſtripes, howbeit
not in any violent or exceſſiue manner, and in ſuch a caſe it is a
laudable and good ſigne.
               As concerning greene vrines,Of greene vrines. of them our Phyſitians commonly
make two ſorts: one properly ſo called, and the other

called greene oylie vrines. As for the firſt, it ſignifieth according
to our writers, abundance of choler aduſt, and of a maligne
qualitie, and almoſt readie to be turned into blacke, being
daily more and more parched and burnt vp. And commonly
in the beſt ſignification it ſignifieth aduſtion of the humours,
long continuance and perſeuerance of the ſame. And
ſometimes cold in extreameſt degree, as was ſaid before of
blacke, and then is mortall: eſpecially if leaden colour and
blacke follow ſucceſſiuely at diuers times, pulſe feeble, with
thirſt or ſhort breath. Sometimes againe a Quotidian ague and
yellow laundiſe, eſpecially with an ague. And howbeit theſe
vrines often proue dangerous, yet is not the caſe alwayes alike:
for ſometimes this colour may be alſo ſeene in found & healthfull
bodies.3. de rat. vict. acut. 
                  Galen doth willingly confeſſe the ſame. Cholericke
people (ſaith he) which faſt long, do oftentimes make greene and fierie
coloured vrines. And that feeding vpon certaine kinds of
foode, may produce ſuch an vrine, this enſuing hiſtorie may
eaſily declare.
               There was a certaine Phyſitian,Hiſtorie. who hauing fed on ſome nouriſhment
of that colour,Guil. Adolph. Scribon. de inſpect. vrin. prope finem. did afterwards voyd an vrine of the ſame colour,
which he ſent to another Phyſitian, to fiſh out his opinion concerning
the ſame. This other Phyſitian gaue out his verdict concerning the
great danger this vrine did threaten the owner. But the other ſending
him backe word againe, that vpon the feeding on ſuch and ſuch
food it was no vncouth thing for him to voyd ſuch an vrine: and
withall aduiſed him not to pronounce his opinion ſo peremptorily vpon
the colour of the vrine onely.
               The other ſort of greene vrines is a light popiniay greene,Of popiniay greene, oylie vrine.
called alſo an oylie vrine: that is, ſuch whoſe ſubſtance is clammie
and thicke, as oyle or fat molten. It commonly ſignifieth
colliquation, and waſting of the fat within man or woman, as
proceeding from exceſſiue heate. And yet ſuch vrines, if blacke
vrines went before, ſignifieth health at hand. If it come ſuddenly
and in a ſhort time, it argueth the colliquation or waſting
of the kidneyes only. The higher this colour is, the worſe
they commonly hold it. But I will dwell no longer vpon this
colour, ſince the vncertaintie thereof may be collected by that

which hath bene ſaid alreadie.
               As for aſh-coloured or leaden coloured vrines,Of aſh-coloured, or leaden coloured vrines. they haue not
alwayes one and the ſame ſignification more then the former.
If an vrine of this colour be thicke, and greene coloured vrine
went before, it ſignifieth extreame heate an 
                     ••
                  urning: if pale
coloured vrine went before, it doth portend extre a me cold and
mortification. This kind of vrine may alſo proceed from the
affluxe of melancholicke humours, or elſe by reaſon of great
blowes or ſtripes: and then it may prooue a good ſigne, the expulſiue
power expelling ſuch reſidence towards the bottome.
In feauers an vrine of this colour without any ſetling or reſidence,
is a ſigne of death. But in a burning feauer it doth portend
a Strangurie. The ſame cauſes which did produce blew
vrines, do alſo bring foorth this colour, but that in this all
things are more violent. Sometimes ſuch an vrine is a ſigne of
the blacke Iaundiſe proceeding from melancholy. But then it
portends health, eſpecially if it be voyded in any great quantitie
and thicke in ſubſtance, by reaſon of the euacuation of
ſuch thicke humours. It is then apparent that theſe colours
ſignifie not alwayes one certaine thing, but ſometimes quite
contrary. For the which cauſe it is no maruell if a Phyſitian
who ſhould ſettle his iudgement ſolely thereupon, might eaſily
be deceiued.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               The manifold ſignifications of white vrines, as alſo the great
vncertaintie of iudgement by the ſame.
               
                  WHite vrines,Of thin white vrines. as alſo all other colours, are either
very thinne and cleare, or elſe thicke in ſubſtance,
and accompanied often with a copious
reſidence. Thinne white cleare vrines like vnto
faire ſpring water, haue diuers ſignifications, as
witneſſeth the learned Rondeletius,
                  Rondelet. lib. de vrin. cap. 15. with whom
are ioyned in iudgement the reſt of our learned Phyſitians. And

firſt of all this vrine is ſometimes ſeene in indifferent good
health,Their diuers ſignifications. and doth now and then ſignifie ſome cruditie of the ſtomach.
Sometimes againe it ſignifieth obſtructions of the Liuer,
Spleene, and Kidneys, which muſt be diſcerned by other ſignes
alſo: to wit, ſuch as be proper and peculiar to each part. In old
age, as alſo in long lingring diſeaſes, it argueth weakeneſſe of
the naturall faculties. Some likewiſe who do voyde ſuch vrines,
are from their very cradles of a weake and craſie conſtitution.
A thinne and cleare vrine, made often, and in great abundance,
doth accompanie the diſeaſe called Diabete. In an obſcure lurking
or lingring feauer, it ſignifieth either the Iaundiſe, or a reſolution
or diſſolution of the ſtrength. A thinne white vrine
accompanied with other good ſignes, doth declare the decaying
and decreaſing of a Quotidian ague, and if it do long perſiſt,
being depriued of any ſmell, eſpecially if ſtrength be much
decayed, it portendeth either death, or elſe the long continuance
of the diſeaſe. And finally with a burning feauer and
phrenſie,Foreſt. obſeruat. medic. tomo. 1. lib. 2. ſchol. ad obſeruat. 25. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . it is a moſt deadly ſigne, as may be ſeene elſewhere.
As concerning the ages, as they are accounted dangerous in
many; ſo eſpecially in little children, as may be ſeene in ſeuerall
places of the workes of the famous Hippocrates. Wherefore we
had need to conſider many things before we proceed to deliuer
our iudgement concerning ſuch vrines. If therefore ſuch an vrine
were brought to the Phyſitian, whether would he thereby
pronounce a weaeneſſe of the ſtomach,Hippcrat. prognoſt. lib. 2. aph. 30 or obſtruction of the
Liuer, Spleene or Kindneys? And why not a phrenſie in a feauer?
And howſoeuer Hippocrates pronounceth this to be a moſt
dangerous vrine; yet haue I my ſelfe often obſerued the ſame
without any danger to the party, as I doubt not but ſo haue many
moe beſides my ſelfe.
               About ſome eight or nine yeares ago,Hiſtorie. there came to me a yeoman
of Northamptonſhire, bringing with him his vrine which well nigh
filled the vrinall, being as cleare as any cryſtall, without any contents
at all, except ſome few motes, ſuch as they ſay are found in the vrines
of women with child. And becauſe I did ſee ſo great ods betwixt his
complexion and his vrine (he bring indifferent well coloured in regard
of the vrine, howbeit neare ſiftie yeares of age) not ſuspecting this

vrine to be his owne, began to enquire ſome circumſtances concerning
the ſame, as namely the time of continuance. At length he freely and
of his owne accord confeſſed, that the vrine was his owne, and that
aboue the ſpace of ſixe yeares by-paſt his vrine had not altered nor
changed from that I did new ſee it. He added moreouer, that he felt
neither griefe nor trouble in his bodie, as being able to go about his
ordinarie employments and workes of his calling; that he was now and
then troubled with ſome wind in his ſtomach, and that he himſelfe
wondered not a little at the long continuance of his vrine after this
manner. I gaue him directions againſt obſtructions▪ and crudities,
with ſomethings for the ſtrengthening of his ſtomach, and neuer ſince
heard any more newes of him.
               The like vrine haue I often obſerued in many other caſes, and
will inſtance but in one: to wit, an hyſtoricall paſſion, commonly
called the mother.
               Some ten yeares ago I had in cure a young maid,Another. much moleſted
with that diſeaſe which is commonly called the Mother. For foure
dayes together, from twelue of the clocke at noone till night, her fits
were ſo violent and tedious, and the intermiſſions ſo ſhort, that both
her father and other friends tooke (as they thought
                     •
                  ) their iuſt leaue
of her. In her time of intermiſſion, or rather remiſſion, when ſhe was
moſt ſenſible of her ſelfe, ſhe voyded almoſt a chamber pot full at a time
of thinne cleare vrine, like vnto ſpring-water, without any manner of
contents diſcernable to the ſharpeſt eye-ſight, and this commonly foure
or fiue times in an afternoone, and that during the dayes of the foureſaid
fits. But being afterwards freed from this infirmitie, ſhe was
likewiſe freed from the aforementioned accident. Neither did I euer
ſince that time know her trouble with this diſeaſe, ſaue once ſince ſhe
was married, and yet was nothing in regard of the former extremitie.
               If any Argus had bene there with his hundreth eyes, or yet
the ſharpe ſighted Lynceus himſelfe, where ſuch vrines had bene
brought in two ſeuerall vrinals (I meane the mans laſt mentioned,
and this womans) they had neuer bene able to diſcerne any
difference betwixt theſe two vrines: much leſſe then the ignorant
Empiricke, the peticoate or woman-phyſitian, or the cunningeſt
piſſe-prophet among them all: and if thou wilt, put in

maſter Parſon-practiſer to make better weight. And if any had
brought ſuch an vrine, ſo often, in ſo great quantity, to any Phyſitian,
was there any reaſon why he ſhould not rather haue coniectured
a Diabete, or piſſing euill, then any other infirmitie?
And this I thinke may ſuffice to prooue the vncertaintie of
iudgement by thinne white vrines: now ſomething of thicke
white vrines.
               
                  Hippocrates,
                  Of thicke white vrines. in the late alledged place, doth include very
thicke vrines, of whatſoeuer colour they be, within the ſame degree
of danger. And Galen himſelfe ſeemeth to ſecond this opinion,
auerring that the thicker an vrine is, the more danger
hath he moſt commonly obſerued in the ſame. Rondeletius affirmeth,
that white vrines which are not tranſparent, but thicke
almoſt like vnto milke, do ſignifie abundance of phlegme, and
ſecondarily wormes, the falling-ſickneſſe, head-ach, palſie,
conuulſions, great coldneſſe of the naturall parts: and finally,
all manner of diſeaſes proceeding from phlegme. If ſuch an vrine
then were offered to thy view and conſideration, good
maſter vrine-monger, for which of theſe diſeaſes wouldeſt thou
giue out ſentence? There being many moe phlegmaticke diſeaſes
beſides the laſt rehearſed; and many of them proceeding
from other cauſes, muſt by conſequent be accompanied with
other vrines: yea and in the ſame cauſe the vrine may by diuers
meanes not be the ſame. And theſe thicke vrines ſometimes accompanied
with a copious reſidence, and ſometimes againe
without the ſame. I will now proceed to ſome inſtances of
both, where it ſhall appeare that ſometimes ſome ſuch vrines
are not ſo dangerous as they are deemed.
               I did ſee in the Caſtle of I
                     •
                  rum in the Countie of Sundoz,Hiſtorie. a young
man about thirtie yeares of age,Nichol. Flerent. ſerm. 3. tract. 10. cap. 21. who did euery day make an vrine in
great abundance, wherein did ſettle a white reſidence, like vnto curdled
milke, filling the vrinall halfe full, howbeit aboue the ſame did
ſwim a ſmall quantitie of whitiſh vrine like vnto whey. They young
man notwithſtanding felt no inconuenience by the ſame, but ſtill enioyed
his perfect health.
               But a woman voyding the like vrine, yet was not bleſſed
with ſo great a benefit, which notwithſtanding for the ſtrangeneſſe

I thought good here to mention.
               In the yeare (as I remember) 1613. a woman of middle age,Another.
dwelling in the South ſuburbe of Northampton, commonly called
Cottonend, ſent me an vrine, if ſo it might be called, which was nothing
elſe, as one would haue iudged by the eye, but thicke curdled
milke, which did very neare fill the vrinall, onely on the top of it did
ſwim a little liquor like vnto white poſſet drinke, being not halfe an
inch thicke aboue the foreſaid contents. And howbeit I did twice or
thrice ſee her vrine afterwards, yet could I neuer againe ſee theſe
curdled contents, it being onely like the aforeſaid white poſſet drinke,
howbeit ſhe had ſometimes before voyded ſuch an vrine, as I was informed.
She died about two moneths after: and as it ſeemeth, of a
conſumption and waſting of the kidneyes and other vrinary paſſages,
as by ſome ſignes did appeare. And what if the ſpermaticall parts did
participate with the former? The woman had lyen long languiſhing,
neither was I euer called to ſee her, and for any thing I know, had
few or no meanes adminiſtred vnto her, being but of poore and meane
eſtate.
               A thicke and milkie vrine hath alſo by others bene obſerued
in the exulceration of the kidneys,A Petro Sphaerorio medico referente Schenck. lib. 3. obſeruat. medicin. lib de vrin. namely in a certaine Polonian
in the Hoſpitall of the holy Ghoſt, the which (ſaith the
Author) I often beheld. There are yet other white vrines, the
which howſoeuer they are to the eye ſomewhat tranſparent,
ſome more and ſome leſſe, ſome of them being of a more bright
& ſhining colour, drawing neare to the color of molten glaſſe,
and ſome againe more darke, and not ſo tranſparent a colour,
yet may they all moſt iuſtly be reckoned among the number
of thicke white vrines, and that in regard of their tough and
ſlimie ſubſtance, which may eaſily be both felt and ſeene to
be ſuch. This ſort of vrine doth often argue great ſtore of crudities,
and tough phlegmaticke matter, with ſuch diſeaſes as
are engendred of the ſame: but moſt commonly diſeaſes of the
bladder, as namely the Strangurie or the Stone, howſoeuer it
cometh ſometimes otherwiſe to paſſe.
               I was theſe yeares by paſt (ſaith Schenckius) familiarly acquainted
with a certaine Noble man,Another. now dead, whoſe name was Vdalrichus,
                  Iohann. Schenck. ibidem.
and brother to George maſter of the other of the Knights of

Germanie, called Ioannitae, being deſcended of the noble familie of
Hohenheimes, ſurnamed Bombeſt, who without any hinderance to
his health, did oftentimes, yea during the greateſt part of his life
time, voyd a thicke muddie vrine, and ſo tough and ropie, that any
might haue drawne it an ell long, as if it had bene ſome glue or birdlime.
He neuer in his life was troubled with the ſtone, and himſelfe
ſhewed me this vrine, offering the ſame to my triall.
               Another voyded by vrine a certaine matter like vnto molten
pearles being of a ſine bright colour,Another. of whom Hollerins maketh mention,Holler. inter raras obſeruat. num. 2.
the ſame partie againe voyding a matter of thicker ſubſtance
much like vnto the white of an egge boyled.
               
                  The ſame Author maketh mention in another place of another,
                  Another.
                  who voyded by vrine,
                  Idem ſchol. ad cap 30 lib. 1. de morb. intern. not without great paine and torment,
little peeces of phlegme, round like little bullets, cleare like vnto cryſtall,
cleare glaſſe or ſine gellie.
               An ancient Gentleman and acquaintance of mine dwelling in London,Another.
being at leaſt threeſcore and ten yeares of age, at that time 1611.
had for a long time voyded great ſtore of ſuch tough phlegmaticke
matter, moſt like vnto birdlime or gellie, and on the top of the ſame
ſome vrine was to be ſeene of a darke colour, not vnlike to transparent
horne. His paine was exceeding great, prouoking him almoſt euery
minute of an houre to this vntimely excretion of his vrine. The counſels
of the beſt Phyſitians were not wanting, ſome being of opinion it
was a ſtone in the bladder, others iudging otherwiſe. My opinion
being demanded, I told him I was not of their opinion, who held that
there was a ſtone in the bladder, moued hereunto by ſome probable
coniectures. But ſeeing him much macerated and weakened by much
Phyſicke, exhibited both by the learned Phyſitian and by the ignorant
Empiricke alſo, my aduice was, that he ſhould abſtaine from all
manner of laxatiue medicines, except it were now and then ſome
gentle gliſter or lenitiue to procure the benefit of nature. I appointed
him alſo fit and conuenient diet: and all his Phyſicke was nothing ſaue
ſome certaine Emulſions, as alſo ſome Iuleps compoſed of ſome ſyrupes
and diſtilled waters, moſt proper and conuenient for his diſeaſe, and
that not for a weeke or a moneth, but for three or foure moneths together.
After two moneths were paſt he found ſenſible eaſe and alleuiation,
but yet much more the next Spring, this being towards the

beginning of Winter: and hath ſince that time ſcarce euer complained
at all of this ſo tedious and tormenting infirmitie. And this laſt Spring
his ſtrength ſpent, and the oyle in the lampe failing, being full of dayes,
payed that debt which admitteth no baile nor ſuretiſhip. This then
may appeare that the vrine here could giue vs no aſſured knowledge
of the certaintie of the diſeaſe, whether the Stone or
ſtrangurie. And thus the vncertaintie of this colour, as well as
of the reſt, cannot be concealed from the iudicious and vnderſtanding
Reader: whoſe patience I muſt yet intreat to giue eare
to ſome things yet to be ſaid concerning the contents of vrine:
concerning the which, howbeit here and there, and namely in
this laſt colour, ſomething hath bene ſaid, yet was not this my
principall purpoſe and intent; but is as it were thruſt in by head
and ſhoulders. Now ſhall ſomething be ſaid of ſet purpoſe,
whereas I will forbeare to repeate any thing which hath bene
ſaid alreadie.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               Of the circle or garland, ſpume and froth, bubbles, ſmoke or vapor,
and fat in the ouer moſt region of the vrine, and what certaintie
from thence can be collected.
               
                  THeſe contents are moſt cōmonly diſtinguiſhed
according to the three regions of the vrine. The
ouermoſt vrine, as it claimeth the firſt place in
the vrinall, ſo ſhall it haue here the preheminence
aboue the other two. Now as concerning
the circle,Of the circle, ring or garland. Not mentioned by the ancients. ring or garland, it hath bene well obſerued by ſome
of our late writers, that neither Hippocrates not yet Galen euer
made any mention of them, as being in their iudgements a
thing not worth the conſideration.Lib▪ de vrin. cap. 31. de circulo. 
                  Rondeletius maketh Auicenna
and Iſaac Arabian Phyſitians,The originall of it. the firſt founders thereof:
howbeit (ſaith he) ſome do attribute the firſt inuention of it to
the Vniuerſitie of Salerna, either perhaps, becauſe ſince Actuarius
his time they had tried ſome concluſions by the ſame, or

elſe did repoſe, much truſt and confidence in this circle or
crowne.It is twofold. Two ſorts of theſe circles or garlands find we mentioned
by Actuarius, which notwithſtanding few authors that I
haue read do remember. The firſt is that commonly ſo called,
being nothing elſe but a certaine circle or round line in the ouermoſt
part of the vrine, enuironing it round about like a ring; and is
ſo called by reaſon of the roundneſſe of the vrinall, the like
whereof may be likewiſe ſeene in any other liquor. The other
circles or garlands are no ſuch round rings or circles as haue
bene mentioned,Leo Reganus de differ. vrin. lib. 1. cap. vlt. but onely ſome ouermoſt parts of the vrine
which ſwimme in the liquor of the ſame, and for the ſame reaſon,
of the roundneſſe of the vrinall, called crownes or garlands.
Of the former of the two do our Phyſitians moſt commonly
make mention, and many things do many men prognoſticate
by the ſame,Poſteriores eiuſdem (coronae) iuditia ſubiecerunt veteribus non vſitata, & in quibus iuſtae ſaepe cauſae deſiderantur: verum vt ſcenae inſeruiamus eadem iudicia ſubdere placet. which neuertheleſſe ſome of their chiefe ringleaders
and vpholders do in a manner confeſſe to be but a nouelty,
not practiſed by the learned ancient Phyſitians: and yet leſt
they ſhould ſeeme to controll the inueterate and common receiued
cuſtome, they muſt needs ſay ſomething as well as their
neighbours. Hence haue we the proportion betwixt the regions
of the bodie of man, and the regions of the vrine violently
thruſt vpon vs; and as they will haue the other parts of the vrine
anſwerable to the reſt of the parts of the body; ſo muſt the
crowne or garland anſwer proportionably to the head, or ſome
part of it at leaſt.Villich. de probat vrin. part. 4. cap. 39. And not with this content, they aſcribe ſeueral
colours of theſe circles, not to ſeuerall humours onely, but to
ſeuerall parts of the head alſo; ſometimes to the right, ſometimes
to the left: and againe ſometimes to the hinder part, and
ſometimes to the fore pa
                     •
                  t; diuing ſometimes into the verie
ventricles or inward concauities thereof. And yet to diſcerne
theſe circles or garlands aright, a ſharpe and very quicke ſight
is very requiſite. Moreouer, may not thine owne ſight, together
with the qualitie or quantitie of the light, the diuers manners
of ſituation of the vrinall, one or all of theſe, eaſily alter the colour
of this thy circle, making it appeare ſometimes of one,
ſometimes of another colour? Beſides, theſe circles or garlands
are ſuppoſed to be ſeene in ſuch vrines onely as are not of one

colour, and the ouermoſt part thinner then the other. On the ſeuerall
ſignifications of the ſuppoſed ſeuerall colours thereof,
with their proportions to the humours of the head, if I ſhould
particularly inſiſt, and confute them, as ſome might perhaps expect,
I thinke it would prooue but a needleſſe and ſuperfluous
labour, the thing being ſo idle in it ſelfe, and of ſo ſmall account.Loco proxime citato.
The learned Rondeletius, I am ſure, made but ſmall account
of them, and where he mentions them, whatſoeuer he
ſaith is but the relation of the opinions of others, moſt of which
he doth afterwards confute. His manner of ſpeech intimateth
no leſſe vnto vs in theſe words following.
               Wherefore we ſhall pronounce that a red circle (if it ſignifie any
thing at all) doth ſignifie abundance of bloud in the whole head, &c.
Another learned author lately mentioned,
                  Idem Reganus de prouid. ex vrinis lib. 3. cap. 8. 
                  would alſo willingly
haue them baniſhed out of all the Hippocraticall commonwealth,
in theſe words following: But perhaps in vaine do I labour
to roote out this ſo inueterate and inbred opinion (meaning concerning
froth, ſpume and bubbles) out of the minds of our ordinarie
Phyſitians. The like may I ſay concerning the crownes or garlands in
vrines, the opinion whereof hath now almoſt ſo deeply poſſeſſed euery
mans mind. It is moſt certaine that Actuarius himſelfe neuer did
prognoſticate any ſuch thing by this circle or line compaſſing round about
the ouermoſt part of the vrine, hauing onely brought it in, to the
end he might prognoſticate by the bubbles when as they do appeare in
it. And who is ſo blind, that doth not ſee how ridiculous a thing it is
to prognoſticate by a certaine circle or roundring, which may be as
well obſerued in any other round veſſell filled with any liquor,Idem lib. 2. de cauſ. vrin. cap. 9. as in an
vrinall? As concerning that crowne or garland which is the ſuperficies
or ouermoſt part of the vrine, which Actuarius ſeemeth to haue
borrowed from Hippocrates, we haue by the authorities of Galen, alreadie
reiected. Wherefore in my opinion theſe crownes and garlands
ſhall be baniſhed farre from vrines. So farre our author. It is not
alſo vnlikely, that if they had bene of ſuch vſe and neceſſitie, but
Hirpocrates or Galen would haue mentioned them; together
with their ſeuerall vſes in Phyſicke, they both being ſo curious
in ſearching out the ſeuerall ſignifications of this ſigne. If any
will yet obiect, that our moderne Phyſitians haue added many

things to former inuentions; I could reply, it is true indeed, and
might well come to paſſe in ſuch things as neuer did preſent
themſelues to their ſenſes, or elſe in ſuch things whereof they
had no experimentall knowledge: but I ſuppoſe they were as
eagle eyed in Aſia and other parts, and could ſee as farre into a
milſtone as any of our late Europaean Phyſitians. And this ſhall
now ſuffice concerning circles or garlands, we now proceed to
the reſt.
               
               
                  Bubbles,
                  Of bubbles, ſpume or froth. 
                  ſpume, or froth, are all accounted to proceed from one
and the ſame cauſe, differing in ſome circumſtances onely. Now
if we ſhall narrowly obſerue and marke what can be ſaid of
them, we ſhall find no leſſe vncertaintie in the predictions by
them,Idem lib. 2. de cauſ. vrin. cap. 9. then in the former. Actuarius (ſaith our aboue named author)
maketh mention of many things concerning this matter
which neither Galen nor Hippocrates haue obſerued, and that in
my opinion (ſaith he) becauſe they were not worth the obſeruing.
And againe a little after: Such things as Actuarius hath ſet
downe concerning the ſpumes and bubbles, are nothing to be regarded.
For who ſeeth not, that as well the ſpume as the bubbles ſtay longer in
the crowne or garland of the vrine, and in the middle part of the ſuperficies
or ouermoſt part they are ſooner diſſolued. For the caſe is not
here alike as in the garland, where the ſolid body of the vrinall is an
occaſion that they ſticke longer and more firmely to the ſame. And
this not in vrine onely, but in any other liquor in like manner may
eaſily be obſerued, to wit, that ſuch froth and bubbles do longer perſiſt
in the circle ioyning to the veſſell then in the rest of the ouermoſt
part of the ſame, &c. This foundation then being rotten, the
reſt of the building muſt needs fall to the ground. They tell vs
in the firſt place that bubbles which ſtand round about ouer the
garland onely, and continue without parting, if they be of the
ſame colour the vrine is of, they declare that there is great paine
in all the parts of the head. But if they occupie onely the one
halfe of the garland, then is that paine in one halfe of the head.
But I aſſure thee, ſuch bubbles may be ſeene, and thou not able
to diſcerne whether the wind be in the head or taile. And beſides
thou mayeſt ſometimes finde a good fellow who could
quickly fill a baggepipe with his bum, and yet in his vrine ſee

neither bubble nor any other ſuch babble.See before in the beginning. But concerning the
vncertaintie of theſe things, ſomething hath bene ſaid alreadie
in another place, whereas mention was made of the regions of
the vrine anſwering to the parts of mans body, which was proued
moſt falſe. It is granted, that ſometimes theſe bubbles do
not appeare at the firſt in the beginning of the diſeaſe, howbeit
after a while they begin to ſhew themſelues: and then is it an
argument that nature waxeth ſtrong to concoct and ouercome
the bad humours. In feauers therefore ſuch do ſignifie the declining
or decaying of the ſame. But if they haue bene from the
beginning ſtill ſo continuing, then is the danger greater, howbeit
better with a thicke then with a thinne vrine. Now put the
caſe that in an vrine brought to thee from afarre thou mighteſt
diſcerne ſome ſuch bubble or froth, yet how ſhalt thou be able
to diſcerne whether any were in the vrine at the beginning of
the diſeaſe, or no? The meſſenger for the moſt part can tell
thee no more then the ground he goeth on: and it may be, that
neither the patient nor any about him are able to obſerue ſuch
nice curioſities, as often not obſeruing matters of greater moment.
But put yet the caſe thou couldſt diſcerne ſome headach
by the aforeſaid contents, how ſhalt thou euer be able to diſcerne
whether 
                     〈◊〉
                   come, as we ſay, per ſympathiam, by conſent
from the neather parts (which is moſt common) or per idiopathiam:
that is, be primarily ſeated in the head? And if thou
knoweſt not this, thy knowledge is to ſmall purpoſe, the cure
differing according to the ſeuerall cauſes. Of this the patient
will giue thee better ſatisfaction then a thouſand vrines. If bubbles
do appeare in the vrine (ſaith Reuſner) together with the ſignes
of defluxion or diſtillation of humours,
                  Schol. in cap. 30. part. 4. Iodo
                        ••
                      Willich. de probat vrinar. 
                  eſpecially if a feauer be therewith
conioyned, they do portenda Pleureſie, as alſo the Gout: and
great ſtore of ſpume or froth appearing in the vrine without the ſhaking
of it, beſides wind in generall, it doth preſage that the wind collicke
threatneth ſuch a partie. The ſame Reuſner affirmeth, that
Rhaſes writeth, that round bubbles do prognoſticate bleeding at the
noſe; and that ſuch as be of a colour yellow like ſaffron with a little
whiteneſſe, do portend ſome infirmitie of the Lungs. But I beleeue he
were a cunning Phyſitian, that could tell or name the diſeaſe by

the vrine onely.Comment. 3▪ libr
                        •
                      prorrh. Againe theſe frothie vrines according to Galen,
do ſignifie a certaine melting or waſting away of the bodie, or
an vnequall perturbation of the ſame by reaſon of ſome windineſſe:
the firſt of theſe being dangerous, but not ſo the other,
but rather prognoſticating the long continuance of the diſeaſe.
Such frothie vrines with ſome bubbles are to be ſeene in feuers
proceeding from the abundance of crude or raw humours. And
not ſo onely, but in the infirmities of the kidneyes alſo; Hippocrates
in his Aphoriſmes affirming,Aph. 34. ſect. 7. that ſuch vrines do both ſignifie
infirmities of the kidneyes, and the long continuance of
the diſeaſe.Sauonarola de vrin. cap. 3. rubr. 17. But from the froth we come to the ſmoke or vapor
in the vrine, of the which an Italian Phyſitian maketh mention;
as is forced to be beholden to the Arabians for the ſame.
               
                  Smoke or vapor (ſaith he) is ſometimes to be ſeene in the vrine,
                  Of ſmoke or vapour in the vrine.
                  and cannot be by euery one conceiued. It is engendred, ſometimes of a
thicke aduſt matter; and then with the continuance of ſtrength ſignifieth
the long continuance of the diſeaſe: ſometimes of an hote aduſt
matter, and with the decaying of ſtrength prognoſticateth death:
ſometimes alſo of raw phlegme ſomewhat aduſt, and ſignifieth the
prolonging of the diſeaſe. And if it continue all the time of the diſeaſe,
it portendeth death, or raw phlegme; which may be diſcerned from
matter by the ſtinking ſmell. But becauſe our ſight is not ſo ſharpe
in this Iland, we will leaue theſe ſmokie vrines to the ſharpe
ſighted Italians and Arabians. But if any ſuch ſmokie ſtuffe be
found in any Engliſh vrines, it muſt needs be beſt obſerued in
our cōmon Tobacconiſts, whoſe vrines it is a maruell that they
are not wholly conuerted into ſmoke. But of this frothie and
ſmokie ſtuffe ſufficient, this being likewiſe ſo idle an opinion,
that of its owne accord it vaniſheth away into ſmoke: howbeit
I thought good to acquaint the Reader with all the hid myſterie
of the impoſture, and abuſes concerning vrines. But now
ſomething concerning the fat ſwimming on the top of vrines.
               Such vrines haue this fat ſwimming on the top,Of fat ſwimming on the top of vrines. ſometimes
in a greater, and ſometimes in a ſmaller quantitie: and ſometimes
againe like oyle, and ſometimes alſo couering all the ouermoſt
part of the vrine, like a ſpiders web. Theſe fat vrines
alſo ſignifie ſometimes a waſting of the whole bodie, if there be

a feauer ioyned with the ſame; or of the kidneyes onely, if without
it.Gal. Comm. 3. in lib. 3. epid. This feauer is ſometimes very ſpeedy and ſwift in operation,
waſting ſuddenly not the fat onely, but the ſolid ſubſtance
of the body alſo; called therefore by our Phyſitians, Febris colliquans;
and ſuch are often Peſtilentiall feauers. It is againe ſometimes
an Hecticke, which endeth in a Maraſme, vnleſſe it be firſt
preuented. But how ſhall one be able by the bare ſight of the
vrine onely, to diſcerne all theſe ſeuerall circumſtances and differences?De prouid. ex vrinis lib. 3. cap. 6.
But this is yet worth the obſeruing (ſaith Roganus)
that when as theſe waſting or conſuming feauers haue welnigh
waſted away the whole bodie, then are no more ſuch waſting
excretions, which he calleth ſyntectica excrementa, either
fat vrines or faecall excrements to be ſeene. For the fleſhie parts
being hardned and dried vp, that which melteth and waſteth away
falleth now no more into the guts or the paſſages of
the vrine,Lib. 1. meth. med. cap. vlt. but paſſeth away like a vapour. This Galen ſetteth
downe by a very prettie and pertinent compariſon, taken from
fleſh broyled on a gridiron. Now if any one ſhould conceiue
ſome better hope by reaſon that this fat matter did no more appeare,
ſhould he not miſſe the marke, the caſe being now farre
more dangerous then before?Guil. Adolph. Scrib. de inſpect. vrinar. prope finem. The words of Scribonius make
not a little to cleare this point in hand. By theſe fat vrines (ſaith
he) ſome do teach vs that we may eaſily diſcerne and know all the
kinds of a feauer Hecticke, by reaſon it ſignifieth a waſting and melting
of the parts of the bodie.
                  3. de praeſagit. ex pulſ. 
                  But whatſoeuer reaſon we render of the
ſame, Galen notwithſtanding in expreſſe words affirmeth; that the vrine
of ſuch as are ſurpriſed with a feauer Hecticke hath no certaine
ſignification. Experience alſo doth teach vs, that ſome being of a cholericke
constitution of body, as alſo ſuch as haue eaten fat meates, or
haue fat kidneyes, vſe often to make fat vrines. What reaſon is there
then to pronounce either a feauer Hecticke, or yet any waſting or conſumption
thereby? This is not erronious onely, but full oftemeritie alſo.
The truth of this aſſertion may alſo in this more plainly appeare,
that many haue dyed of ſuch conſumption and waſting, who neuer, notwithſtanding
had any fat ſwimme on their vrines. Sometimes it hath
bene alſo obſerued, that the veſſell wherein the vrine hath bene carryed
to the Phyſitian, hath before contained either oyle or ſome other

fat matter, which hath by this meanes bene communicated to the vrine.
It is therefore the Phyſitians part diligently to enquire concerning
all the circumſtances of the diſeaſe, and not by the inspection of
the vrine onely peremptorily to pronounce any thing. Thus farre our
author. Many of my friends and patients haue voyded vrines
with this fat like a ſpiders web floting on the top for diuerſe
yeares together, and yet were neuer ſubiect to any conſumption
or waſting, either in the whole bodie or their kidneyes.
And how eaſily one may be deceiued in theſe fat vrines, may by
this which followeth appeare.
               It is not yet full three yeares ſince I had vnder my cure in Northampton
towne a countrey woman diſeaſed of that infirmitie which we
call Lienteria,
                  Hiſtorie. 
                  or the fluxe of the ſtomacke, whom one day viſiting,
and viewing her vrine, I perceiued ſome fat like vnto ſome drops of
oyle ſwimme on the top of it, which was againe the next day after to
be ſeene after the ſame manner:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   ſhe then ſeeing me narrowly view the
ſame, told me that the vrine was vnaduiſedly made both the dayes in
a veſſell wherein ſome oyle had before bene contained. What then if
ſuch an vrine had bene brought out of the countrey, either to
my ſelfe, or yet to any other Phyſitian, without any further information?
But we proceed now to the reſt.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               Of the cloud, ſwimme or ſublimation, together with diuerſe ſorts
of grounds or reſidences, and the vncertaintie of
their ſignifications.
               
                  IN the firſt place we are to obſerue,All vrines are not accompanied with contents. that all vrines
are not accompanied with contents, but many
depriued of them; which may proceed from diuerſe
cauſes. As namely, in caſe of cruditie, and
the concoction being good, yet may ſome obſtruction
hinder any contents to paſſe.And may proceed from diuers cauſes. The like may be by faſting
procured, and want of food, which may alſo make the
vrine of an higher colour. The inflammation of any part of the

bodie, by drawing of the humours thither, may produce the
like effect. In lasks alſo or fluxes of the bellie, as the vrine ſhall
be the leſſer, ſo ſhall the contents be few or none at all. Some
certaine conſtitutions alſo gather no ſetlings in their vrines:
and ſuch as are in preſent health, and eate much, haue a more
copious reſidence, and in Winter it doth more abound then in
Sommer. Laborious and very painfull people may alſo haue little
or no contents at all in their vrines. The time of the ſickneſſe
in which this cometh to paſſe, is alſo narrowly to be obſerued:
for in the beginning and increaſe of acute diſeaſes, then this
want of contents argueth great defect of naturall ſtrength and
vigour. In the declining of the diſeaſe it is not a meſſenger of
ſo bad newes, yea although it were in the vigour and ſtrength
of it. And moreouer that many diſeaſes are brought to a happie
and expected iſſue without any contents at all, is no vncouth
thing. What certaintie then can be collected, either by the preſence
or yet by the abſence of the contents? Now howbeit
heretofore ſome contents on the top of the vrine haue bene
mentioned, yet are theſe laſt mentioned, moſt commonly and
conſtantly to be ſeene ordinarily in vrines; and therefore are
more properly called contents, and ſo to be vnderſtood by that
name. Now all theſe three, cloud, ſwimme, and grounds, haue
one and the ſame materiall cauſe, and their generation is alſo
alike, differing onely in place and ſituation, according to the
weight of the matter and the concoction of the diſeaſe. When
the diſeaſe is yet crude and not concocted, yet in ſome forwardneſſe
thereunto, then appeareth that which is commonly
called a cloud,The cloud. for the proportion and analogie it ſeemeth to
haue with the clouds of the aire. When the diſeaſe is yet in a
better forwardneſſe, then is to be ſeene in the vrine, that which
is commonly called the ſwim or ſublimation,The ſwimme. hanging as it
were betwixt the ouermoſt and neathermoſt region of the vrine.
But when nature hath now gotten the vpper hand of the
diſeaſe,The ground. then doth this which we call ground, ſettle to the bottome
of the vrinall. My purpoſe is not here to enter into a large
diſcourſe concerning the engendring of this ſubſtance, and
farre leſſe yet the controuerſies about the ſame, which I leaue

to be diſcuſſed in the ſchooles, my intent here being onely to
diſcouer the vncertaintie of iudgement which theſe contents
do affoord vs. Now when thou ſeeſt the cloud, ſwim, or reſidence,
what canſt thou pronounce but ſome generall and indefinite
verdict concerning the cruditie or concoction of the diſeaſe?
but what this thy diſeaſe is, thy vrine will neuer reueale
vnto thee, nor any of the reſt of the ſignes and circumſtances
to be obſerued in diſeaſes. And howſoeuer the materiall cauſe
of all theſe three be one and the ſame, differing onely in circumſtances,
yet may ſometimes the one be without the other.
Wherſoeuer there is a ſwim (ſaith Scribonius) there is alſo a ground
or reſidence,
                  Lo
                        •
                     o proxime citato. 
                  which may alſo be vnderſtood of a cloud: howbeit the
ground may be without the former: to wit, if it do not containe ſuch
a flatuous matter as raiſeth the ſame vp, according to the teſtimonie
of Galen. Moreouer, the beſt and moſt healthfull vrine is accounted
ſuch as hath no ſuch cloud nor ſwim in it, as witneſſeth the ſame
Galen.2. Prorrh. 1. & 2. in 6. epid. 37. 
                  And moreouer, if they be preſent, the iudgement by them is
yet vncertaine. For who can tell whether this cometh to paſſe by way
of criſis or otherwiſe, vnleſſe he weigh in the ballance diuers other
circumſtances, according to the which criticall dayes are accuſtomed
to be tried.
                  Seuerall times to be aſſigned for the ſetling of vrine. 
                  And beſides the premiſſes, all vrines do not ſuddenly ſettle,
and they aſſigne vs ſeuerall times for the vrine to ſettle in: ſome
aſſigne vs halfe an houre, ſome the ſixt part of an houre, &c. But better
it were when they are ſetled, then to giue out our iudgement of
them. For I haue often let vrines ſtand by me, and could ſee no ſetling
till the next day. Now what couldeſt thou haue iudged of ſuch
an vrine the firſt day, eſpecially if the meſſenger, according to the common
cuſtome, had hyed him home? What couldeſt thou haue ſaid concerning
the ſame? And yet is this a caſe which cometh not ſeldome
to paſſe. Moreouer, theſe contents do ſometimes ſuddenly vaniſh
away, and that after an houre or two after the voyding of the vrine.
I
                        •
                      may then plainly,
                  Et ex his pr
                        •
                     inde vniuerſis optime facillime
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      intel
                     
                        •
                     igi p
                        •
                     ſſe opin
                        •
                     r, 
                        •
                     uantu
                        •
                      fucus, 
                        ••
                     anta deceptio, 
                        •
                     uanta denique malignitas, ſit omnium illorum qui abſque alijs coiudicantibus vllis nude & ſimpliciter ex allata ſibi vrina aliquas corporis male affecti cauſas & originem, ſubiecta, adiuncta & ſic deinceps, vel exploratiſſime ſe cognoſcere poſſe autumant. Idem. S
                        •
                     ribon. ibid. 
                  by the premiſſes, appeare (ſaith the ſame Author)
what counterfetting iuggling and deceit they vſe, and how
wicked their practiſe is, who without any other coiudicant ſignes, do
by the vrines onely, giue out ſentence concerning the infirmities of
the bodie of man, their cauſes and beginning, their ſubiects adiuncts,
&c. Now ſomething concerning the ſeuerall ſorts of grounds

or contents in the vrine, muſt likewiſe be ſaid, that the errours
and impoſtures in this point, as well as in other parts of the
vrine, may be layd open to the capacitie of the moſt ignorant.
               As in the colours, therefore ſo in the contents, we will begin
with the beſt of all others. That then is 
                     •••
                  unted the beſt
ſediment, ſetling, or ground, which is white, duly knit and ſtable,
and that continually all the time of the ſickneſſe: and that
which declineth from the foreſaid laudable conditions, is accounted
worſe, and that ſo much the more as it doth decline
from them. It is generally agreed vpon among Phyſitians, that
great ſtore of yellow grounds argueth great ſtore of yellow
choler in the bodie; and the lighter coloured it be, it argueth
the leſſe, the higher coloured the greater exceſſe. Now beſides
that thou canſt not tell what particular diſeaſe proceeding
from choler (there being diuers) it may ſignifie,Of yellow contents or grounds as whether an
Ague, or ſome other diſeaſe: and againe, if an Ague, of what
ſort or kind, continuall or intermittent: ſo much leſſe art thou
able to tell the time of it, which notwithſtanding maketh not
a little to informe thy iudgement concerning the vrine. For if
at the firſt there be either ſmall quantitie of choler, or yet none
at all, and then it after increaſe abundantly, which is knowne
by changing from a white thin to a ſaffron coloured ground)
it is a ſigne and token that nature doth vnburden it ſelfe of this
heauie ballaſt of choler, and ſo conſequently that health is like
ſhortly to enſue. But if after a ſaffron colour it change to a
white, it is a bad ſigne, eſpecially without ſignes of concoction:
for the which cauſe it will be requiſite that thou obſerue the ſeuerall
alterations of the vrine, and then be well acquainted with
the ſtate and nature of the diſeaſe of the patient. The like may
be ſaid of red reſidence,Red reſidence. the which in the beginning of diſeaſes
doth not portend any good, and that by reaſon it argueth great
ſtore of cruditie, which hindereth the concoction of the bloud;
and ſuch are commonly ſeene in baſtard Tertian & Quotidian
Agues. But yet ſuch Feuers as are incident to Plethoricall and
Carechymicall conſtitutions, oppreſſed with abundance of
bloud and bad humors, if they attaine to their expected iſſue,
muſt needs be accompanied with ſuch or the like reſidence.

The bare inſpection of the vrine onely will neuer acquaint thee
with the particular. Sometimes both the afore-mentioned
contents are to be ſeene in one and the ſame vrine, which is
ſometimes deadly, and ſometimes againe proueth a fore-runner
of ſafetie and 
                     •••
                  uritie: I will inſtance in two examples of
mine owne experience, to make the truth of this appeare.
               About ſome three yeares ago,Hiſtorie. or a little aboue, a young Gentleman
in the countrey, to mine owne knowledge, voyded ſuch an vrine
for a quarter of a yeare together, and by appearance had ſo continued
long before my ſight of the ſame: and yet notwithſtanding all the euacuations
were vſed, it continued ſo more or leſſe vntill his dying day.
His diſeaſe was a Dropſie, and with the ſame was ioyned the yellow
Iaundiſe, which did outwardly ſhew it ſelfe to the view of the eye.
His Liuer hote, and the whole conſtitution of his bodie participating
of the ſame diſtemper.
               But in the yeare 1613.Another. a woman of Northampton of good account,
being with child, voyded an vrine with the like reſidence, and
that for as long a time at leaſt, and yet did their diſeaſes farre differ.
For beſides her being with a liue child (for vntill that time was not
my counſell craued) ſhe was for a many weekes together neuer free
from a Tertian, Quotidian, or both agues conioyned: the which were
accompanied with a continuall cough, proceeding from a thinne ſalt
rheume, with ſpitting of bloud, reaching and caſting, as alſo a great
laske, all which accidents, or the moſt of them, did not forſake her till
neare the time of her deliuerie. Phlebotomie for diuerſe conſiderations
I durſt not then attempt. Other euacuations, both vpwards and
downewards, came in greater abundance then was wiſhed. It was now
deepely imprinted, not in her owne onely, but in the conceits of her
neighbours and others alſo of good vnderſtanding, that (in regard of
her ſpitting of bloud) ſhe was now farre ſpent in an irrecouerable conſumption.
Vpon the relation of others I inclined to the ſame opinion.
But at my firſt ſight of her, together with the ſight of the bloud ſhe
ſpat vp I changed my opinion. And ſo, God adding his bleſſing to the
meanes ſhe vſed by my directions, ſhe brought foorth at the time appointed,
a liue manchild, which neuertheleſſe liued not aboue the ſpace
of a moneth. The mother two or three dayes after her deliuerie was
ſurpriſed with the Meaſels, and afterwards recouered her health againe,

the which at this preſent day ſhe yet enioyeth.
               Here was no Dropſie at all, nor yet could I euer perceiue any
ſigne of a hote Liuer, and the matter of the Iaundiſe was voyded
both by ſtoole and vrine. It may then plainly appeare, how
farre the diſeaſes may ſometimes differ, the reſidence being ſtill
alike in two ſeuerall bodies, ſexes▪ &c.
               As concerning bloudy reſidence,Bloudie reſidence, and the ſeuerall cauſes of the ſame. as was before ſaid of
bloudy vrine, it may come either of abundance of bloud in
a plethoricall body, or elſe by weakneſſe of the retentiue
power, and of the Liuer; the which rightly to diſcerne, wee
muſt be acquainted with diuers other circumſtances, which the
vrine can neuer make knowen. It hath beene likewiſe already
related, that ſometimes great quantitie of bloud it ſelfe hath
beene voyded without any danger: and ſometimes againe after
the voyding of a very ſmall quantitie thereof, death hath
not long deferred his approaches.
               In the yeere 1614.Hiſtorie. about the beginning of Ianuary, my counſell
was demanded for a Gentleman dwelling neare Northampton, about
fiftie yeares of age or vpwards. In his vrine at my firſt comming
at him, was to be ſeene great ſtore of yellowiſh contents, cleauing
to the bottome of the vrinall, wherewith were intermingled
ſome red ſtreakes of bloud. And howbeit I often earnestly intreated
him to admit of Phlebotomie, as the onely remedy to preuent a
greater inconuenience, yet could I not preuaile, vntill ſuch time as
bloud now iſſuing out in great abundance, both vpwards and downewards,
his ſtrength now decaying, and hairy irrecouerable occaſion
ouer paſt, with a too late repentance, he would willingly haue paied
a good fine for the renewing of the leaſe of his life, but all too late.
               As concerning white,See ſomewhat in the colours heretofore. blacke, leaden, or aſh-coloured; as
alſo greene and blew contents, the vncertaintie of theſe may
be in ſome ſort collected from that we haue already ſaid of ſuch
vrines, and many other matters I willingly paſſe by, and haſten
to the reſt: to wit, diuers other ſorts of reſidences or ſtrange
contents, called by ſome, difforme contents.
               Purulent or mattery reſidence,Purulent or matterie reſidence. doth much reſemble a white
reſidence or ground, which is ſo much commended for the
beſt of all others; and therefore requireth ſome iudgement to

diſcerne the one from the other: and yet is there a crude and
vnconcocted reſidence not vnlike this purulent matter to bee
ſeene, as well in whole as in ſicke bodies. This purulent or
mattery reſidence, againe proceedeth either from the kidneyes
or the bladder, as is moſt commonly receiued. But heare what
the learned Hollerius ſaith concerning the ſame.Schol. ad cap. 50. lib. 1. de morb. intern.
               
               Neither yet doth this mattery ſtuffe alwaies proceed from the
kidneys or bladder. For it proceedeth almoſt from euery part of the
vpper region of the body, by the great and admirable industry of
nature, and by meanes of the body euery where made paſſable for ſuch
a purpoſe, doth disburden it ſelfe ſometimes into the guts, and ſometimes
againe into the bladder.Hiſtorie. A certaine woman voyded, not without
great paine and torment, ſuch purulent and mattery vrines,
who foure moneths after dyed, and the dead corps being opened, two
ſtones were found in her heart, with many little impoſtumes, the
kidneyes, together with the other vrinary paſſages, being free from
any other hurt.
               
                  Galen (ſaith Ro
                        •
                     deletius) did ſee an impoſtume of the Lungs
purged by vrine,Lib. de vrin. cap. 38. by meanes of the emulgent or ſucking arteries.
The gibbons or backe part of the Liuer, the kidneyes,
bladder and yard, make vſe of the ſame paſſage. Now which
of theſe places are affected, the griefe and tumor of the part
giueth vs notice, and not the vrine onely.
               Now red Vetches or Fitches in the reſidence,Red vetches or fitches. called therefore
Hypoſtaſis orobea, or eruarea, are recorded by our Authors,
to ſignifie either great inflammation of the Liuer, or colliquation
of the whole body, or of the kidneyes onely. And ſo
branny contents,Brannie and ſealie contents. ſignifie ſometimes conſumption of the whole
body, or of the bladder onely with concoction, no Ague; and
great heat waſting the ſubſtance of the Liuer, and burning the
bloud if it be red. So do fine branny contents ſignifie a collequation
or waſting of the ſolid parts: ſharpe ſickneſſe, and
for the moſt part mortall, and ſome adde yet that it is ſometimes
ſeene in the vrines of women with child. And if this
reſidence be red, they attribute it to extreame aduſtion of the
bloud.Scales. Scales, called Lamine, Squame, differ not much in ſignification.
               
                  
To Haires or ſmall filaments in the vrine,Haires in the vrine. are attributed alſo
diuers ſignifications: as namely, a conſumption of the whole
body, a Feuer then being ioyned therewith, or elſe of the kidneyes
onely,Comm. 1. ad aph. 76. ſect. 4. and then is no Feuer to be ſeene. They are according
to Galen, engendered of a tough Phlegme, proceeding
from the vſe of groſſe diet. Sometimes alſo they are ſaid to
ſignifie exulceration of the reines or bladder: and ſometimes
alſo fluxe of ſeed from ſeuerall cauſes. And finally, womens
white fluxe, from the matrixe or wombe. Galen is of opinion,
that ſuch contents come neuer without a thicke vrine. But experience
hath taught vs the contrary,Loco proxime ſupra citato. ſaith Hollerius.
               
               A certaine man voyded ſuch hairy excrements, with a golden
coloured vrine,Hiſtorie. aboue the ſpace of twenty yeares, it not being thicke,
but keeping a meane: and howbeit his conſtitution and ſtate of body
inclined to choler, yet was he of a reaſonable ſquare and corpulent
body. The like commeth alſo to paſſe in many others, howbeit to others
a thicke vrine is more frequent.
               If the Reader pleaſe,Schenck obſeruat. medic. lib. 3. tit. de vrina. he may yet reade a ſtrange Story in
Schenckius of a great quantitie of true and naturall haire, voyded
by a woman with her vrine for a long time, the which the
Author tried, by burning a parcell of it in the fire.
               Sand or grauell in the vrine affoordeth vs yet no greater certaintie.Sandie or grauelly reſidence. Aph. 79. ſect. 4.
                  
It is recorded by that famous Hippocrates, that in whatſoeuer
vrine a grauelly matter ſetleth to the bottome, it betokeneth a
ſtone either in the kidneys, or in the bladder. It is likely he had moſt
commonly obſerued it ſo in the place where he liued: but we
find often the contrary in our climate. I haue my ſelfe often obſerued,
both in old age and younger yeeres, ſuch grauelly
vrines without any ſtone. The wideneſſe of the vrinary paſſages,
as alſo diureticall expelling medicines, may be a meanes
of expelling ſuch contents. And this diſeaſe may ſometimes be
accompanied with a thinne vrine without any grauell at all,
as in the obſtruction of the aforeſaid paſſages. The Phyſitian
being preſent, is often encombred, notwithſtanding the concurrence
of all the ſignes together, to diſcerne a ſtone from
ſome other diſeaſe, as hath heretofore appeared: what certaintie
then can be expected from the ſole deceitfull ſigne of
the vrine?
               
                  
The Admirall Annebault (ſaith Hollerius) being much tormented
in making his vrine for the ſpace of eight moneths together,Hiſtorie. Ibidem.
                   both
P
                     •
                  yſitians and Surgeons being in doubt whether there were a ſtone
in the bladder or no, at length it was concluded to make inciſion for
the ſtone. No ſtone notwithſtanding was found, but a lumpe of fleſh
growne to the necke of the bladder, hindering the free paſſage of the
vrine, which was cured by conuenient remedies, and the patient reſtored
to his former health againe.
               Some alſo are of opinion,Fleſher. it ſignifieth aduſtion of humours,
as in diſeaſes coming of choler, ſuch as be burning Agues, Tertian
Agues, ſingle and compound, and ſometimes in diſeaſes
of melancholie, as Quartaine agues long continuing. Likewiſe
the Gout, paine of the ioynts and reines, Leproſie, French poxe
confirmed, Emeraudes, coſtiueneſſe, and heate of the Liuer: if
there be no paine nor heauineſſe about the reines.
               
                  But beſides all the former contents,
                  Worms reiected by vrine. 
                  wormes haue ſometimes
bene voyded by the vrine, the which becauſe it may ſeeme ſome
thing ſtrange, therefore I will walke with my guides. Rondeletius
maketh it plaine.
                  Rondel. de vrinis, cap. 38. Gilbert Griphon firſt of all ſhewed me worms
in the vrine when I was but yet young, who was alſo the chiefe inciter
of me to this profeſſion. T
                     •
                  e wormes might be ſeene to mooue without
any motion of the vrine.
                     Montuus. Idem Rondel. lib. de morb. cognoſ. cap. 17. 
                  Againe. I haue ſeene wormes in the vrine as
large as Gourd ſeedes, flat and aliue. Argenterius hath ſeene the
forme of a winged Dragon come foorth with the vrine. The hiſtorie
alſo annexed to the foreſaid Rondeletius his Tractate of vrines,
                  Hiſtoria Didymi Obrechti ad finem libri Rondel. de vrinis adiecta.
                  of foure wormes voyded by vrine at two ſeuerall times,
do plainly witneſſe the ſame. His countreyman Hollerius maketh
alſo mention of one Beaucler a Counſeller, who after great paine in
the kidneys, voyded a great worme.Loco iam ſupra citato. And of another, who after the
voyding of ſome ſtones and grauelly matter, voyded two euill fauoured
wormes.
               
                  The ſame Author againe.
                  Ibidem. One demanded counſell of a Spaniard
by letters, and helpe for one that was troubled with grauell, who hauing
voyded ſome ſtones and much ſand, did alſo put foorth at his
yard two little wormes, hauing pointed beckes, two hornes vpon the
head like a ſnaile, the backe and bellie was as it were couered with
ſcales, blacke like a Tortoiſe, but vnder the bellie which was red.
               
                  
I haue wondered to ſee (ſaith another Author) in mine owne vrine
a great number of wormes,Hieron. Cardan. comm. in aph. 76 lib. 4. ſhort and little, like vnto ſmall lice.
Monſieur Duret a Phyiſitian hath aſſured me (ſaith Ambroſe
Pare) that he did voyd at his yard, after a long and grieuous ſickneſſe,Ambroſ. Par. Chirurg. lib. 19. cap. 3.
a little beast aliue, very ſtrange and wonderfull to behold, which was
of a reddiſh colour. Charles Earle of Mansfield being very ſicke of
a continuall Feauer, caſt foorth at his yard a worme of the very forme
of a blacke Pye.
               
                  Leuinus Lemnius reporteth that he hath ſeene in the vrines of
diuerſe that haue bene ſicke of the French poxe,De occult. nat. mirac. lib. 2. cap. 40. wormes like vnto
Antes.
               One being troubled with difficultie of making water (ſaith Schencleius)
voyded by his yard a little liue Scorpion.Obſeruat. medicin. l. 3. ſect. 312.
               
               
                  And as another author affirmeth,
                  Alexand. Bened. anat. lib. 2. c. 22. in the bladder of ſome perſons
wormes do breed, and little beaſts like to Cockles of the ſea.
               But now would I willingly demand of the cunningeſt piſſeprophet
in the countrey, what would or could he preſage by
ſuch a wormie vrine? Putrefaction thou wilt ſay, it may be. But
of what part, I pray thee? whether in the bloud or the bladder,
the ſtomacke or maw, or in the guts? I haue often adminiſtred
meanes both to yong and old againſt this diſeaſe, euen againſt
all the ſorts of wormes commonly recorded by our Phyſitians,
yet could I neuer perceiue any in ſuch perſons vrines. And in
how many young childrens vrines haue they found any ſuch
creatures? But what if ſuch creatures were conueyed from the
ſtomacke through the meſaraicke veines into the great porter
veine, and from thence into the great hollow veine, and ſo from
thence diſtributed into the reſt of the bloud, or elſe by the kidneyes
into the bladder?Iohann▪ Renodaeus de mat. med. lib. 3 cap. 33 & antidot. lib. 1. ſect. 1. cap. 20. circa finem. If thou wilt denie this long and tedious
iourney, I will againe demand of thee, how come wormes into
the bloud, as may appeare by this which followeth.
               
                  In a certaine citizen at Paris, the baſilica or Liuer veine being opened,
in mine owne ſight and preſence came forth a worme about a
ſpanne long.
                  Motes in the vrine, together with their ſeuerall ſignifications. Thus then thou ſeeſt what certaintie may be collected
by the ſight of wormes in the vrine. There are yet ſometimes
motes to be ſeene in the vrine, which according to our
writers ſignifie diuerſe things: as namely, putrefaction, as in the

                  Plague and French poxe, being accompanied with ſtinch. Againe
great agitation and commotion of the humours, as in the ſmall
poxe and meaſels. They are ſaid likewiſe to ſignifie rhewme, the
gout, diſeaſes of the mother, and finally conception. Let the vnpartiall
Reader iudge what aſſurance one can learne from ſuch
an vrine, concerning the particular circumſtances of the diſeaſe.
               But we muſt not yet omit the very duſt,Of duſt in the vrine. which they will haue
to ſignifie diuerſe and ſundrie matters; and that according to
the ſeuerall colours of the ſame, vpon the which I will not long
dwell, but yet ſay ſomething of the blacke, which may ſeeme
to threaten greateſt danger. Such duſt falling to the bottome,
either blacke or of a leaden colour, proceeding of melancholie,
is thought to ſignifie fluxe of the Emeraudes, preſent, or ſhortly
to follow: and ſometimes vomiting of bloud. As alſo ſometimes
paine in the reines, loynes, &c. and ſtopping of the Flowers,
and at other times paine and diſeaſes of the Spleene, &c.
               In the beginning of the yeare 1623. my counſell and perſonall preſence
was craued for a Ladie in Northampton-ſhire of good account.Hiſtorie.
In the bottome of the vrinall wherein her vrine was put, for certaine
dayes together, ſome ſuch blacke duſt might be ſeene; which a graue
Diuine there preſent thought to be ſo dangerous, that he told me he
had ſeldome ſeene them liue many dayes after the ſight of ſuch cōtents
in their vrines. And howbeit ſome ſtrange and troubleſome accidents
did terrifie the ſpectators who beheld her with vulgar eyes, yet did her
pulſe put me in better hope, which was ſhortly ſeconded by a happie
and prosperous iſſue, the Ladie recouering her former health againe.
Neither heard I any complaint of ſuch things as theſe contents are
ſaid to ſignifie.
               But hauing now finiſhed both colours and contents, with
other things belonging to this ſubiect, it is perhaps now exſpected
I ſhould ſay ſomething of the manner of piſſing, as
concerning not a little the matter in hand.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX.
               Of the manner of piſſing: the retention or ſtoppage of vrine,
totall or in part, as alſo of inuoluntarie piſſing, both
in ſickneſſe and in health.
               
                  THe manner of piſſing, is either hard and vneaſie,
or elſe inuoluntarie. As for the firſt, the action is
intereſſed three manner of wayes, as witneſſeth
Hollerius and others. Firſt, there is a great deſire
to piſſe, but cannot be effected without force
and hard ſtraining, & ſometimes not without paine. Secondly,
there is the like deſire, but the vrine paſſeth away but by drops.
Thirdly, there is a ſtoppage or obſtruction of the vrine, that it
is not voyded at all, or elſe ſo little that it is to ſmall purpoſe.
Painefull and vneaſie piſſing,Of painfull and vneaſie piſſing. may come to paſſe, either by the
acrimonie and ſharpneſſe of the humour, or by the imbecillitie
or weakeneſſe of the retentiue facultie, proceeding for the moſt
part from cold: the which painfulneſſe may in like manner be
procured by reaſon of ſome inflammation, clotted or congealed
bloud,Suppreſſion of vrine. an vlcer, a ſtone, &c. Suppreſſion of vrine proceedeth
from diuerſe cauſes: ſometimes by meanes of the obſtruction
or ſtoppage of the guts, and ſometimes againe by meanes
of the emulgent or ſucking veines: and that againe two manner
of wayes: to wit, either by reaſon of the weakeneſſe of the
drawing or ſucking qualitie,The ſeuerall cauſes of the ſame. or elſe by obſtruction. This ſuppreſſion
is likewiſe procured by the obſtruction or ſtoppage
of the Kidneys and Vrine-pipes, and by meanes of the weakeneſſe
thereof. By reaſon of the obſtruction of the aforeſaid paſſages,
it cometh alſo diuerſe wayes to paſſe: as either by meanes
of an inflammation, knob or bunch of either of theſe parts, or
others adioyning: or elſe by reaſon of a ſtone, clotted or congealed
bloud, or ſome tough phlegme impacted and cleauing
faſt to the place: as alſo ſometimes, howbeit ſeldome, by reaſon
of ſome holes in the kidneyes,De internor. morb. curat tomo. 3. lib. 4. cap. 12. and that after the voyding of
ſome ſtones, as Mercatus hath obſerued. Suppreſſion of vrine

is likewiſe ſometimes cauſed by meanes of the bladder or parts
thereto adioyning,Suppreſſion of vrine by meanes of the bladder diuerie wayes procured. it being alſo thereby intereſſed. And in the
firſt place, by reaſon of the want of the ſenſe of feeling, the ſinew
deſcending from the loynes and the hucklebone being
looſened. Secondly, by reaſon of the failing of the expelling
power of the bladder, &c. Thirdly, the exceeding great quantitie
of vrine diſtending and ſtretching out of the bladder, detained
longer then is conuenient, may bring this ſometimes to
paſſe. Fourthly, the reſolution or looſeneſſe of the muſcles of
the neather bellie, which haue likewiſe ſome intereſt in the furtherance
of this excretion. Fiftly, by the totall ouerthrow of
the expelling facultie: as we ſee ſometimes come to paſſe in
burning Feauers, as witneſſeth Hippocrates. Sixtly, by the defect
and fault of the vrine-pipes, and that diuerſe manner of
wayes: for ſometimes the muſcle which ſhutteth vp the bladder
is clinged together by a conuu
                     •
                  ſion: the paſſage is likewiſe
ſtopt, either by the meanes of ſome tough clammie humours,
ſome clotted bloud, matter, knob or bunch, or any tumour, the
outgrowing of ſome peece of fleſh, ſome wart or ſcarre, and
finally, by reaſon of a ſtone ſtopping vp the paſſage by the neck
of the bladder. Seuenthly, by the conſent of the places adioyning,
the bladder and the vrine-pipes are ſometimes ſo ſhut vp,
that they cannot freely deliuer the vrine, which cometh often
to paſſe in women, by reaſon of the neareneſſe of the wombe.
Eightly, by meanes of a Palſie or reſolution of the bladder. The
vncertaintie therefore of the vrine in diſeaſes of this nature and
kind, may as euidently appeare as in any of the premiſſes. And
there being ſo many cauſes producing paine and difficultie in
making of vrine, to which of them wilt thou aſcribe it? Againe,
if there be a retention of the vrine, what wilt thou ſend
to the Phyſitian? And if ſuch an accident come to the cure of
ſome Empiricke or vnskilfull Phyſitian, his conceit will
ſtraightway leade him to ſome ſtone, and ſo, according to their
ignorance in this art, exhibite ſtrong diuretickes, or medicines
prouoking vrine, as I haue ſometimes obſerued:Calculus renum rare aut nun quam diuretica huius aut illius ſortis citra damnum admittit, &c. which are ſo
farre from procuring the intended good, that they produce rather
a contrary effect. Of a ſuppreſſion of vrine by meanes of

clotted bloud I haue inſtanced alreadie.
               This last Spring a young Gentleman of Leiceſterſhire,Mercat. Tome. 1. lib. 3. par. 3. claſſ. 3. quaeſt. 217. of good
worth, trauailing towards London thorow this Towne of Northampton,Hiſtorie.
was ſuddenly ſurpriſed with a ſuppreſſion of vrine. Being afraid
of a ſtone in his bladder (howbeit he had neuer heretofore
complained of this infirmity) yet tried he what the art of Surgerie
could doe, by meanes of a Catheter thruſt vp thorow his yard towards
the necke of his bladder, together with ſome other meanes,
which notwithſtanding tooke no effect. The next morning, about
eight of the clocke, I was ſent for to the patient, whoſe belly began to
ſwell, and ſome fumes to aſcend into his head. By meanes of a gentle
opening inlep, together with a Cataplaſme applied to his ſhare, it
pleaſed God to accompliſh his deſires: howbeit a meſſenger had bene
already ſent away to bring with him an expert Surgeon to make inciſion.
He voyded that day abundance of vrine of a laudable colour,
and anſwerable contents; ſo that none could find any fault in the ſame,
and the next day he went forward in his intended iourney towards
London.
               The paſſage of the vrine in this patient was ſomewhat narrow,
as ſeemeth, and that by reaſon of ſome former infirmity;
and perhaps ſome wind gathered in the great gut might make
ſome compreſſion of the necke of the bladder. Now that ſuppreſſion
of vrine in acute diſeaſes is dangerous,Aphor. 62. lib. 4. 
                  Hippocrates
doth not deny; other Phyſitians alſo haue obſerued it, and my
ſelfe not long ſince, in one who died not long agoe. And becauſe
this Hiſtory for diuers reaſons is worth the relating, I
will intreate the courteous Reader that he would be pleaſed a
while to lend his eyes and eares.
               This laſt yeere 1623.Another. Auguſt the 28. an Alderman of Northampton,
a man of good account in this Corporation, neare fiftie
yeares of age, ſubiect of late yeares to a great paine in his head, and
ſometimes my patient: riding abroad in his corne-field, about ſome
three miles off this Towne, was ſuddenly ſurpriſed with a chilneſſe
in his legges, and ſhortly after complained of the like in his backe,
bones, and vpper parts of his body: vpon which occaſion he hyed him
home, and imagining it to be ſome cold, continued ill that night, and
the next day and night following. The Satterday after, and the

third day of his diſeaſe, by perſwaſion of ſome of his friends, his vrine
with a letter was carried to a Parſon practiſer, dwelling about a
dozen of miles hence, one of our chiefe Calculators of Natiuities in
all the countrey. The Parſon ſent backeword, it was a blind Ague,
and withall ſends him a vomit, and preſcribes Phlebotomie. The
Surgeon being ſent for, perceiues a Iaundiſe, and the patient complaines
of ſome faintneſſe; vpon which occaſion he refuſes to let him
bloud, wiſhing his friends to acquaint the Parſon with theſe occurrents.
The Parſon repeales his former ſentence, and commends
the Surgeon for being ſo ſparing. And indeed he dealt honeſtlier
then the Parſon: for he truſted none but his owne eyes, and ſo told
his mind freely to his friend: but the Parſon both ſaw with other
mens eyes, and heard with other mens eares; and building vpon this
ſ
                     •
                  ndy foundation, ſent his Oracle to the abſent, which he as eaſily
recalled againe vpon the firſt information, and ſends him another
Oracle written now in a peece of paper, and withall ſends him an
Electuary and Iulep for his laundiſe, and ſome directions for a
drinke. But let vs heare the laudable effects of this vomit. It
wrought vpwards effectually, and ſomething downewards: and while
the patient was able to take any ſuſtenance, it returned backe by the
ſame way it went in. And beſides, after the operation of this vomit,
the Iaundiſe appeared, a ſuppreſſion of vrine and ordure, together
with a troubleſome and tedious Hicket, which neither day nor night
forſooke our patient. To the former accidents was ſhortly added a
difficulty in ſwallowing, with an extreame ſoreneſſe in his mouth,
which like a Canker ſpread it ſelfe ouer all the parts of the ſame,
with an vlcer (as appeared) in the Almonds or parts adioyning,
which yeelded ſuch abundance of white corrupted matter at firſt,
and afterwards coloured, as I neuer did obſerue the like in euery reſpect.
The Parſon being earneſtly intreated to affoord his patient his
preſence in this his ſo great extremity, no prayers would preuaile;
but ſent him backe word, that the Iaundiſe now appearing, he hoped
the worſt was paſt. The patient ſeeing himſelfe forſaken now in his
greateſt need, hauing learned by a too late repentance, that his Parſon
proued not ſo truſty a friend as he ſuppoſed; Cum nemini obtrudi
poteſt iturad me. On the Thurſday after, about two a clocke
in the morning, and the beginning of the eight day ſince the beginning

of his diſeaſe, he ſent for me, moſt earneſtly intreating me that I
would be pleaſed to affoord him my preſence with what ſpeed I could▪
I preferring Chriſtian charitie and loue of my old friend before any
late ingratitude, repaire preſently to his houſe, where I find him in
that caſe I haue alreadie related. Hauing acquainted his wife and
friends with the extreame danger I then found him in, yet being both
by himſelfe, his wife and all his friends earneſtly intreated to do my
vttermoſt endeauour to helpe him in this extremitie, and at leaſt to
eaſe him of theſe troubleſome accidents; ſo much by gliſters and other
mild meanes in two dayes ſpace I preuailed, that moſt of the aboue-named
accidents vaniſhed quite away: his vrine alſo came in
great abundance, of a laudable colour, without any bad contents, and
the other egeſtion obſerued now a good and orderly courſe: the hicket
came but ſeldome, and with ſmall annoyance. But the pulſe
played not his part ſo well as I wiſhed, and the ſoreneſſe of his mouth
increaſed ſo faſt, that it began to get ground vpon his lips. The which
I then perceiuing, as likewiſe that he was not as yet free from his
Feauer, willing to trie if Phlebocomie would any thing auaile, I gaue
way to the vſing of this remedie. About ſixe ounces of very corrupt
bloud were taken from him on Saturday morning, (his noſe hauing
made ſome offer twice or thrice before, and once after his Phlebotomie)
not without alleuiation, whereupon enſued reaſonable good reſt
the night following. On Sonday morning was little alteration to be
diſcerned, but that he complained much of faintneſſe, and yet was bitter
able to ſwallow then before: the ſoreneſſe of his mouth began likewiſe
to amend, being duly dreſſed diuerſe times of the day: his hicket
alſo was no more to be heard. Not full two houres after our departure,
Death ſends him new ſummons by ſome change and alteration to the
worſe, which could not be concealed from the moſt vulgar eye. In the
afternoone viſiting him, I found no further hope or encouragement to
proceed, and yet farre leſſe on Monday morning, ſaue that I wiſhed
them ſtill to continue the giuing of him a Cordiall Inlep there in a
readineſſe, and ſo left viſiting him any more, and he ere nine of the
clocke at night, obeying Deaths laſt ſummons, diſcharged that debt
which we haue yet to pay.
               But now Maſter Parſon, our patient reſting in peace, I would
willingly expoſtulate a little concerning your careleſſe (and as I

thinke) irregular and ignorant proceeding in this buſineſſe,
which concerned no leſſe then a mans life: the life, I ſay, not of
an ordinary man, but of a magiſtrate, whom this corporation
could not ſo well at this time haue ſpared; beſides the intereſt
his wife and children and other friends had in him. In the firſt
place your Oracle being asked, it anſwered, His diſeaſe was a
blind Ague.Raro aut nunquam eiſdem accidentibus & conditionibus inſignata apparet huiuſmodi febris, ſed pro varietate corporei apparatus & aliarum rerum, quae corpus humanam mutare habent, variari ſubinde ipſam contingit. Mercat. tom. 2. lib. 7. cap. 2. Of maligne Feauers I haue both read, and knowne
them poſſeſſe now and then ſome of my patients; but as for
blind Agues, we leaue them to Parſons that cannot ſee. And
what be the Pathognomonicke ſignes of a blind Ague, and what
Authors write of it? The vrine told you no ſuch matter, and I
dare ſay, the meſſenger was much amazed at ſo blind an Oracle.
But this is no new practiſe of your ſelfe and others of your
cloth, leſt you ſhould ſeem to be ignorant of any thing, to coyne
new names for diſeaſes, whereof you are altogether ignorant.
And thus another of your double profeſſion, ſome few yeares
ago, his iudgement by a Gentleman concerning his diſeaſe being
demanded, anſwered, It was a diſeaſe in his ſpirits. The
Gentleman died within a few dayes after of a Feauer, which
tooke poſſeſſion of the whole bodie; and a Phyſitian that came
afterwards to him, thought it to be a Squinancie, and that the
Parſon had wronged him in deferring Phlebotomie too long,
by the which he gaue the patient ſome eaſe for the preſent. If
this Parſon had euer learned the grounds of Phyſicke, he could
haue told that that Feauer which we call Ephemera,
                  Gal. 1. de differ. febr. cap. 1. not exceeding
foure and twentie houres, is properly ſaid to be in the ſpirits,
being commonly free from danger: but if it exceed this
terme, then turneth it to ſome other Feauer, and ſo loſeth the
former name. But what remedies were by you appointed for
this patients blind Ague, as it pleaſeth you to call it? If a blind
Ague, it had as blind a remedie, a vomit was exhibited, Phlebotomie
preſcribed. As for your vomit, although I neuer did
ſee it, yet I am not ignorant of the matter and nature of it. But
be what it would, that it was then vnſeaſonable, I thinke any
of common ſenſe cannot deny. For in the firſt place he had not
long bene ſicke, neither yet came his ſickneſſe by any ſurfet, to
induce you at firſt daſh to preſcribe him ſuch a vomit before

any other remedie. Againe, you ought not to be ignorant, that
in moſt diſeaſes (acute eſpecially) the appetite faileth at firſt,
and yet vſe we not alwayes to begin with ſtrong ſtibiate vomits.
But what were the effects of your vomit we haue heard,
and the patient fared the worſe for it. He was ſubiect to an old
paine in his head, and with this vnſeaſonable vomit the torrent
of thoſe ſharpe and maligne cholericke humours wherewith
his bodie abounded, were drawne vp towards the throate, and
other parts adioyning: hence had he that exulceration in his
throate and mouth, the hicket, &c. I know your grauitie would
diſdaine the name of an Empiricke, but pardon me good maſter
Parſon, this courſe was too Empiricall. I wiſh both your ſelfe
and ſome of your brethren to be more circumſpect in exhibiting
your vomits.Strong ſtibiate vomits ordinarily vſed by our Parſon-practiſers in moſt diſeaſes, and for the moſt part without the ſight of their patient. It is too well knowne in the countrey, that
ſtrong ſtibiate vomits are vſed by many of you, almoſt in euery
diſeaſe, as ſome famous Panacaea or Aurum Potabile, falſly ſuppoſed
good againſt all diſeaſes. The other Parſon lately mentioned,
within theſe few yeares gaue two vomits in one day, the
one to a woman dwelling ſeauen miles off this towne, who died
preſently: the other to a woman of this towne of good account,
and ſince my patient, at that time being big with child,
and the vomit wrought with great violence from ſeauen a
clocke in the morning till foure a clocke in the afternoone, and
hardly eſcaped ſhe the like danger, or abortion at leaſt.
               Some few yeares ago my preſence was required for a Gentlewoman
at a Knights houſe within ſeauen miles of Northampton.
                  Hiſtorie.
Her diſeaſe was a Squinancie, and had bene before my comming,
by the aduice of a neighbour Parſon (for ſuch are in moſt
corners of the countrey to be found) at leaſt twice Phlebotomiſed,
howbeit without any ſucceſſe, and then had this cunning
Aeſculapius left her a ſtibiat vomit, as his laſt anchor of hope.
At my coming I found her not able to ſwallow any thing at all,
the drinke which ſhe aſſayed to ſwallow coming out at her noſtrils
againe. The Ladie asking me whether ſhe might take the
Parſons vomit or no, I replyed, it was abſurd both inSi igitur valē
                     ter etiamnum fluxio irruat, ad contraria reuellere ſtudebimus: vtique ſi in ſuperioribus vlcus co
                        •
                     ſistat, per inferna purgantes: ſin autem in inferioribus ſit, ſuperiorera ventrem purgantes. Gal. Meth. med. lib. 4. reaſon
and common ſenſe, and that both in regard it could not deſcend
into the ſtomach, as alſo for feare of attraction of the humour

towards the place affected. In three dayes ſpace, by
meanes of attractiue gliſters, which the Parſon had omitted,
and ſome other meanes I vſed, the patient, by Gods
helpe recouered againe her former health. But to our purpoſe
againe. The next remedie by you preſcribed was Phlebotomie.
I denie not the neceſſitie thereof, howſoeuer your preſcription
was but by ayme, as being ignorant of his ſtrength, wherein
the meſſenger might eaſily be miſtaken, as it often cometh to
paſſe. Within theſe two yeares paſt, I tooke aboue fiftie ounces
of bloud from a man of middle age in this ſame towne, being
ſeiſed with a burning Feauer, accompanied with a ſtrong deliration,
whom his friends ſuppoſed to be ſo weake, that after I
had ſeene him, & acquainted them with the truth, ſcarce could
I perſwade them to yeeld to this remedie. And this was performed
in a weekes ſpace, the patient taking nothing in the meane
while but a little drinke, or milke and water, being both then
and a long time after depriued of his naturall reſt, by his owne
vnrulineſſe, and his friends careleſneſſe, and yet recouered he
his health. But why was not this remedie adminiſtred to our
patient? Becauſe the Parſon was informed of the appearing of
the Iaundiſe. But did the Iaundiſe croſſe the former indication
of bleeding The
                     
                        〈…〉
                      vel paruitate eius, aut ab imbecillitate facultatis att
                        •
                     actri
                        ••
                      eiuſdem, aut a m
                        •
                     atuum 
                        ••
                     ſìructions ſiue 
                        •
                     orum ſit per quos bilis allicitur, ſiue corum per quos pellitur ad inceſ
                        •
                     
                     na, quo regurgi tat ad vena
                        •
                      bil
                        •
                     s, & praedictū gignit affectum. Hepa
                        •
                     cus efficitur 
                        •
                     cterus ab n
                        ••
                     atu obſtruct
                        •
                     ne, ſctrrno, iuſtant
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                     tiore, aut calida diſtemperie: ad qu
                        •
                     d etiam membrum reducitur venarum caliditas exurens, & tetius etiam corperis ſiue etiam corrumptatur in venis & 
                        〈◊〉
                      a corpore ſangu
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     b earum intemperamentum citrahepatis affictum, aut à veneno aſſumpto, aut eiaculato à fera, vel aſſumtis catharcticis non purga
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     bus, 
                        〈◊〉
                      duplex exiſtit: ſalutarn vnus, qui rurſus ſit dum 
                        〈…〉
                      natura, aut in mecrborum iudicationibus, quae ſeptimo die art post ſeptem, 
                        •
                     icbus 
                        •
                     iticus incidit, a
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     greſſis coctionis ſiguis, &c. Alter verò eſt 
                        〈◊〉
                      à moto maligns morbi quem etiam ſymptomaticum dicere poſſumus, qui ſemper antè ſeptimum incidit &c. 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     e intern. morb. curat. tom
                        •
                      3. lib. 4. cap. 5. Iaundiſe proceedeth of diuerſe cauſes, and
therefore the cure is accordingly to be accommodated. It
cometh ſometimes ſolely and of it ſelfe, without any other diſeaſe,
and ſometimes prooueth nothing elſe ſaue a ſymptome or
accident of ſome other diſeaſe, as of a Scirrhus, or inflammation
of the Liuer, &c. It is alſo ſometimes occaſioned by poyſon,
and ſometimes by meanes of ſomeAliam adhuc adlit cauſam Hollerius, calculum vnum, vel plures in veſica ſell a ſaepce ceneretes De morb. intern. lib. 1. cap. 37. ſtone or ſtones growne
within this ga
                        •
                     -bagge. And againe, the learned are not ignorant
that it is ſometimes a criticall excretion: ſafeſt after the ſeuenth

day in acute diſeaſes, more dangerous, or at leaſt doubtfull before
the ſame. Our patients Iaundiſe appeared in an acute diſeaſe,
before the ſeauenth day. That Phlebotomie in this
Multis rationibus ſanguis in hac affectione vltiliter mitti poteſt, primo quidem malo incipiente retractionis gratia: ob id l'aulus ſtatu
                        •
                     t conſilium eſſe venam in dextro cubito ſecare, vbi meatus veſicae bilis vtrique ſunt obſtipati, vel alter duntaxat. Item ſi ſimul sanguis abundet, aut ſit praecipua obſtructionis occaſio: quopropter dixit Aetius duo maxima eſſe in hoc affectu remedia, nimirum, venae ſectionem, & purgationem, &c. & paulo poſt. Si ex morbe acuto ante ſeptimum prodeat ſanguinem mittes, &c. Idem Mercatus ibidem. caſe is required, our Authors do witneſſe, and in many other
ſorts of the ſame: yea euen when the Iaundiſe is but a beginning,
ſaith a learned Spaniard, and that according to the opinion
of Paulus Aegin
                        •
                     ta and 
                     •
                  ctuis, two famous ancient
Greeke Phyſitians: eſpecially in the abundance of bloud, with
a concourſe of choler, which was manifeſt to the eye-ſight in
this our patient. And this ſame Author approoues of it in this
diſeaſe, euen after it hath continued a long time, and that by
meanes of inueterate obſtructions, as alſo in the ſuppreſſion of
any wonted euacuation. This then was no contrarie indication
to dehort or hinder you from ſo methodicall a courſe. And as
for ſome faintneſſe, it is not vnuſuall in this diſeaſe, where there
is neither Feauer nor danger of death. The vomit was a great
deale worſe then the opening of a veine. Fiue dayes after, when
by reaſon of hote and ſharpe humors towards his throate, procured
by your vnſeaſonable vomit, this remedie brought alleuiation,
with ſome reſt after enſuing. What then might it in
probabilitie haue procured, if at the firſt, and in due time adminiſtred?
And why was there no mention of a purge or gliſter
for this Iaundiſe? It had bene but according to theVerum ſi ſuſpitio aliqua eſt excrementi in ventre & primis venis Caſſiae aut Catholics ℥ j. ex ſero lactis imperabis. Et quia in hoc morbo aluus fere aſtricta eſt, vtiliſſimus eſt clyſter, cuius materia ſit ex ijs quae ſtercus durius emolliunt, &c. Sic enim placuiſſe veteribus Aphrodiſaeus ſcriptum reliquit. Holler, loco nuper citato. rules of
reaſon and precepts of art. And thoſe who attended him can
teſtifie that one gliſter by me preſcribed, gaue him more eaſe
then all your Phyſicke. But let vs come to your Prognoſticke:
you hoped the worſt was paſt. Vpon what ground? Becauſe
now the Iaundiſe came foorth. Cuius contrarium verum eſt. The
caſe is quite contrarie: you ought therefore to haue deemed
ſome danger. Fie maſter Parſon, ſuch a Rabbi as you thinke your
ſelfe, whom the vulgar adore like theActs 19. 35. 
                  Image of Diana, which
the fooliſh Epheſians thought came downe from Iupiter. Old
Aphor. 62. lib. 4. 
                  Hippocrates could haue told you, that ſuch a Iaundiſe ſeldome

portended ſecuritie. And howſoeuer he and ſome others make
mention of ſome who in ſuch a caſe haue recouered: yet do
all our Authors hold the caſe to be very dangerous.Medicum arbitror operae praetium eſſe prouidentiam conſectari praeſentiens enim atque praedicens apud aegros res praeſentes, pr
                        •
                     teritas atque futuras, & eitam quas ipſi agri praetermittunt explicans, exiſtimabitur facile perceprſſe notitiam ſingularem rerum ad aegros pertinentium: eoque fiet vt confidentius credant homines ſeipſos Medico. Medicinam autem optime faciet Medicus, ſi ante praeſenſerit quid euenturum ſti cuique affectui. Hippocr. Prognoſt. lib. 1. aph. 1. At my
firſt coming to our patient I found apparent danger, not onely
by reaſon of this accident, but of diuerſe other dangerous and
deadly ſignes, wherewith I at that inſtant acquinted his
friends. And if you pleaſe to reply, that your abſence could
not ſee ſo much as my preſence might diſcouer, I do not denie
it: yet was not this Iaundiſe concealed from you, nor that it
ſucceeded or came after a blind Ague, as you call it, and that
before the ſeauenth day, as hath bene prooued. And the meſſenger
was an vnderſtanding young man, able to relate ſome other
dangerous accidents, and beſides he had no ſmall intereſt
in our patient. But what was wanting by information, might
haue bene ſupplyed by your owne preſence: the which howbeit
earneſtly deſired, yet could not be obtained, ſaying, that
your directions were ſufficient. And yet it was told me, that
coming to his houſe to ſpeake with ſome at the Aſſiſes, you promiſed
him great kindneſſe. Now is the time of triall: your
friend in danger of his life, requeſteth and earneſtly intreateth
your ayde and beſt aſſiſtance, with your perſonall preſence: he
entruſts you with his life, and yet will you not affoord him
your preſence? Your golden promiſes produce ſcarce leaden effects.
                  2. Sam. 16. 17. 
                  Is this the kindneſſe to your friend? Why vndertooke ye the
cure of him, whom you had no purpoſe to ſee if intreated? Beſides,
the patient was of ſufficient abilitie to giue you ſatisfaction.
If there be hope of a good bootie, your preſence will not
be wanting: witneſſe your voyage into Leiceſterſhire in Sommer
1623. to a patient of yours, who howbeit he died before
your coming, yet were your fees more then doubled: and yet
maſter Parſon muſt not be called couetous. Now beſides the
Iaundiſe, theSingultus in ſebre periculoſus niſi ſit criticus & ſigna coctionis manifeſtae appareant. Avmitu quoque malum: cum enim vomitus qui remed i
                        •
                      eſſe debet ſingultum gignit, ab inflammatione cerebri vel ſtomachi metuendum. Holler. lib. 1. de moreb. intern. cap. 33. Hicket in acute diſeaſes, euen in the iudgement
of the vulgar and moſt ignorant, but eſpecially after ſo vnſeaſonable
a vomit, muſt needs preſage ſome great euill to enſue.

And ſuppreſſion of vrine concurring withSigna ſaepius memoranda & obſeruanda in aegrotantibus. Nam ex continua inſpectione, exquiſitam 
                        •
                     orū poteſtatis habemus notiatiam. Semper mente reuoluere opertet, ac conſiderare quaenam ſigna ſunt optima quae peſſima, & quae in medio confinio horum veluti gradus quoſdam habentia, nonnulla quidem optimis, nonnulla vero deterrimis proximiora, & quae quidem minus, quae vero ſunt magis proximiora vel remotiora, & quaenam exquiſite media ponenda ſint inter bona & mala ſigna. Deinde conſiderandum quaenam ſemper mala ſunt, & quae continuo bona, &c. Gal. 1. de criſ. cap 13. other dangerous
ſignes, maketh the danger yet apparent. And yet the Parſon hopeth
the worſt is paſt. But how came it to paſſe, that all your
twelue houſes in the heauens forgot you at this time, and made
you become a lying Prophet? Where were all your maligne
aſpects?Terent. in Andr. 
                  Luno Lucinafer opem. Will neither Mercurie nor the
Moone, who are neareſt, come to your aide? And where was
old froſtie father gray-beard (Saturne I meane) and angrie
Mars? I adhere to none of your iuggling Genethliacks, and yet
beſides the former ſignes, I could reade death in our patients
eyes, yea and in ſome motions of his hands, &c. better then the
vrine and all the caeleſtiall Orbes could tell you.Sexcenta licet ei
                        •
                     ſmodi proferre. But many
other ſuch pranks are played by your ſelfe, and others that are
partakers with you in the ſame offence, wherewith I would be
loth to enlarge this Treatiſe. But maſter Parſon, make more account
of mens liues, and diſcharge more conſcionably that calling
from which you take the denomination, and yet buſie
your ſelfe too little about it. I haue neuer heard much commendation
of your diligent preaching; not ſo much as in ſeaſon,
farre leſſe yet out of ſeaſon: And as for your care in this
other profeſſion, this our Patients friends, and this whole Corporation
haue no great cauſe to magnifie it. But it is not much
to bee maruelled at, that he who ſetteth ſo light by the ſoule,
makes as ſmall account of the body, but for his owne benefit.
And how many of yours and others ſuch beneficed mensQ
                        •
                     ot Themiſon aegros a
                        •
                     tumno occiderat vno. Iu
                        •
                     eu. errors
are buried in the boſome of the earth; howſoeuer your
adherents may cry out, Great is Diana of the Epheſians. Let the
iudicious Reader iudge then, whether all Phyſicks ſufficiency
be couered vnder a Clergy mans Caſſocke. But we hope the
Reuerend Fathers of the Church will confine you within your
owne Orbes; or at the leaſt enforce you to reſigne the one
wholly, and betake your ſelues to the other. A Prelate of prime
note of late yeares (as I am informed) and yet liuing (and long
may he liue) gaue one of theſe Pragmaticall Miniſters his
choice, to which of the two he would betake himſelfe: and he
hauing found in his owne experience this to be true, Dat Galenus

opes, being forced, forſooke his Paſtorall charge, which
affoorded him not aboue fiftie pounds; yearely comming in.
But now to the maine matter in hand againe.
               The ſecond branch of the manner of piſſing,Of inuoluntarie piſſing. is inuoluntary
piſſing, which commeth to paſſe either in ſicknes or in health.
And in ſickneſſe it commeth to paſſe, by reaſon of the hurt,
weakneſſe, or decay of the retenti
                     •
                  e facultie of the paſſages of
the vrine; as kidneyes, bladder, &c. as commeth to paſſe in
the Palſie,It is produced by diuerſe cauſes. Apoplexy, and Falling ſickneſſe. And in the piſſing
euill, called Diabete, this commeth likewiſe to paſſe. And
againe, when the Muſcle Sphincter ſhutting the necke of the
bladder or ſinewes helping thereto, are hurt, either by a fall, a
wound, or ſome ſuch other occaſion: and ſometimes againe in
reaſonable good health, they are weakned by meanes of ſome
cold diſtemper, or too much moiſture; as commeth to paſſe
in children, and moiſt conſtitutions. Drineſſe ſometimes is
likewiſe ſaid to produce the like effect in old age. And ſome
perturbations of the mind, as great and ſudden feare and aſtoniſhment
make men often void, not the vrine onely, but other
excrements alſo againſt their will. And yet were our Piſſe-Prophets
neuer able by any ſuch vrine onely to finde out the
true cauſe of any ſuch infirmitie.Dangerous in acute diſeaſes. That this proueth alſo often a
dangerous, if not deadly ſigne in acute diſeaſes, I could by
many inſtances both of my owne and other mens obſeruations
make it appeare, but that now I feare I haue too much abuſed
thy patience courteous Reader; and therefore I haſten to the
concluſion, if thou wilt giue me leaue to talke a word or two
by the way with Maſter Alchymiſt.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X.
               Of the fond and fooliſh opinion, concerning the diſtillation of
Ʋrines: of the water of ſeparation, together with
the vncertaintie of iudgement by
ſuch meanes.
               
                  THE Aſchymiſts well perceiuing this vecertaintie
affoorded vs by this ſigne, haue ſet their wits
a worke another way. One of their great Maſters,
Lib. de diſtillat. vrinar. 
                  Thuenheuſerus by name, to the end that
Paracelſus and his Diſciples might be thought
to ſurpaſſe all other Phyſitians, deuiſed a new way to iudge
of diſeaſes by Vrines: to wit, by diuiding it into three ſeuerall
principles, Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt: and ſo by diſtillation
to finde out that which we demanded.Eſt aqua quaedam que dicitur ALKALI ſecretat cuius vſus ad ſehres, ad foetum mortuum & alia. Inter haec eſt etiam ſeparatio ſuccorum. Nam ſi tantum vna gutta proij
                        •
                     iatur in vrinam aegroti, ſtatim fieri dicitur elementerum ſeparatio, adeo vt praedominans elementum aperte inconſpectum prodeat, & cauſam mortificum manifeſtet. laban. in Alch. pharm
                        ••
                      cap. 8. ex Penoto. 
                  Libanius mentioneth a
certaine water of ſeparation, which beſides diuers other effects
hath this alſo, that one onely drop of it being mingled with the
Patients vrine, it maketh a preſent ſeparation of the aforeſaid
Elements, inſomuch that the predominant Element ſhall apparently
lay it ſelfe open to the ſight of the eye, and ſhall withall
declare and lay open the cauſe of the diſeaſe. Parturient montes
naſcetur ridiculus mus. Great cry and little wooll. Our Paraceleiſts
would faine feed vs with many ſuch ſmoaky promiſes.
Then come they to weigh the vrine, which they will ordinarily
in a healthfull and ſound man, not to exceed eight ounces
and a halfe: If it exceed this weight, they thinke it argueth
great abundance of a tartareous or terreſtrious ſubſtance: eſſpecially
if this be to be ſeene after the ſeparation; from
whence they do inferre a great number of ſuch tartareous diſeaſes,
as they call them: and yet the wiſeſt of them cannot tell
which. But let vs heareCap. de Spa, iricorum 
                        〈◊〉
                      prorſus vrinae prolat. 
                  Reuſner ſpeake. After the ſeparation
of the aforeſaid Elements (ſaith he) the vapors aſcending
ſticke to ſome part of the Still, anſwering in ſituation to that
part of the body of man in the which lyeth hid the very fountaine
and ſpring of the diſeaſe, and doth withall ſo plainly and

clearely repreſent vnto vs, both the kind and the nature of the
diſeaſe, that it may eaſily appeare to what element and principall
part it is to be referred. So farre Reuſner. But let vs now ſee
whether there be any hold to be taken of theſe more then hyperbolicall
promiſes. If we ſhall narrowly pry into this point, I
doubt we ſhall find the old Prouerbe true, Out of the frying pan
into the fire. But heare the cōfutation out of the mouth of a learned
Phyſitian, often quoted in this Diſcourſe. This doctrine of
Thurnheuſers (ſaithGuil. Adolph. Scribon. de in. ſpect. vrin. ſub finem. he) cannot by any ſound argument be demonſtrated.
For admit that the vrine be ſeparated into ſeuerall
elements, according to the ſeuerall parts thereof, yet can
nothing but the elementarie qualities (as they call them) heat,
cold, &c. be diſcerned by the ſame. And by this meanes ſhall
we onely be able to iudge of the diſeaſes of the ſolid parts; as
of obſtructions, exulcerations, and the like. And is not the
vrine an excrement of the bloud contained in the veines, that
is of one body? What vtilitie or profit therefore can come by
this ſeparation into ſeuerall parts? Thou ſhalt thus onely obſerue
the number of the parts which are in the ſubſtance of the
bloud, and of what nature and kind it is. Thou mayeſt perhaps
perceiue it either to bee cauſed of Mercurie, Sulphur, or
Salt. But wilt thou ſtraight-waies maintaine, that all Mercuriall
diſeaſes are ſeated in the head onely? &c. If this bee true,
then will it follow, contrary to that which thou and Paracelſus
maintaine, that theſe three grounds or elements are not common
to all diſeaſes. For I am of opinion, that if we will needs
vſe the names of theſe three; as well ſuch diſeaſes as haue their
originall from this Sulphureous and ſalt matter, as any that
proceed from a Mercuriall cauſe, haue their root and originall
from the head,Abſurditie of this opinion. &c. Thus farre our Author. And may not this
opinion ſeeme ſo abſurd in it ſelfe, that it needeth no further
confutation? For if when thou hadſt vſed all thy art and cunning,
a countrey-man ſhould aske thine opinion concerning
his vrine, and thou ſhouldſt tell him hee were troubled with
ſome ſulphureous, Mercuriall, or ſaltiſh and tartareous diſeaſe,
would he not laugh thee to ſcorne, and thinke, it may be, thou
hadſt beene that day too well acquainted with ſome pots and

pipes of Tobacco? And if hee ſhould deſire to know what
were his particular diſeaſe, and where or what particular part
of the body it had taken vp for its abode; would it ſeeme
ſtrange if he looked for ſome extraordinary skill after ſo great
an outward oftentation? And if he ſhould go home and tell
his wife of a Tartareous, Sulphureous, or Mercuriall diſeaſe,
who knowes but ſhe might call him Good-man Wood-cocke
for telling her ſuch a tale of Robin-hood? But put the caſe thou
mighteſt yet ſee ſome Sulphureous diſeaſe (as they terme it)
by meanes of this ſeparation and diſtillation; yet amongſt many
ſuch Sulphureous diſeaſes, vpon which of them wouldſt
thou faſten thy coniecture? As if a Feauer might be found out,
how may the kind be knowne, whether a continuall or inmittent;
and whether ſymptomaticall or dependant vpon
ſome other diſeaſe; or elſe be it ſelfe a principall gueſt,
with many moe circumſtances? The like may be ſaid of the
other two principles. So that it may euidently appeare, there
is greater vncertaintie in this then the other way. But if they
will be ſo skilfoole, I wiſh they would diſtill the other excrement
alſo; for I am ſure they may learne of both alike. But
yet wiſh I them to take this Prouiſo with them, that the ioynings
of their ſtils and Alembicks be well luted with lutum
moſchatum, or ambarinum, that none of this fragrant ſmell be
carried away with the wind, and ſo ſome part of this precious
liquor loſt. But it may be, when the patient had caſt vp his account,
he would find this manner of caſting of waters, as they
terme it, more coſtly then the ordinary. But for my part, I wiſh
our vrine-mongers would vſe it: for by this meanes this great
abuſe might the better be ſuppreſſed. But this opinion being
ſo abſurd in it ſelfe, needeth no further confutation. But fearing
ſome infection, or at leaſt annoyance to my noſe by ſuch Mercuriall
and Sulphureous ſmels, I thinke it is more then time to
withdraw my ſelfe out of ſo ſtinking a place. The like libertie
is allowed thee kind Reader, to whom I am afraid I haue now
bene too tedious; but yet I muſt once againe intreat thy patience
to heare the concluſion, and then mayeſt thou quietly depart
in peace.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               The Concluſion of this whole Diſcourſe, where ſomething
concerning iſſue and euent, and caſuall cures.
               
                  BY the premiſſes then, I hope, doth plainly appeare
the abſurditie of this erroneous and inueterate
opinion of magnifying the vrine,
and the iudgement concerning diſeaſes
which may from hence be collected. And
therefore I hope the iudicious and vnpartiall
Reader will with me ſubſcribe to the generall concluſion; to
wit, that there is no certaintie or aſſurance to be collected for
the information of the iudgement, either concerning the diſeaſe
it ſelfe, together with the particular ſymptomes and ſeuerall
circumſtances; and yet farre leſſe for the cure of the
ſame, by the bare inſpection of the vrine onely. And therefore
I cannot ſee any iuſt cauſe why it ſhould not bee pronounced
guiltie of man-ſlaughter at the leaſt, if not of murther; and
therefore is not a thing ſo ſlightly to be paſſed ouer, as many
may idlely imagine.Obiection. But me thinkes I heare ſome of the vulgar
ſort, who thinke it a prettie thing to heare one prate ouer an
vrine, obiect, That our cenſure ſeemeth too ſharpe, ſince that
daily experience doth not deny, that ſome haue from the inſpection
of the vrine, often attained to the knowledge of that
they deſired.Anſwer. Now as I denie not, but that ſometimes one may
through hap (as we ſay) hit the naile on the head: ſo on the other
part, that this manner of caſuall coniecture hath euer bene
allowed of by the learned and more iudicious, I do vtterly denie.
If Chriſtians would hold their peace, yet will the heathen
pleade on my ſide.Careat ſucceſſibus opto quiſquis ab euentu facta notanda putat. Quid. in epiſt. The Poet wiſhed them a bad ſucceſſe, whoſoeuer
iudged of an action according to the iſſue or euent. Beſides,
that it is often a fallacie, a non cauſa pro cauſa, making the
ignorant beleeue, they ſee that in or by an vrine, which neuer
had allowance of any learned authoritie. And may not any ignorant
Empiricke, a cozening Quackſaluer, or any old woman,
now and then gueſſe aright at an vrine, and by cunning interrogatories

and ſome other ſhifts, learne of the vnwarie meſſenger,
as well the ſubſtance as the circumſtances of the diſeaſe, at
leaſt as farre as they are able to relate? And this to be true, hath
bene ſufficiently prooued alreadie. Beſides, that oftentimes the
meſſenger himſelfe cannot ſufficiently informe the Phyſitian
concerning the particular circumſtances of the diſeaſe: and againe,
his owne ocular inſpection often bringeth that to the
eyes of his vnderſtanding, which neither the meſſenger nor yet
the patient himſelfe were euer able to relate, and farre leſſe the
vrine make knowne. What haſt thou then gained, when one
of theſe vnſufficient perſons hath told thee ſome truth by the
vrine? To wit, that then thy conceit carrieth thee (howbeit
moſt erroniouſly and falſly) to apprehend ſome extraordinarie
ſufficiencie in that perſon, as being beſt able to free thee from
thine infirmitie. Thus then we ſee, 
                     Ʋno dato abſurdo mul
                        •
                     a ſequuntur:
One errour draweth on another. The proſperous euent
ſometimes ſeconding their bold attempts, inuolueth the
vulgar daily in this dangerous errour.Arguments taken from iſſue or euent, not to be truſted to. But arguments taken
from euent haue neuer had allowance, where the rules of reaſon
might take place. And if this argument from euent may
take place, then will this abſurditie thereon enſue, that we ſhall
be forced to allow of many vnlawfull things. Many Witches
and Wizards haue ſometimes performed ſuch cures as haue
often aſtoniſhed ſome of great vnderſtanding: that I ſay nothing
of our Spelmongers, curing by characters, figure-caſting,
with a world of other forbidden traſh. Are we therefore warranted
by theſe actions to turne our backe vpon God, and make
a couenant with his enemie? The diuell himſelfe no doubt, as
well in the ancient Oracles as of later dayes, hath ſometimes
told truth. I ſhould be too tedious to inſtance in examples. But
did not that counterfeit Samuel,
                  1. Sam. 28. 18. to wit, the diuell himſelfe, tell
Saul the whole truth, both concerning the euent of the battell
and his owne wofull and wretched end? But who will notwithſtanding
maintaine the lawfulneſſe of asking counſell at
the diuels Oracles, but he who meaneth to haue his habitation
with him in hell?L. H. Howard of blind Prophets. Farre ſounder was the opinion of a Noble
man of this kingdome, in theſe words. Examples which fall out

by chance were neuer currant where the cauſe is to be iuſtifyed by
reaſon. And therefore till a man can as readily produce a certaine
ground to make his gueſſes good, as ſcore vp a regiſter of blind euents,
we may rather commend his lucke then his learning.
                  Argumentis & rationibus oportet quare quicquam ita ſit docere non ruantis. Cicer. de diuin. lib. 2. 
                  Reaſons and
arguments (ſaith a Heathen) muſt be produced for the confirmation
of mens courſes, and not examples of euents both caſuall and
vncertaine. So farre were the ancient Aegyptians from maintaining
this opinion, and ſo carefull of mens liues, reiecting
this coniecturall, caſuall, and Empiricall manner of curing diſeaſes,
and iudging of the ſufficiency of the Phyſitian by the
euent or iſſue of the diſeaſe;Medici ex publico victum ſumant, agro
                        •
                      ſecundum legem curant, ab antiquis medicis comprobatiſque ſcriptoribus traditam. Si quis normam libri ſequutus infirmum ſanare nequiuerit omni caret crimine. Si praeter ea quae libris continentur, curauerit illum, morte punitur. 
                  That at their owne coſt and charges
they maintained many ſufficient and skilfull Phyſitians: and
moreouer, ſet downe an inuiolable law and or dinance, That if any
Phyſitian following the precepts and rules of art, recorded in the
bookes of the learned in that profeſſion, yet could not attaine to the
height of his hopes; the Patient through the violence of the diſeaſe
yeelding to fatall neceſſitie, he was then freed from all danger
of law. On the other part, if he recouered his Patient, yet neglecting
the aforeſaid rules and meanes, his puniſhment was no leſſe then the
loſſe of his life. What if (ſaith mine Author) this wholeſome law
were brought in amongst vs (as it were good reaſon it ſhould) where
could we find ſo many executioners condignely to puniſh ſuch Impoſtors,
Empiricks, Women-Phyſitians, buſie-bodies, &c. Thus farre
our Author. Now as concerning ſuch remedies thus caſually
and vnskilfully adminiſtred, howſoeuer at ſometimes they may
either doe,Lang. epiſt. medicin. lib. 1. epiſt 80 ex Diodero Siculo. or at leaſt ſeeme to doe ſome good, which I will not
deny: yet I am ſure they do often more hurt then good; & more
hurt then on the ſudden is perceiued, many often praiſing them
for the Authors of their health, who haue bene the inſtruments
of their vtter ouerthrow & ruine: for howbeit the Patient reape
ſome preſent eaſe, yet is his body by meanes of ſuch medicines
vnskilfully exhibited, left more infirme, and becommeth afterwards
more craſie: their cure being imperfect, accidentall, vncertaine,
and voyd of rule and reaſon. And howbeit I could
make this ſmall Tractate ſwell vp into a big and voluminous
booke, if I ſhould inſtance in a many of theſe caſuall cures, performed

by Empiricks, and ſuch others, which for feare of tediouſneſſe
and prolixitie I am loth to go about: yet before I
make an end, I will offer to the Readers view, two or three Stories.
During my abode at Paris, one Maſter Robin, ouer-ſeer
of the Garden of Simples, related vnto me this which followeth.Hiſtorie.
                  A few yeares agoe (ſaith he) the plague of Peſtilence preuailing
daily more and more in this famous Cittie of Paris, whereof
no ſmall numbers, eſpecially of the meaner ſort, died daily: the learned
Phyſitians did their beſt endeuours when their counſell was craued,
and the ignorant Empiricks alſo were not idle. Amongst the
reſt was a certaine countrey Clowne carried on the wings of Fame,
for his extraordinarie ſuppoſed skill in curing this diſeaſe, who was
ſaid to haue cured more then ſome of the moſt expert Phyſitians. The
Ducheſſe of Longueuille being acquainted with theſe occurrents,
ſendeth for her Phyſitian, deſirous to know the cauſe of ſo happie ſucceſſes
by ſo meane a perſon performed: which howbeit alwayes aymed
at, yet are not alwayes attained vnto by men of greater merit. The
Phyſitian well knowing the inſufficiencie of this fellow, yet not fully acquainted
with the particulars, and withall knowing how much is commonly
attributed to theſe caſuall euents, anſwered onely in generall at
that inſtant, that many things ſeeme often otherwiſe then they are
indeed: and falſe fame maketh ſome men famous, whoſe names deſerue
rather to be buried in obliuion: and after ſome further diſcourſe
concerning that ſubiect (all which notwithſtanding, would not
ſatisfie her more then nice curioſitie) he taketh his leaue for the preſent.
A few dayes after, cauſing carefully to watch and obſerue the
actions of this Aeſculapius, he was obſerued to go to a certaine place
within two little leagues of Paris, called Bois de Vincennes, that is,
Vincence wood, and there to dig vp certaine rootes. The Phyſitian
therewith acquainted, reſorteth thither with ſpeed, and finds that it
was nothing elſe but a certaine kind of Spurge (whereof there grew
in that place and about no ſmall ſtore) whereof this Clowne had at
ſeuerall times digged vp great ſtore, eaſily diſcerned by the holes there
round about that place, ſome being but new digged. After a narrow
ſearch, he found that moſt of thoſe whom this new Aeſculapius was
ſaid to haue cured, either died after a certaine time of a bloudie
Fluxe, this violent medicine hauing procured an excoriation in their

guts▪ being especially exhibited, without any preparation of the ill
qualitie, or obſeruation of the due doſe or quantitie: or elſe that they
liued a languiſhing life, worſe then a ſpeedie dispatch by a ſudden
death, from whoſe mercileſſe clawes notwithſtanding this former
Purgatorie was not able to free ſome of them. The Phyſitian repairing
againe to the Ducheſſe, acquainteth her Grace with theſe ſeuerall
circumſtances: as alſo that it ſeemed most of thoſe people were
able, ſtrong, and cacochymicall bodies, who would preferre the counſell
of this Clowne, before that of the learned and iudicious Phyſitian.
The iſſue notwithſtanding did make it appeare, that if any did
recouer, it came not to paſſe through his skill or ſufficiencie,
which as ſeemeth, was none at all, but by the ſtrength of nature,
able to expell both the Plague and the poyſon of the medicine.
The learned and iudicious Phyſitians againe met for the moſt
part with thin and tender bodies, brought vp in eaſe and idleneſſe,
and for this cauſe apteſt to receiue the poyſoned impreſſions
of the peſtilentiall aire, and therefore the diſeaſe prouing
greater then the meanes were able to ouercome, the patients
were often forced to faint vnder the burthen. Neither were
ſuch dangerous, or r
                     •
                  ther deſperate meanes, as this Empiricke
vſed, in their opinions to be adminiſtred to any, much leſſe to
perſons of qualitie and weake conſtitution. The Noble woman
hauing heard the Phyſitians apologie, was afterwards better
pleaſed with her Phyſitian, and after that time conceiued a better
opinion, both of the Art and the profeſſors of the ſame. I
was likewiſe informed during my abode at Leua in Germanie,Dangerous medicines exhibited by Paracelſiſts.
of many rare cures ſeemed to be performed by that medicine
which they call the Philoſophers ſtone, Aurum potabile, and many
other ſuch hyperbolicall medicines, exhibited by the Paracelſiſts
of thoſe parts. And yet moſt of them to whom they were
exhibited, before the full period of a twelue moneth, went to
viſite their friends in another world: and little better ſucceſſe
for the moſt part had their maiſter Paracelſus himſelfe.
               Some few yeares before my coming to this towne of Northampton,
                  Another.
a certaine Empiricke, and Iriſh by nation, was accounted one of the
moſt famous vrine-mongers in all the countrey about, but eſpecially
in telling whether women were with child or no. And yet his skill in

Phyſicke was confined to one forme of purge, compoſed of a certaine
portion of the Electuarie Diaphoenicō, mingled with ſo much powder
of Diagridium as he could take vp betweene his finger & his thomb,
which were his ordinary weights and ſcales, as I 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſince by our Apothecarie
informed: by which his butcher like boldneſſe he caſt many
into moſt dangerous laskes, accompanyed ſometimes with diuerſe
other euill accidents, as I haue heard ſince from ſome of themſelues:
and this chiefly was then to be ſeene, when this medicine was exhibited
to thinne and weake bodies.
               Now howbeit I could inſtance in a number of other examples,
all tending to the ſame purpoſe, yet fearing too much to
offend the Readers patience, referring them to ſome opportunitie,
I thinke it is now high time to turne my ſailes towards
the ſhore, and to caſt anchor for the preſent. And the aſſembling
of ſo many ſage Senators, according to the ancient
and laudable cuſtome of this kingdome, to apply fit ſalues to
the feſtered ſores of the ſame, putteth me in good hope of ſome
redreſſe, as well of the abuſes here complained of, as of diuers
other diſorders. I am not indeed ignorant, that affaires of high
conſequence, are to be handled in this honorable aſſemblie.
And yet I hope the life of man is not a matter of ſmalleſt moment.Iob 2. 16.
                  Agitur de corto humano. Skinne for skinne, and all that a
man hath will he giue for his life. Let this Gangrene therefore
in time be looked to, leſt it grow to a greater euill. Since
therefore errors of this kind are ſo full of danger, as hath bene
both in the precedent, & now in this preſent diſcourſe plainly
prooued, both by a great and ſmaller enqueſt, of ſuch perſons
with whoſe worth the delinquents I am ſure dare not compare,
I wiſh it may not be forgotten. Sed verbum ſat ſapienti. A word,
yea a nod, is enough to a wiſe man. And therefore I leaue
it to your Honourable conſiderations. CONSIDER
THE MATTER, CONSVLT, AND GIVE
SENTENCE.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Faults eſcaped.
            Pag. 5. line 2. for would reade could. p. 13. l. 29. r. ſtincking vrine. p. 16. marg.
note l. 8. r. victu. p. 21. l. 12. r. deliration. p. 23. l. 17. r. pot-dropſie. l. 29. r. retaining,
and marg. note l. 2. r. Forſ. p. 33. l. 13. r. of a high. p. 33. marg note. l. 20. r. à vitioſa.
p. 39. r. an abſurditie. p. 55. l. 29. r. foure pounds. p. 70. l. 36. r. winie colour. p. 77. l.
5. diſeaſes alone.
            
         
      
   