
      
         
            
            
               
            
            Floreat.
         
         
            
            THE Paſsionate Sparke of a Relen
               ting Minde.
            ¶ WRITTEN BY Simion Grahame.
            
            
               Quo fata vocant.
            
            Seene and allowed by authority.
            Printed at London by Humfrey Loynes, and are to be ſold at his Shop at the Weſt doore of S. Paules Church. 1604.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HIGH AND Mightie Prince Iames, by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, Fraunce and Ireland. &c.
            
               THis ſparke comes from the quenchleſſe fire of my euer-burning loue, which (to your Highneſſe) J ſacrifice vpon the Altar of my ſpotleſſe hart. Jn the ſeruent flames of this ardor, my Muſe with reſtles flightring wings combur's, ſtil hoping to be Nouriſhed with the radiant beames and propitious ſplendors of thoſe gratious Eyes. Then, O then let not the

Miſtie Ʋapors of darke Obliuion ouercloud the bright quickeneſſe of ſuch ſhining Suns. But rather let the Jnfluence of their admired vertue exhauſt theſe my rude lines vp into the rare and rich treaſure of your Maiſties ſuperaboundant fauor. So ending (to begin againe) J wiſh your Grace a moſt happie and long Reigne.
            
               Your Maieſties euer louing ſubiect.
Simion Grahame.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            To the King his Maieſtie.
            
            
               1
               GO thou proud Muſe with thy ambitious flight
               Let Wiſdome with her pleaſing plumes adorn thee
               If lofty thou ſhould'ſt ſoare thy ſelfe from ſight,
               What need'ſt thou care, the worlds Enuy to ſcorn thee?
            
            
               2
               Let Heau'ns thy Song with Ecchoes ſtill reſound,
               A Royall Subiect doth thy wings vpholde,
               And bids thee Mount aboue the valted Round,
               
               Loue hath no ſcope, bee prodigall and bolde.
            
            
               3
               Go then my Muſe His mightie Muſe adore
               Pull of the Veile that hid thy high deſire
               With conſort ſweet ſhe ſhall thy ſong decore,
               Her feathers faire giu's promiſe to aſpire.
            
            
               
               4
               Then like the Larke aſcen'd the Azure Ayre,
               With quiu'ring wings goe houer in the skye,
               Out blaſt thy Notes, and ſend them here and there
               Filling his eares with this melodious Crye.
            
            
               5
               O mightie King, Celeſtiall glory ſhine
               Ouer thy Crowns and thy earth'ruling hand,
               Let harts inſpir'd thy happines deuine:
               And let the world come ſtoupe at thy command.
            
            
               6
               
                  Fame through this Globe moſt furious-like ſhall thūder
               Fraught with thy praiſe on Vertues worth to flee
               And choke the Earth with ſuch admiring wonder
               That potent Kings may come and honor thee.
            
            
               7
               Hartes ſhall Conſume, of thy aſtoniſh'd foes
               To ſee thy rare and high ſtupendious ſtreet
               All paueat (whereon thou ſacred goes)
               With Crownes and Scepters thrown before thy feet.
            
            
               8
               Why hear'ſt thou not thy ſmiling Fortune call,
               And bids thee ſpurne that pleaſure mak's thee ſtay?
               Goe climbe her wheell, be not afraide to fall
               Thy ſtrength but thinks this world a ſlender pray.
            
            
               
               9
               Seeke firſt thy owne, what force can thee reſiſt?
               A name with nought, makes all thy people rage
               Like eager Haukes, reteinde vpon the fiſt,
               Who cannot haue their hunger to aſſwage.
            
            
               10
               The Apple ſtayes the ſimple Childe to weepe,
               And doth appeaſe his ſobbing heart of harmes:
               So flatt'ring ſonges lulles courage faſt a ſleepe,
               And makes the Souldier throw away his Armes.
            
            
               11
               Now ſits he wrapt vp in a warme furr'd gowne,
               Ouer the fire with firme-fixt-gazing eyes:
               There battels braue Characters doth ſet downe,
               Hee apprehends which thought deceiuing ſees
            
            
               12
               An Armie there in bloudy rage forth goes,
               With furie for'ſt, ſwelde with reuenge and griefe:
               And yonder flyes their faint and feeble foes,
               Heere ſtandes ſome troopes cut of without reliefe.
            
            
               13
               Some Martiall men bewitch't with beauty rare,
               Are intricate in Laborinthes of Loue:
               And for'ſt to trie in fancies flatt'ring ſnare,
               What ſweet-mixt-ſowre or pleaſing paines can proue.
            
            
               
               14
               Then Nymph-like-ſhe with ſtrange intiſing looke
               Doth ſo inchant the gallant minded men
               The bayte ſtill hides the poyſon of the hooke
               Till they be faſt, and thus betray'd, what then?
            
            
               15
               Poore captiue ſlaues in bondage proſtrate lies
               Yeelding vnto her mercy-wanting-will
               Shee in diſdaine ſcornes all their carefull cries.
               And Circes-like triumphes in learned skill.
            
            
               16
               With ambling trippes of beauties gorgeous grace
               
                  Aurora-like in firie colors clad
               And with bright reflex of her faireſt face
               She tempting goes with brainſicke humors lad.
            
            
               17
               Fearing that if ſhe ſhould but looke below
               Then Beames would from her burning eyes deſcend
               On Iuory breſt proud ſwelling hils of ſnow
               Would melt, conſume, and all their beauty ſpend.
            
            
               18
               And ſo ſhe lets her curled lockes downe fall
               Which do allure the gentle cooling winde
               To come and play ſtil wrapping vp in thrall
               Chaines of her haire, fonde louers hearts to binde.
            
            
               
               19
               Beautie in prime adorn'd doth feede the fight
               From Crimſon lipps ſweet Nectars guſt forth flowes
               Odor's perfumes the breath, not Natures right
               White Iourie hands a ſacred touch beſtowes.
            
            
               20
               And when thoſe pearle of Orientall-rankes
               With treaſure rich of tempting ſound deuides
               From two bright daintie mouing-corall-bankes
               In▪circkled cares calme ſmothing ſpeeches ſlides.
            
            
               21
               Ech ſenceleſſe ſence on doting pleaſure faſt
               Doth in a careleſle Regiſter inroule.
               Wiſhing that courſe of ſwift-wing'd Time to laſt
               Which ſpots the ſpotleſſe ſubſtance of the ſoule.
            
            
               22
               But oh beholde, Nature in morning weede
               Wepes to be wrong'd with ſupeſttitious Art
               For what can braines of rare inuention breede?
               Or what's vnſought which pleaſure may impart?
            
            
               23
               The ſharpeſt wit whoſe quicke deceiuing ſtill
               Makes reſtleſle muſing of their minde to try
               Vaine trifling ſnares, mixtur'd with Magicks skill
               So Art adds that which Nature doth deny.
            
            
               
               24
               And thus much more ſweete Syrens ſongs ſhe ſounds,
               To charme, coniure and tempt his hſtning care:
               Oh, then the poore Captiued wretch abounds
               In peruerſe vowes and monſtrous othes to ſweare.
            
            
               25
               By furious force of Fancy more than madd,
               With fond deſire in reſtleſſe courſe hee hunts:
               Blinde Loue can not diſcerne the good from badd,
               When on the eye-plumde tayle of pride it mounts.
            
            
               26
               The curious minde makes choiſe of good or ill,
               Then ſcales the fort of his engine to clym
               Aboue the top of Art exceeding skill,
               Perfect in that predominates in him.
            
            
               27
               Drunke with the wonders of a worthleſſe worth,
               From proſpect of a looking glaſſe he takes
               Strange Apiſh trickes to ſet his folly forth,
               Mockt with the geſture, that his ſhadow makes.
            
            
               28
               When fooliſh feates no waies will ſerue his turne,
               All hope is drownd in deſpaires groundleſle deepe:
               In reſtleſle bed (hee martir'd man) muſt mourne,
               Thoughts, ſighes, and teares admitt no kind of ſleep.
            
            
               
               29
               Thus layes the Conqueſt Conquerour of fieldes
               on his hurte harte he carries Cupids skarre.
               The skiruie fainting Coward baſely yieldes:
               to idle Loue the enemie of warre.
            
            
               30
               Now Trumpets ſounde, braue Martiall muſick turnes
               To fiddling noiſe, or ells ſome am'rous ſonge,
               That glorious fame her winges of worth now burnes,
               When golden youth in prime muſt ſuffer wronge.
            
            
               31
               Thus gallant ſprights doe quinteſence their wittes,
               Spending the rare inuention of their braines,
               On idle toyes, at which high honor ſpittes,
               Nor memoriz'd memorials remaines.
            
            
               32
               What Marble minde at this would not amaze,
               To ſee the ambuſht robberies and ſpoyles,
               O Royall Sir, with Conqu
                     •
                  ring eyes now gaze,
               Conquer this loſſe tha'ts loſt in all thy ſoyles.
            
            
               33
               Goe, goe, and make the skiruie world to yielde force
               Which trembling ſtoopes, made feareful with thy
               Outſprede an hoſt vpon ech forreigne fielde:
               And from ſelfe pleaſure, doe they ſelfe diuorce.
            
            
               
               34
               (But ſtay my Muſe recall this word of woe)
               Thy ſelfe ſhall with thy ſecond ſelfe abide,
               The glorious iſſue of thy loynes ſhall goe
               His honor ſhall the proude earths honor hide.
            
            
               35
               It's he the floriſh of thy Princely prime,
               It's he that Kings are made for to adore
               It's he bewayles the ſlow and tardy time,
               It's he that weepes there is not worlds in ſtore.
            
            
               36
               It's he that with a greater Courage com's,
               Than Godfrey did to ſackt the Pagan Turke
               
               With Trūpets ſounds & with great noiſe of Drum's,
               It's wondrous hee will ſet this world on wourke.
            
            
               37
               In his approach allegreat thy owne,
               With mightie Muſicke of a Martiall mirth.
               Beholde thou mak'ſt great Neptunes pride be ſhowne,
               Adorning him with ſuch a gorgeous birth.
            
            
               38
               Let matchleſſe marching-Caſtles with the winde,
               In Armies ſtrong and ſtately troopes forth ſhine:
               Now let them goe as harbingers to finde▪
               
               Ech vnknowne Coaſt and tell them all is thine.
            
            
               
               39
               Looke on that power that potent thou Commands,
               In learned Militarie Art, and how,
               Thy eager-harted ventring Subiects ſtands
               Wayting that Gallant warriours word. Goe tow,
            
            
               40
               Then doe not ſtay Victorious Troph's to raiſe,
               Let my Tryumphes through Sea and earth be ſpred,
               When thou art dead high fame ſhall pen thy praiſe,
               Of great renowne in volumes to be read.
            
            
               41
               Thou Eagle thou looke not on baſe fowles winges,
               Out-ſtretch thy owne and flye this world about.
               Thou Lyon thou leaue beaſts and hunt at Kinges,
               From their vſurped dennes goe rouſe them out.
            
            
               42
               Prowde Valor for the vangard ſhall make ſtrife,
               And loftie ſprights for Honor will aduance.
               Let him be loath'd that loth's to looſe his life,
               Or in thy quarrell skornes to trye his chaunce.
            
            
               43
               He willbe firſt who dying liu'd to ſee,
               This ſoyle thy right gouern'd with thy great grace:
               And that blacke miſt of vap'rous clowdes to flee
               Which long obſcur'd the ſplendors of thy face.
            
            
               
               44
               O, when he heard thy peoples ioy proclame
               The righteous King in their exalting Cryes,
               And when he heard them ſound thy ſacred Name,
               He threw his hatte vp in the azure skies.
            
            
               45
               On the Tow'rs toppe incarcerat he ſtood,
               And ſaid, O rare and ſweete exchange in deede!
               Thou fleetſt on Neptunes dutie-paying flood▪
               
               Hatte, thou art loſt, and I haue gainde a heade:
            
            
               46
               His Lady ſtaide her ſweete eyes ſiluer ſtreames,
               The hart-burſt ſighes which that deere dame did breath:
               Thou with the radiāt brightnes of thy beames
               Expeld her woes, and his vntimely death.
            
            
               47
               Pittie in thee doth Pitties ſelfe ſurpaſſe,
               With pittie heare thy peoples mourninge ſonges:
               Looke in abuſe, as in a looking glaſſe,
               Appeaſe this plague of their peſtif'rous wronges
            
            
               48
               With treaſure rich and rare adorniug giftes
               Of Iuſtice ioynde with mercy both in one:
               See how the worngde Complainer kneeling liftes,
               His hands, his eyes, and ſighes with martring mone.
            
            
               
               49
               He ſaies O Sir I would to God thou ſawe,
               What numbers great, Damn'd Vſurie doth kill
               The ſnakye Lawyer with vnlawfull lawe
               He ſuckes the hartblood of his Clients ſtill,
            
            
               50
               His hopeleſſe ſhiftes will promiſe very fayer,
               And take their ſoule, if that their ſoule were golde
               He robbes them firſt, then drownes them in diſpaire,
               So poore mens right, is to the rich men ſolde.
            
            
               51
               To come to thee alas they'r chokte with feare,
               Some are put backe, when kneeling on their knees
               Doe what they can before they get thy eare,
               The bribrous Minion, needes will haue his fees.
            
            
               52
               He takes in hand ech ſute both great or ſmall,
               And ſweates they'r ſure yea to them ſurely loſt.
               For firſt he tryes the walue of them all,
               And ſelles them quite to thoſe that will giue moſt.
            
            
               53
               When dayes, weekes, moneths and yeeres are ſpent he telles
               The Kinge will no waies graunt your ſutes: farewell,
               This whorles the poore man in a hundred helles
               Both them and theirs to begge, to robbe, and ſteale.
            
            
               
               53
               O Heau'ns what filthie Colors can I haue.
               To painte ſuch vgly Monſters in their kinde:
               They flatter moſt when they would moſt deceaue,
               There hony tonges ſtinges with a Vip'rous minde.
            
            
               34
               It's this vile Caterpillers Miſcheifes-Nurſe,
               That fills thy Commons full of ſad Complaintes,
               Thou com'ſt to cure this ſtrange conſuming Curſe,
               At which I know thy ruthfull hart relents.
            
            
               55
               I care not for the falty-ons enuie,
               I know this Phiſicke makes his ſoule to ſmart:
               O that it could both make him Weepe and Crie.
               Whil'ſt Conſcience-worme eates vp his giltie hart.
            
            
               56
               Spare not Reuenge, God ſends thee to redreſſe,
               Long-ſuffring-greife, and Rigor to remoue
               Treade down their heads that would the poore oppreſſe
               So ſhalt thou win and keepe thy peoples loue.
            
            
               57
               Still may thy loue with their true loue be bought,
               Still may thy Crown bring Crownes vpon thy Crown
               Still may thy worth with wond'rous worth be wrought
               Stil may renowne inrich thy rich renowne.
            
            
               
               51
               Still maiſt thou reigne in happines and health
               And ſtill mayſt thou in being euer bee:
               Belieue me Sir my loue is all my wealth,
               And all that wealth I ſacrifice to thee.
               So only Loue hath giuen my Muſe this flight,
               And makes her come ſalute thy ſacred ſight.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Of a Bee.
            
            
               
                  De l' Ape ch' loprenai Dolce, e Crudele
                  Le ago nel Core, Nella bocca La mele.
               
            
            
               Madrigall.
               Once did I ſee
               a ſounding Bee.
               
               Amongſt her ſweetned ſwarme
               ſtill would ſhee flee
               and fauour me.
               Then did I dread no harme.
            
            
               Now whilſt in Nectred-glory of her gaines,
               Shee ſitts and ſuckes the fayre well-floriſht flower:
               My ſugred hopes are turn'd to bitter paines,
               And lookt▪for-ſweete is nothing elles but ſower
               Ah cruell ſweete Bee ſweet and cure my ſmart,
               Honny my mouth, but doe not ſtinge my hart.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            To the famous Ile of Glorious Britannie.
            
            
               1
               ON Parnaſſe hill whilſt as I ſit to ſing▪
               
               Of ſtately ioy the ſtreames that by me ſlides:
               Sweet conſort yeelds from the Caſtalean ſpring
               Whoſe murmure ſtill in Siluer veines deuides,
               Then intricate with courſes to and fro▪
               
               They ſeeme to turne whil'ſt as with ſpeed they go.
            
            
               2
               The Muſes ſcarſe in circuit is ſat downe,
               When Laureat troopes comes kneeling mee before,
               In humble ſhow ech takes his Lawrell Crowne,
               And ſweares they ſhall this ſubiect all adore:
               So am I forc'd by thee, O wondrous worth!
               In warbling notes ſweete conſorts to ſend forth.
            
            
               3
               With nine-voyc'd mouth, my Delphin ſong I ſound,
               Of all the world bleſt bee thou Brittaines Ile.
               Thou, onely thou within this mortall round
               On whom the Heau'ns haue lou'de ſo long to ſmile
               For Phanix-like thou haſt renewde by kinde
               In getting that which lay for thee iuſhtinde.
            
            
               
               4
               Thy preſent time doth winter-blaſt diſpaire
               At force of Joy the barren branch decayes
               Long floriſh'd hope now fruitfull is and faire
               Whoſe lod'ued birth with burthen bowes the bayes,
               So downeward tops inclining ſtill below
               Such homage to their owner do they ſhow.
            
            
               5
               Then ſoyle in this moſt happie haru'ſt your right
               Ripe ſweete deſire in ſpight of vilde Enuie
               So ſhall you with your Monarches▪matching-might
               Make earthly Kings to feare your conqu'ring crie
               The circuit of this ſpatious Ball at length
               ſhall yeeld vnto your armie potent▪ſtrength,
            
            
               6
               As ſounds below relents the Ayer aboue
               That hideous noyſe of Thunderclaps may ſwage
               So proud vſurping mindes ſhall ſtoope to mooue
               The Lion read to ſtay his roring rage
               Their honors high when he hath made them thrall
               Since with his force their forceleſle force muſt fall.
            
            
               7
               Hee threatens th'earth with ſuch tryumphant might
               That makes his foes afraid to heare his name
               On Vertues wings oreſhinde with honors light
               Borne through the world with euer flying fame
               Which ſtill the Eccho of his might reſounds
               A terror threatning theſe terreſtiall bounds.
            
            
               
               8
               His Scepter proud and his great conqu'ring hand
               Will erect Troph's of high Triumphes on all
               Earth-ruling mindes ſtooping at his commaund
               Adorn'd they are by him to bee made thrall.
               So Monarch hee muſt cauſe ech potent King,
               For him and his rich tributes for to bring.
            
            
               9
               No treaſons gilt, ſuch threatningss can abide
               Nor Vipers vilde who cates their tongues to barke
               With feares confuſ'd muſt needs their ſelues go hide
               And lye obſcure in the Cemerian darke.
               From light debar'd to preſſage Plutoes place
               Where mōſtrous ſpirits ſuch mōſters ſhal imbrace
            
            
               10
               Sweld with Enuie and poyſ'ned great with griefe
               Moſt ſerpent-like ſpewes Vennome on their owne
               Damn'd harts abhord whoſe mutins breeds miſchief
               They with their ſelfe, their ſelfe ſhall bee orethrowne.
               So diu'lliſh braynes brings reſtleſſe murther ſtill
               They ſilthie frogs ech one ſhall other kill.
            
            
               11
               Then ſubiects true on honors throne ſet forth
               No death your eternized life can end
               For famous feates ad's wonders to ſuch worth▪
               
               And truth ſtill doth a ſhining light out ſend
               Whoſe glancing beames reflexing heere and there
               By flowing quilles of Poets are made rare.
            
            
               
               12
               Now happie Ile ſequeſtred liues no more
               Since ioyn'de expell the excrements of wrath
               And let their foule ambitious factes implore
               Their owne orethrow and well-deſeruing death.
               Raſe downe, tread on their turrets of Enuie
               Whoſe pride would mount aboue the valted skie.
            
            
               13
               The Regiſter of Memorie beholde
               How God of wonders, wondrous works hath wrought
               When life paſt hope to Treaſon he was ſolde,
               Till threatning▪death in dangers mouth him brought
               In ſuch extremes deathes ambuſh was in vaine
               For Heau'ns ſtrong hand did ſaue him ſtil vnſlaine.
            
            
               14
               All high attempts of deu'lliſh foes was foyld
               All hideous noiſe of horrors did aſſwage
               All tragike troopes of helliſh thoughts was ſpoylde
               And rigors ſelfe gaue rigor to their rage
               Enſignes diſplaid whoſe terror them confounds
               Whilſt conqu'ring Ioy victorious trumpet ſounds.
            
            
               15
               The ſhip which death with tempeſts grief did threat'n
               And gulfes of ſeas was readie to deuoure
               When reſtleſſe-mercy-wanting-ſtormes had beat'n
               At laſt came ſafe vnto her long-ſought ſhore.
               So heau'n now brings him to his hau'ning place
               Still to ſucceed to him and all his race.
            
            
               
               16
               The vpright in each true externall thing
               Bewrayes the force hart▪burnig-loue doth yeald
               For ſmiling lookes of ſuch a gratious King
               Shall make your loue with liſe and blood be ſeald,
               Vnworthie to enioy this mortall breath
               Who for this King or countrey feares their death.
            
            
               17
               The Altar is a ſpotleſſe minde whereon
               You ſacrifice and offer vp good-will
               Loue yeelds the fuell from the hart alon
               Which once inflam'd is quenchleſſe burning ſtill
               Then Martiall feates ſhall breed couragious ſtrife,
               In battels braue to trye a careleſſe life.
            
            
               18
               Though the Idaa of your long deſire
               Vnſetled Time obſcures him for a ſpace
               Yet ſhall this Time with comming Time expire
               And then receiue fruition of his face
               Who Iuſtice ſeekes, his wiſedomes eyes ſhall ſee
               With Reaſons right each may contented bee.
            
            
               19
               Lo Spring-time comes, long dark'ned Sun com's out
               All to renew that Winter blaſtes had ſpoil'd
               When ſending forth, his gorgeous beames about,
               Hopes haru'ſt expel's which high diſpaire had foil'd
               So hope triumphes, diſpaire lies quite o'rethrowne
               Sweet Soyle thou haſt which God hath made thine own.
            
            
               
               20
               Miſconſter not his well-inclining-minde
               Doo not miſtruſt, for Triall lurkes in Time
               Why to his Kingdomes ſhall hee prooue vnkinde,
               And glorie ſtayne of his adorning prime?
               No counſaile can make him become ſo ſtrange,
               Nor earthly pompe his burning loue to change.
            
            
               21
               Murmour no more nor bee not diſcontent
               When conſtant loue and ſpotleſſe Iuſtice ſtands
               With eager piercing lookes for to preuent
               All kinde of foule oppreſſion in his lands.
               This is the right inricheth his renowne,
               This is the oath made to his royall Crowne.
            
            
               12
               And you whoſe long tormented hearts hath ſtill
               With cloudie miſtes and darkeneſſe been obſcur'd
               You all the world with Tragike volumes fill
               What woe's deuiſ'd that you haue not indur'd
               Your Regiſter this Rigor may recall,
               Shame, bloodſhed, death, ſtill captiues led in thrall.
            
            
               23
               In guiltleſſe him, no crueltie doth dwell
               Nor from his mercy neuer ſprang miſchiefe
               Your conſcience read and it ſhall ſurely tell
               His hands are waſh'd as cauſeleſſe of your griefe
               Then let the bloud the baniſhment and death
               Bee on their heads the Authors of your wrath.
            
            
               
               24
               What though a King? yet Kings are ſometime forc'd
               To yeeld conſent with vnconſenting hart
               As from his will vnwillingly diuorc'd
               That no vprore ſhould riſe any part:
               Such is the onely prudence in a Prince
               That 'gainſt a murm'ring Momus makes defence.
            
            
               25
               Why, doe not then degorge ſatyrike words
               Vſurping right, thou ſhalt vſurpe thy braine
               For lo nought elſe ſuch fooliſh feates affords:
               But diu'lliſh guerdon for thy greateſt gaine,
               And ſtill thou ſhalt infamous make thy name
               When as thy end's to end in endleſſe ſhame.
            
            
               26
               If Chriſtian thou, then Chriſtian-like abide
               Till flowing fauour from his Kingly loue
               By Stately rule thy fredome ſhall prouide
               When mindes remorſe and mercy ſhall him moue,
               So Conſcience thral'd, made free and griefe is gone
               Then ſhall his Soyles contented hue in one.
            
            
               27
               And dark'ned Clouds that lowers vpon you heads
               Giues place vnto the glori'us ſhining Sun
               Whoſe burning beames with radiant ſplendor ſpreads
               A reſtleſſe race not ending ſtill begun
               To ſhew the ods 'twixt heau's Caeleſtiall light
               And glomy miſt of Helles eternall night.
            
            
               
               28
               From treaſure rich of Gods immortall ſtore
               Let feruent loue in fity flames deſcend
               And ſill you: hearts with pittie to implore
               That heau'ns preuenting hand may him defend
               Let higheſt curſe breath forth conſuming woes
               For to conuert or elſe confound his foes.
            
            
               29
               A gratious King whoſe Mercie ſtill abounds
               A gallant Queen by Nature made none ſuch▪
               
               A Prince whoſe worth Iames reſtles Trumpet ſounds
               And Princeſſe ſhe I cannot prayſe too much
               A King a Queene, a Prince, a Princeſſe rare
               O Soyle, what Soyle, can with this Soyle compare.
            
            
               30
               Then happie Ile, in this thy happie day
               Gods thundring voyee with harts relenting heare
               Whil'ſt heau'ns high Troopes theatred in array
               With ſounding loy before Chriſts throne compeare
               In conſort ſweet melodious ſongs to ſing
               Liue hue great Iames moſt bleſt and potent King.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            To Scotland his Soyle:
            
               To thee my Soyle (where firſt
               I did receiue my breath)
               Theſe Obſequies I ſing
               Before my Swan-like-death.
               My loue by nature bound
               which ſpotleſſe loue I ſpend
               From treaſure of my hart
               to Thee I recommend.
               I care not Fortunes frowne,
               nor her vnconſtant Fate:
               
               Let her diſſembling ſmile
               and tryumph in deceate.
               Curſ'd be that man which hoords
               his hopes vp in her lap,
               And curſ'd be he that builds
               vpon her hapleſle hap.
               I tread on that blinde Bawd
               
               and ſcorne hir ſowre-mixt-ſweet,
               In ſpite of all her ſpite
               I ſpurne her with my feet.
               Now let her ſpet more wrath
               (If any more yet bee)
               Let horror of her hart
               thunder at careleſſe-Mee.
               
               Then all the flatt'ring ſhowes
               of Fortune I diſdaine,
               So farewell Soyle and friends,
               a Pilgrime once againe.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            
               His Paſsionado when he was in Pilgrimage.
            
               1
               THou Phaeton thy fity courſe do'ſt end,
               and Cinthia thou with borrow'd light do'ſt ſhine
               Theſe woods their ſilent horrors doo out-ſend,
               And Vallies lowe their miſtie Vapors ſhrine,
               Each huely thing by natures courſe doth goe
               To reſt ſaue I that wander now in woe.
            
            
               2
               My plaints impart theſe ſoli'd partes to fill,
               Whil'ſt roaring Riuers ſend their ſowndes among
               Each dreadfull Deen appeares to helpe me ſtill,
               And yeelds ſad Conſorts to my ſorr'wing ſong,
               How oft I breath this wofull word alace,
               From Eccho I ſad accents backe imbrace.
            
            
               3
               I wil▪ aduance, what feares can me affray▪
               
               Since Dreades are all debar'd by high diſpaire,
               Lake darke nights-Ghoſt, I Vagabond aſtraye
               With trobled ſpri't tranſported here and there,
               None like my ſelfe but this my ſelfe alone
               I matur'd man bewaile my matchleſſe mone.
            
            
               
               4
               You flintic ſtones take eares and eyes to ſee
               This thundring greife with earthquake of my hart
               That you may ſigh and weepe with miſer-Mee
               
               Melt at the tragicke Commentes of my ſmart.
               Let theſe my teares that fall on you ſo oft
               Make your obdurate hardneſſe to be ſoft.
            
            
               5
               You liquid droppes diſtilling from mine eyes,
               In Chriſtall you▪ my ſecond ſelfe appeares▪
               
               Patterne of paine, how do'ſt thou ſympathize
               In viſage wan, and Pilgrim's weede thou beares?
               And on thoſe ſignes of miſcontent attire
               Still doe I read, debar'd from my deſire.
            
            
               6
               This hairie Roabe which doth my corps contain
               This Burden and my rough vnraſed heade
               A winter and a ſummer haue I bin
               In dangers great ſtill wandring in this weede,
               Loe thus the force of my diſaſters ſtrange
               Hath made me vſe this vnacquainted change.
            
            
               7
               I am dri'd vp with Dolors I endure
               My hollowe eyes bewray my reſtles night
               My Viſage pale ſelfe pittie doth procure
               I ſee my ſores deciph'red in my ſight.
               A Pilgrime ſtill, my Oracle was ſo,
               
                  And made my name, AH MISER MAN I GO.
            
            
               
               8
               Now doe I goe and wander any way,
               No ſtrange eſtate no kinde of trau'ling toyles
               No threatning Croſſe nor ſorrow can me ſtay,
               To ſearch and ſeeke through all the ſorts of ſoyles.
               So round about this Round ſtill haue I run,
               Where I began, againe I haue begun.
            
            
               9
               In ſtrangeſt parts where ſtranger I may bee,
               An outcaſt loſt and voyed of al reliefe:
               When ſaddeſt ſights of ſorrow I can ſee,
               They to my graue ſhall helpe to feede my griefe▪
               
               If Wonders ſelfe can wofull wonders ſhowe
               That ſight, that part, that wonder I will knowe.
            
            
               10
               Thus doe I walke on forreigne fieldes forlorne,
               To careleſſe-Mee, all cares do prooue vnkinde,
               I doe the Fates of ſickle Fortune ſcorne:
               Each Croſſe now bredes contentment to 
                     •
                  y minde
               Aſtoniſh of ſtupendious things by day,
               Nor howling ſounds by night can me affray.
            
            
               11
               You ſtately, Alpes ſurmounting in the skyes
               The force of floods that from your heights down falles
               There mighty Clamors with my carefull Cries,
               The Ecchoes voice from hollow Caues recalles.
               The ſnow froz'n-clowds down frō your tops do thū
                  der
               Their voyce with mine doth teare the ayre a ſunder
            
            
               
               12
               And Neptune thou when thy proude ſwelling wrath
               Frō gulphes to mountaines mou'd with Winters blaſt
               In anger great when thou did'ſt threaten death
               Oft in thy rage, thy raging ſtormes I paſt
               And my ſalt teares increaſt thy ſaltnes more,
               My ſighes with windes made all thy bowells rore.
            
            
               13
               The ſpatious earth and groundleſſe deepe ſhall beare,
               A true Record of this my mart'ring mone
               And if there were a world of worlds to heare
               (When from this mortali Chaos I am gone)
               I dare approue my ſorrow hath bin ſuch
               That all their witts cannot admire too much.
            
            
               14
               On the colde grownde my Caytife-Carcaſle lyes,
               The leaueles trees my Winter▪blaſted-bed.
               Noc Architecture but the Vap'rous skyes,
               Blacke foggie Miſt my weari'd corpes hath cled,
               This lothſome La
                     •
                  e on which I reſtles tourne
               Doth beſt befit Mee-Miſer-man to mourne.
            
            
               15
               With open eyes Nights darknes I diſdaine▪
               
               On my Croſ'd▪breſt I Croſle my Croſſed armes
               And when Repoſe ſeckes to preuent my paine▪
               
               Squadrons of Cares doe ſound their fleſh alarmes
               So in my ſleep (the Image of pale Death)
               
               Theſe ſighing words with burthen bruſ'd I breath.
            
            
               
               16
               I euer row'd my Barge againſt the ſtreame,
               I ſcal'd thoſe ſteppes that Fortune did me frame
               I Conquer'd, which impoſsible did ſeeme.
               I, haples I, once happie I became
               Now ſweeteſt Ioy is turn'd to bitter gall
               The higher vp the greater was my fall.
            
            
               17
               What paſsing Follies are in high Eſtates,
               Whoſe fooliſh hopes giue promiſe to aſpire:
               Selfe-flatt'rie ſtill doth maske the feare of Fates
               
               Till vnawares deceiu'd in ſougth deſire,
               This breeds diſpaire, then force of Fortunes change
               Setts high Eſtates in dread and perrill ſtrange.
            
            
               18
               There ſecret grudge, Enuie and Treaſon dwelles
               There Iuſtice lies, in Dole▪bewraying weede
               There ſlyding Time with alt'ring feates ſtill telles
               The great Attempts ambitious mindes doe breed.
               They who haue moſt ſtill hunt for more and more
               They moſt deſire that moſt are choak'd with ſtore
            
            
               19
               Henceforth will I forſake Terreſtiall Toyes,
               Which are nought ells but ſhawdowes of deceat
               What Couer'd danger is in earthly ioyes,
               When vilde Enuie, triumphes on each Eſtate.
               Thou Traytor Time thy Treaſon doth betray
               And makes youthes Spring in floriſh fayre decay.
            
            
               
               20
               What's in Experience which I haue not ſought
               All (in that All) my will I did aduaunce
               At higheſt rate, all theſe my witts are bought
               In Fortunes Lottrie, I haue try'd my Chaunce.
               So what I haue I haue it not by ſhowe,
               But by experience which I truly knowe.
            
            
               21
               Long haue I ſearch'd and now at laſt I finde,
               Eye-pleaſing-Calmes the tempeſt doth obſcure.
               When I in glory of my proſp'rous winde,
               With white▪ſweld▪ſayles on gentle ſeas ſecure
               And whē I thought my Loadſtarre ſhin'd moſt faire
               Eu'n then my hopes made ſhipwracke on diſpaire.
            
            
               22
               My light is darke whil'ſt I am ouerthrowne,
               Poore ſilly Barke that did pure loue poſſeſſe:
               With great vngratefull ſtormes thus am I blowne
               On ruthleſſe Rockes ſtill deafe at my diſtreſſe.
               So long-ſought-Conqueſt doth in ruin's boſt
               And ſaies behold, thy loue and labor's loſt.
            
            
               23
               Since all my loue and labor's loſt, let Fame
               
               Spit forth her hate and with that hatefull ſcorne
               In darke obliuion ſepulchrize my name:
               And tell the world that I was neuer borne.
               In me all earthly dream'd-of-Ioy ſhall ende.
               As Indian herbes, which in blacke ſmoke I ſpende.
            
            
               
               14
               All-doting-pleaſure, that all-tempting-Deuill,
               I ſhall abhor as a contag'ous Peſt
               I'le purge and clenſe my ſences of that Euill
               I ſweare and vow, ſtill in this vow to reſt,
               In fable habit of the mourning blacke
               I'le ſolemnize this oath and vow I make.
            
            
               15
               Then goe vilde World confuſed Maſſe of nought,
               Thy bitterneſſe hath now abuſ'd my brayne
               Auoid thy deu'lliſh Fancy from my thought
               With idle toyes torment me not agayne.
               My Time which thy alluring folly ſpent
               With heart contrite and teares I doe repent.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Againſt Time.
            SONNET.
            
               GOe traytor Time and authorize my wrong▪
               
               My wrack, my woe, my wayting on bewray
               Look on my heart which by thy ſhifts ſo long
               Then tyranniz'd with Treaſon to betray
               My hopes are fled, my thoughts are gone aſtray
               And ſenceleſſe I haue ſorrow in ſuch ſtore
               That paine it ſelfe to whom I am a pray
               Of mee hath made a martred man and more.
               Go, go then Time, I hatefull thee implore,
               To memorize my ſad and matchleſſe mone
               Whilſt thy deceipts by death I ſhall decore
               My loſſe of life ſhall make them known each one,
               So (I poore I) I ſing with Swan like ſong,
               Go traytor Time and Authorize my wrong.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            ¶ The Eſtate of worldly Eſtates.
            
            
               1
               EAch hath his Time whom Fortune will aduance
               Whoſe fickle wheel runs reſtleſſe round about
               Some flatt'ring lye oft changeth others chance
               Dangers deceipt in guiltie harts breeds doubt.
               It's ſeene
               What yet hath beene
               With tract of time to paſſe,
               And change
               Of Fortune ſtrange
               At laſt hath turn'd their glaſſe.
            
            
               2
               
                  Enuie triumph's on tops of high Eſtate
               All ouer-hung with veiles of feigned ſhow
               Man chmbes aboue the courſe of ſuch conceate
               That lothe-like, they loath to look below.
               And what?
               All's haſzard that
               Wee ſeek on Dice to ſet,
               For ſome
               To height's do come
               Then falls in dangers net.
            
            
               
               4
               The gallant man, if poore, hee's thought a wretch,
               His Vertue rare is held in high diſdayne
               The greateſt Foole is wiſe if he be rich
               And wiſedome flower from his Lunatique brayne,
               Thus ſee
               Rare ſprit's to bee
               Of no account at all.
               Diſgrace
               Hath got ſuch place
               Each ioyes at others fall.
            
            
               3
               The brib'rous minde who makes a God of gould
               He ſcornes to plead without he haue reward
               Then poore mens ſuites at higheſt rat's are ſould
               Whilſt Au'rice damn'd, nor Ruth hath no regard.
               For heere
               He hath no feare
               Of Gods conſuming curſe
               His gaines
               Doth pull with paines
               Plagues from the poore mans purſe.
            
            
               
               5
               The furious flames of Sodom's ſodaine fier,
               With feruent force conſume vaine Pride to nought
               With wings of wax let ſoaring him aſpire
               Aboue the Starres of his ambitious thought.
               And ſo
               When hee doth go
               On top of Prides high glory
               Then ſhall
               His ſodain fall
               Become the worlds ſad Story.
               
            
            
               6
               
                  Ingratitude that ill,-ill-fauor'd Ill
               
               In noble breſtes hath builded Caſtles ſtrong
               
                  Obliuion ſett's-vp the Troph's that ſtill
               Bewrayes the filthie vildeneſſe of that wrong.
               Ah minde
               Where deu'lliſh kinde
               
                  Ingratitude doth dwell
               That Ill
               
               Coequals ſtill
               The greateſt Ill in hell.
            
            
               
               7
               On poyſons filth contagious Error ſpreeds
               Heau'ns ſpotleſſe eyes looks as amaz'd with wonder
               Their Viprous mindes ſuch raging horror breeds
               To teare Religions virgin-roabes aſunder.
               What then
               O wicked men
               And Hels Eternall pray
               Go mourne
               And in time turne
               From your erronious way.
            
            
               8
               What courſe wants croſſe? what kinde of ſtate wants ſtrife?
               What worldling yet could euer ſeem content?
               What haue wee heere in this our thwartting life?
               
                  Ioy, Beautie, Honour, Loue, like ſmoak are ſpent.
               I ſay
               
                  Time goe's away
               Without returne againe
               How wiſe!
               Who can deſpiſe
               Theſe worldly vapors vaine.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            His Dying ſong.
            
               1
               NOw hapleſſe Hart what can thy ſoars aſſwage
               Since that art grypt with horror of Deaths hand?
               Thou (baleful-thou) becoms the Tragick ſtage
               Where all my tort'ring thoughts theatred ſtand:
               
                  Griefe, feare, death, thought, each in a monſtrous kinde
               Like vgly monſters muſter in my minde.
            
            
               2
               Thou loathſome bed to reſtleſſe-martred-Mee
               
               Voyd of repoſe, fill'd with conſuming cares,
               I will breath forth my wretched life on thee,
               For quenchleſſe wo and paine, my graue prepares
               Vnto pale-agonizing-Death am thrall
               Then muſt I go, aud anſwere to his call.
            
            
               3
               O Memorie moſt bitter to that man,
               Whoſe God is Golde and hoords it vp in ſtore,
               But O that blind-deceiuing-Wealth what can
               It ſaue a life, or add one minute more?
               When hee at reſt, rich treaſures in his ſight,
               His Soule (poore Foole) is tane away that night.
            
            
               
               4
               And ſtrangers gets the ſubſtance of his gaine,
               Which he long ſought with endleſſe toyles to finde
               This v
                     •
                  lde worl
                        •
                     s ſilth and excrements moſt vaine,
               Hee needs muſt dye and leaue it all behinde.
               O man in minde remember this, and mourne,
               Naked thou cam'ſt, and Naked muſt retourne,
            
            
               5
               I naked came, I naked muſt returne▪
               
               Earths flatt'ring pleaſure is an Idle toy
               For now I ſweare my very Soule doth ſpurne
               That breath, that froth, that moment fleeting ioy,
               Then farewell World, let him betray'd ſtill boſt
               Of all miſchiefe that in Thee truſteth moſt.
            
            
               6
               Burnt-Candle, all thy ſtore conſum'd thou end's,
               Thy lightning ſplendor threat's for to be gone,
               O how do'ſt thou reſemble Mee that ſpend's
               And ſighs forth life in ſighing forth my mone?
               Thy light Thee lothes, I loth this lothed life,
               Full of deceipt, falſe enuie, grudge, and ſtrife.
            
            
               7
               I call on Time, Tim's alt'red by the change,
               I call on Friendes, friendes haue cloſ'd vp their eares
               I call on Earthly Pow'rs, and they are ſtrange
               I call in vaine when Pittie none appeares.
               Both Time and friends, both Earthly Powers and all
               All in diſdaine are deafe at my hoarſe call.
            
            
               
               8
               Then Prayer flowe from my hart-humbling knees,
               To the ſupreame Celeſtiall Throane aſpire,
               And ſhew my griefe to heau'ns all ſeeing eyes,
               Who neuer yet deny'd my iuſt deſire.
               Mans helpe is nougth, O God thy helpe I craue,
               Whoſe ſpotleſſe blood my ſpotted Soule did ſaue.
            
            
               9
               Then take my Soule which bought by thee, is thine,
               Earth harb'ring-worms, take you my Corps of Clay,
               O Chriſt on mee Eternall mercy ſhine,
               Thy bleeding woundes waſh all my ſinnes away.
               Now now I come to thee O I-ſu ſweet,
               Into thy hands I recommend my Street.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   