
      
         
            
            
            
            THE
DISCOVERY
of
A NEW WORLD
or
A Deſcription of the South
Indies. Hetherto vnknowne
By an Engliſh Mercury
            Imprinted for Ed: Blount
and W. Barrett.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE TRVE
mirror of trueſt honor,
WILLIAM Earle of
Penbroke.
            
               IF IT BE
an offence
(my noble
LORD)
to ſhew our
Affections
vnto thoſe
wee honor
in any obiect
of dutyfullneſſe
whatſoeuer:
then haue I offended, and muſt kneele

for remiſſion. But if loue and gratitude
be law dable effects, in what forme
ſoeuer they appeare, then haue not I
broken any condition of decorum, in
conſecrating this worke to your illuſtrious
honour. It bare the badge of
an honorable Patron in the originall:
and I could make it doe no leſſe in the
tranſlation. And for mine election,
the worlds generall decay of the eſteeme
of learning, in thoſe breaſts
that haue beſt meanes to ſupport it,
and the farre-ſpread fame of your
glory, by that Phoenix-bounty that
hath left all the land to build her neſt
in your boſome, theſe motiues haue
more then induced mee to approache
ſo neere that bright luſtre your Honour
lights the world with, as to
beare one part in the Hymnes of your
prayſes, by this dutifull dedication▪
And (good my Lord) herein bee▪ you
my ſeauen-ſold ſhield againſt the shout
of all thoſe bliſtered mouthes, whoſe
moſt felicitie is to miſ-interprete moſt

maliciouſlie: Or doe but giue mee
foote-holde, and then let mee alone
to beate all their diſgraces about their
owne eares, and the whole worlds, in
a true Satyrick furie; in an Arioſtoes
Swanne, that ſhall ſnatch their names
from times all-waſting skirt, and beare
them vp, to euer-laſting recorde in the
Temple of Infamie. But for my dutie
to your ſacred vertues, let this expreſſe
mee: I will bee that Bolognian dogge,
whoſe faith purchaſed him this Epi
               
                  •
               aph:
that hee did alwayes

                  Latrai a ladri, & a gli amanti tacqui, &c.
               
               
                  Barke lowd at theeues, and make them euer faile:
                  But whē friends came, lay down, & wagd his taile.
               
Such am I: conſecrated to your Lordſhips
ſeruice: and vnder the protection
of this mine owne zeale, aduenture
to preſent you with A diſcouerie
and no diſcouerie, of a world and no
world, both knowne and vnknowne, by a

traueller that neuer trauelled. Written
first in Latine, and no Latine, and now
tranſlated, and yet not tranſlated, by
the ſame man, yet not the ſame
man that first of all
pend it.
            
            
               Your Honours moſt
zealouſly deuoted:
I. H.
            
         
         
            
            To the Readers,
Inſtructions for their voiage into
this new world.
            THere are diuers inquiſitiue Sceptiques
(vnpartial reader, for ſuch I
would haue thee to be,) who ſince this new
Diſcouery of the South Indies, vpon
ſome ouer-ſight of mine owne, in not giuing
ſufficient intimation of the grounds
whence I had the firſt light of the ſaid
Diſcouery, as alſo of the manner wherein
I haue proceeded vpon the ſaid grounds
haue out-runne their owne iudgments in
deſcanting farre otherwiſe of this worke,
then a fauourable cenſure would euer
haue held it to deſerue, and being either
lead with too much zeale to the well deſeruing
vertues of that Reuerend man that
long agoe laid the firſt proiect of this Diſcouery,
or with (it may be a true) obſeruation
of ſome imperfection in mee that
now of late haue raiſed this new building
vpon that old foundation: haue taken occaſion
both to thinke him leſſe worthy of
their good conceites, and alſo to proclaime
me a iuſt deſeruer of the ſeuereſt and moſt

exemplary cenſures. Which wrong done
vnto him (whome I muſt euer reuerence)
hath bound mee to make an ingenuous acknowledgement
of mine owne forgetfulneſſe
in the firſt edition of this preſent
worke, rather then to ſit ſtill and ſee his
reputation expoſed to the miſconſtructions
to which my negligence is (& in ſome
iudgements, iuſtly) imagined to haue giuen
the firſt and originall cauſe. But let
this proteſtation be (if it may be) ſufficient
to remooue the weight of ſiniſte imputations
from his grauity, and lay them
vpon mine owne youthfulneſſe, that I dare
engage my life, there is no man in the
whole world, who hath either conuerſed
with himſelfe in perſon, or his workes in
print, that euer will ſurmiſe this preſent
copy to haue had any teſtimony of his acknowledgement,
or approbation to bee any
way befitting his place, or (which is more)
his profeſſion. Wherefore to giue a full
anſwere vnto that groſſe miſpriſion of
theirs, who imagine the worke it ſelfe to
haue beene of his writing and publiſhing
in the forme wherein it now paſſeth;
whereby they take occaſion to taxe him of

diuers (in their iudgement) immodeſt,
light, ſcurrilous, and ridiculous paſſages
therein. I doe here abſolutely auerre, and
giue notice to all that ſhall hereafter take
view hereof, This worke was neuer his, he
neuer ſaw it, neuer dreamed of any ſuch
matter, vntill hee met it in the hand of
another man. There was indeed a little
booke ſome 8. or 9. yeares agoe that came
from Franckford, which ſome few (I know
not vpon what illumination more then
ordinary) affirmed to haue paſſed the file
of his muſe, which if it be true, it can be no
way in the world either preiudiciall to his
learning, (ſeeing it hath all perfection fitting
an abſolute poeme) nor to his grauity
or profeſſion, ſeeing it was a birth of his
youth; wherein neuertheleſſe I will a vow
that hee hath towred aboue the capacities
(at leaſt aboue the imitation) of all thoſe
ouer-weening iudgements that dare any
way preſume to traduce his originall. In
iuſt defence of which worthy worke, I caſt
defiance in the teeth of all that malice or
traduce him, that it is neither any way
ſcurrilous, immodeſt, light, nor ridiculous:
and I will giue the proudeſt Critique
               
that liues, as many yeares as hee and his
fellowes haue bin fooles, either to parallell
it, or to pick any the leaſt touch out of it,
which cannot bee defended euen till his
wittes that ſhall oppoſe, be drawne as dry
as euer Dutchman left cup.
            But as touching this preſent pile of
Engliſh, it is mine, it hath no further alliāce
to his, then chalke hath to cheeſe, for
as theſe haue no cohaerence in their neareſt
proprieties (which tranſlations ſhould neuer
want) but onely in their generall kind
of eſſence as they are both corporeall ſubſtances;
no more doth this worke any way
reſemble his in faſhion, ſtile, or diſcourſe,
but onely in the inuention and proiect. As
for the paſſages in it, which ſome pretend
to bee ſcurrilous or immodeſt, there
may perhaps bee ſome indeed that carry
not that pondrous reſpect in them which
an ancient iudgement, or retired grauity
may ſeeme to require: I grant it, what
would yee haue more? they are flaſhes of
youth: ſemel inſaniuimus omnes; And
I pray yee (that cenſure mee ſo ruthleſly)
which of you all is there, but one time or
other in the forenoone of your daies, hath

had his vagaries in the world, and hath
flowne out ſometimes as well as I? Oh but,
not inprint, ſaies ſome ſeuerer Critique!
Alas yet had Ouid his Amores, Seneca
his Luſus in Claudium, and others as
graue as hee, their exorbitances now and
then as vnguirt as others! But that theſe
weakeneſſes (for ſo I confeſſe they are) in
mee, ſhould be made as ſtaines to the reputation
of another, of one whoſe learning,
life, and workes now extant may ſerue as
purging fires whereat all thoſe that hence
haue taken occaſion to wrong him thus,
might long agoe haue lighted their ignorance
were it neuer ſo immenſe; that my
lightneſſes ſhould bee reputed as births of
his worthines! Oh that my pen (whereby
ſince I have ignorantly iniur'd him, I doe
thus willingly and freely cleare him) could
but make them ſee what an vniuſt conſtruction
they haue made of an ignorant
(and I protest vtterly vnwilling) offence!
But ſince mine owne vnwarineſſe gaue
first occaſion of thoſe vnkinde, and more
then fooliſh callumniations which ignorance
draweth from mine error, to ſtaine
his goodneſſe with; all the ſatisfaction I

can giue him, is to ſhew my ſelfe willing to
make a faire way againe for his deſerts,
in the boſomes of ſuch as hence take their
occaſiō of diſlike, by proclaiming this truth
to all that ſhall read it, that this preſent
Diſcouery of the South-Indies is none
of his, but had this forme giuen it, without
his knowledge, by one who will euer
acknowledge his worth & grauity to haue
beene vtterly ignorant of any vnfit phraſe
whatſoeuer included in the whole booke.
Hee whom my contrition, and this ſatiſfaction
(COLLATERALLY) cannot content,
is without mercy, and I aſſure my ſelfe will
dye without merit, if hee bee not quickly
ſhipt away for this new Continent, with
letters of commendation to all our friends
in Cockſcombaya.
            
            As for you (gentlemen and frinds)
whoſe iudgements haue giuen gracious
acceptance to this our Imaginary world,
I will euer endeuor to further your contentments
with the beſt inuentions that
the labours of a yong ſcholler can produce.
You, (right Iouiall ſpirits) and none but
you, are they to whom I conſecrate theſe
my trauels, ſince none but you can diſcerne

the ſence which they include. Onely in
one thing I muſt intreate your fauorable
Cenſures, and that is, in my alluſions here
and there vnto the names of ſome cities of
fame and reſpect, both of our owne, and others:
aſſuring you (as your true examination
of the particulars may aſſure you
better) that I had no intent to intimate
any collation or reference of the ſtate or
maners of thoſe I deſcribe, vnto theirs to
which I allude. Let this proteſtation therefore
cleare me from ſiniſter imputations,
and you from all vntrue ſuppoſitions.
            And know all you that haue not yet ſeene
theſe Lands, but intend to take a view of
thē hereafter, that you muſt firſt of al take
one of that French Doctors pills, Deſpouillez
vous de tout affection, and this
will enable you fully to endure the alteration
of all ayres in this clime. Secondly
you muſt neuer trauell ſingle, but two, or
three in a company, for one you know may
apprehend more then another can, and
thoſe before, that haue miſcaried in this
voiage, as you haue heard, incurred their
miſfortunes onely by neglecting this direction,
and by too much conuerſing with

thoſe of the Foolianders nation. Thirdly,
you muſt go ouer the country thrice, ere
you ſhalbe able to make any exact platforme
of it: Once for Strabo, once for
Socrates, and once for Merlin Cocaius;
The firſt for the Geography, the ſecond
for the Morality, and the third for the
Language, and Etymology. No more at
this time, but aboord when you pleaſe and a
good gale of wit go along with you.
            
               His, that is his.
IOHN HEALEY.
            
         
         
            
            A Table of the
chapters.
            
               The firſt Booke.
               THE diſcouery of the land of Tenter-belly
part of the South Indies
bordering vpon Tierra del fuego,
and the ſituation thereof. liber 1.
chapter 1.
               Eat-allia and Drink-allia. chap. 2.
               
                  Dreſſem-bourg the firſt Canton of Eat-allia.
cap. 3.
               
                  Banquetois the ſecond Canton of Eat-allia.
cap. 4.
               
                  Pewter-platteria the third Canton of
Eat-allia. cap. 5
               The metropolitaine Citty of Eat-allia
                  
and the peoples conditions. cap. 6.
               The warres of the Eat-allians. cap. 7.
               Of Idle-bergh an Imperiall free towne.
cap. 8.
               The lawes of the land. cap. 9.
               Their religion. cap. 10.
               The election of the great Duke.
cap. 11.
               
                  Of Starue-ling Iland, or Hungerland.
cap. 12.
            
            
               Drinke-allia the ſecond Prouince of
Tenter-belly and the conditions
of the Inhabitants. Chap. 1.
               THE ſhires of their countrie.
cap. 2.
               The diſcription of Carouſi-kanikin the
chiefe citty of Drink-allia, as alſo of
the faſhions and conditions of the
Drink-alls. cap. 3.
               Of the Knights of the goulden Tunne,
and of the lawes of the Cittie.
cap. 4.
               
               The artes, and millitary diſcipline of the
Drink-alls. cap. 5.
               The funeralls of one of the cheefe
Quagmyriſts, and the ſacrifices of
Bacchus. cap. 6.
               Of Hot-watria or Lycor-Ardent, and of
the Pilgrimage to Saint Borachio.
cap. 7. And laſt of the firſt booke.
            
            
               The ſecond Booke.
               THE deſcription of Shee-landt, or
Womandecoia and of the ſitutation
thereof. cap. 1.
               How the Goſsipingo-eſſes vſed the author
of this deſcouery. cap. 2.
               Their formes of gouernment, and elections
of perſons of State. cap. 3.
               The originall of the Shee-landreſſes.
cap. 4.
               
                  Of Gigglot-tangir. cap. 5.
               Of Double-ſex Ile, otherwiſe called Skrat
or Hermophrcodite Iland. cap. 6.
               
                  Of Srewſ-bourg. cap. 7.
               And laſt of the ſecond booke.
            
            
            
               The third Booke, or the deſcouery of
Fooliana and the Situation and
populouſneſſe thereof. Chap. 1.
               THE parts of Fooliana and the peoples
conditions in general. cap. 2.
               Of Fooliana the fickle. cap. 3.
               Of the peoples conditions and attires.
ſect. 1.
               Of the Duke and Inhabitants of Solitaria
the ſad. ſect. 2. 3. 4.
               Of Cholericoy the other Dutchie of Fooliana
the craggy. cap. 5.
               
                  Fooliana the fond. cap. 6.
               
                  Of Aſſ-ſex. ſect. 2.
               Of the Citties of Cockſ-combria, and Aſſſex
and of Blockſ-foord the metropolitane
ſea. ſect. 3.
               Of the Bourgue-maiſters of Blockſ-foord.
ſect. 4.
               Of the Marquiſate of Spendal-ezza. ſect.
5. and 6.
               Of Fooliana the fatte. cap. 7.
               
               The quality and condition of the people.
ſect. 2.
               The paradiſe of Fooliana the fatte.
ſect. 3.
               Of Fooliana the deuout. cap. 8.
               
                  Sectorioua the ſecond Prouince of Fooliana
the deuout. ſect. 2.
               The State politique of Fooliana, in generall.
cap. 9.
               And laſt of the third booke.
            
            
               The fourth Booke, or the deſcouery
of Thee-uingen and the deſcription
thereof. Chap. 1.
               THE conditions of the Robberſ-walders.
cap. 2.
               The pirats, and Sea-borderers of Robberſ-walder.
cap. 3.
               How the author got into this country
of the Harpies. cap. 4.
               Of Lyerſ-buy plaines; The natures of

the Leger-demanians of Free-purlogne,
and Bags-death. cap. 5.
               Of Lurtch-thrift a Country in Legerdemaine.
cap. 6.
               
                  Of Still-moore. cap. 7.
               And laſt of the forth booke.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧The occaſion of this
trauell, and the pre-inſtruction
for it.
            
               MINE acquaintance with
trauellers of all ſorts, is
both well knowne to our
Vniuerſitie men, and recorded
by the curteous
correſpondence that haue
beene euer held betweene ſtrangers and me:
whether this of Homer mooued mee to
this humour,

                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     :
               
Or were it that mine vnquenched thirst
and deſire of knowledge, togither with the
applauſiue carriage I found in theſe men,
were the motiues to theſe effects, I
knowe not. I was already fully acquainted
with all the rarities of mine owne
Nation: and falling into a diſcourſe
of the profit of trauell with two Aliens of
my neare acquaintance (Peter Beroaldus,
               
a Frenchman, and Adrian Cornelius
Droge, a Dutchman) wherein wee had
many delightfull paſſages about compariſons
of languages, conditions, and cities;
at last, In troth (quoth Beroaldus) I know
not as yet what trauell meanes, if hee that
leaues his natiue ſoyle to paſſe but into a
neighbour countrie, or ouer a neighbour
riuer (admit it bee the Rhine, or the Tweed)
deſerue this name (as vulgar opinion ſeemes
to allow) whereas hee neuer changes eyther
skie, ayre, or ſoyle: I ſee not (if this bee
true) any profit or worth in the world,
contained in trauell. My parents & friends
at Montauban, haue written very often
for my returne, as though I were farre
from them: whereas I (beleeue mee) haue
imagined my ſelfe all this whole two yeares
at home: for how little a way is it from
Mount-auban to Paris, from Paris to
Callis, from Callis to Douer? Truely
when I thinke of the land, it ſeemes about
an elle: in the Mappe a finger-breadth: in
the forme of the heauens, iust nothing.
Nor ſee I any reaſon why that France
ſhould hee held my natiue ſoyle more then

all Europe: for if you ſtand vpon diuerſity
of language, how many languages (I pray
yee) haue yee in Europe quite different
from the French? If the conditions of the
nations mooue yee, view not Europe, but
view the whole world, and euery Prouince
thereof, leaning to the qualities of thoſe
that adioyne vpon it, as the Polipus turnes
into the colour of euery ſtone ſhee comes
neere! O Beroaldus (quoth I againe) but
we do enuie at the licence you haue to contemne
trauell: wee (wretches) that like
Tortoyſes, are bound to our owne houſes,
whileſt you haue taken ſuruey of all the
worlds ſingularities, and now that you are
filled with their knowledge, you ſet them at
nought thus. Might I but view the Snowie
Alpes, or the ſhady Pyrenes, oh how much
ſhould I thinke my ſelfe beholding to mine
eyes at my reſting time, when all that I had
ſeene ſhould turne to my benefit, and ſtore
mine vnderſtanding with a freſh fraught
of knowledge! Ah how much (quoth Beroaldus)
doth abſence promiſe him that
would bee preſent, and how vaine are the
hopes that attend on ignorance! friend,

when I was at home, vnexperienced, I
thought as you do; but triall hath now taught
me to ſee mine owne ſimplicity. A trauell
of ſo ſmall toyle yeelds eaſie ſatisfaction:
and in this, your expectation ſhall exceede
your experience in all thoſe nouelties. Forreine
parts are ſo like ours, that you cannot
thinke them ſtrange to yee, though you neuer
ſaw them before. And what is there in
all the knowne world, which mapps, and authors
cannot inſtruct a man in, as perfectly
as his owne eyes? your England is deſcribed
by Cambden: what vnderſtanding man
is there, that cannot, out of him, make as
perfect a deſcription of any cittie, riuer, monument,
or wonder in all your Ile, as well as
if hee had viewed it in perſon himſelfe?
What part of Europe is there that affoords
more to a ſtrangers eye then is related by
one pen-man or other? The ſeuerall conditions
of the people are all deſcribed already:
as farre as eyther pen or experience can ſet
downe: but neither can giue any vniuerſall
knowledge. The French are commonly called
raſh, the Spaniard proud, the Dutch
drunken; the Engliſh the buſi-bands; the

               Italians effeminate; the Swethen timoroas,
the Bohemians inhumaine; the Iriſh
barbarous and ſuperſtitious: but is any man
ſo ſottiſh, as to thinke that France hath no
ſtaid man at all in it; Spaine, no meacock;
or Germanie none that liues ſoberly? They
are fooles (beleeue it) that will tie mens
manners ſo firme vnto the ſtarres, that they
will leaue nothing to a mans owne power,
nothing to the parents natures, nothing to
nurture and education. View this Pernaſſus
here, whereon we liue: Suppoſe here were
a Colledge of Italians, Spaniſh, French,
Danes, Dutch and Polacques? doe you
thinke to finde more varietie of diſpoſitions
in this company of Students, then you may
doe amongst your owne Engliſh?
            
            Turne yee therefore which way yee
will, I cannot ſee how this halfe a foote
trauell can benefit vs any waye, excepting
that wee may reape ſome annimation
to learning by the ſight of ſuch great Schollers,
as Whitaker, Raynolds, Bellarmine,
Beza, Iunius, Lipſius, and ſuch
like as thoſe vvere. Indeede I holde,
that your Drake and your Candiſh were

trauellers, as alſo Sebaſtian Delcano,
the Portugheſſe, becauſe their voyages put
girdles about the whole world: Nay I will
allow Chryſtopher Colono that name
alſo, for his diſcouerie of the West Indies,
Franceſco Piccaro, and Almagro for
Peru, Hernando Magellano for the Moluccaes,
and Sir Hugh Willoughbye for
his Northren diſcoueries: together with
all ſuch as eyther haue first found out vnknowne
regions, or haue brought them to
order. And truly (I will tell you two plaine)
my minde doth prompt me with ſome noble
enterpriſe of this kinde, ſuch as the world
might gaze at, and all poſterity record with
admiration. With that hee bluſht, and held
his peace, as if he had blabd ſome bold ſecret.
Yea Beroaldus (quoth Drogius to him) &
dare you not ſpeake it out? doe you imagine
to torture our mindes with ſetting them on
worke vpon doubtfull inquiries, or is your
modeſt ſecret (hetherto ſo cloſely ſuppreſſed)
afraide to aduenture vpon ſo many eares at
once? Nay ſpeake what ere it bee, wee haue
cleere browes (looke you) open eares, and
faithfull hearts: nor can your vnknowne

enterpriſe come to light eyther vvith more
ſecuritie, or fitter occaſion. Well Drogius
well, (quoth Beroaldus) you take my ſilence
in no good ſence, but mixe it with
your coniectures, that though great
matters neuer goe but (like as Princes
doe with their numerous traines) with
a great preamble of ambiguous tearmes;
yet that I ſhould not doe ſo, but vent a
pondrous conceite, a birth that my braine
hath trauelld a yeare with, all naked, without
any praemonitions. In truth I reſolued
at the first to let you know it: marry not
with-out ſome graduall proceedings, and
materiall preparations, without which, I
know well how fond the vviſest proiect
doth commonly ſeeme: but now I ſee my
ſelfe chayned to a head-long diſcouerie
mauger my beard, vnleſſe I ſhould giue
you iust cauſe to call my loue to you both,
in queſtion. Wherefore you ſhall know it:
ſooner (I aſſure you) then I did intend,
but with no leſſe willingneſſe: Onely imagine
you, that you haue already heard mine
intended premonition.
            It hath euer offended mee to looke vpon

the Geographicall mapps, and finde this:
Terra Auſtralis, nondum Cognita. The
vnknowne Southerne Continent. What good
ſpirit but would greeue at this? If they
know it for a Continent, and for a Southerne
Continent, why then doe they call it vnknowe?
But if it bee vnknowne; why doe
all the Geographers deſcribe it after one
forme and ſite? Idle men that they are,
that can ſay, this it is, and yet wee know
it not: How long ſhall wee continue to bee
ignorant in that vvhich vvee profeſſe to
haue knowledeg of?

                  Certé ſi nemo vnquam
                  —vv—Fragilem truci
                  Commiſiſſet Pelago ratem
               
            
            If none had euer beeen
So bold as to expoſe
the ſlender barke vnto the Oceans teene
            Then vvee might haue had ſome excuſe
for our obſtinate (wee may euen as vvell
confeſſe it) and notorius idleneſſe: But
ſeeing all is opened now; ſeeing there is
not a ſhip-boy but knows all the vvindes,

creekes, ſhelfes and harbours of the whole
world; ſlie vpon this ſlouth of ours, this
more then female feare, this vaine careleſneſſe,
that vvittingly and willingly robbes
vs of another world. What colour haue vve
for it? vvhat feare vve? ſhadowes, or our
ſelues? there is heauen, there is earth in
that continent, & there is men, perhaps more
ciuill then wee are. Who euer expected ſuch
wit, ſuch gouernment in China? ſuch arts,
ſuch practiſe of all cunning? wee thought
learning had dwelt in our corner of the
world: they laugh at vs for it and well may▪
auouching that they of al the earth, are twoey'd
men, the Europians the one eyd, and all
the world elſe, ſtarke blind. But admit there
be no men in this climate: it is a ſhame for
a wiſe man either to feare or complaine of
ſolitarineſſe.
            Theſe thoughts haue fired my breſt full often:
and whileſt others neglect them, haue
kindled a bold attempt in mee, beyond the
rest. I ſee the land lye vnknowne; no man
dreames of it; I will aſſay to diſcouer it.
Your enterpriſe Beroaldus (quoth I) is
great, and almoſt more then mortall

power can execute. Howeuer it ſucceede,
I applaude your generous ſpirit, as like your
owne: but as you ſaid, great matters, as they
require many praemonitions, ſo doe they
more premeditations. Haue you therefore
caſt your full account of the dangers, labours,
hopes, expences, and all other ſuch accidents
as muſt attend this your attempt?
There is heauen you ſay: there may bee ſo,
and yet you bee kept from the ſight of it by
perpetuall darkeneſſe.
            There is earth; but you may bee driuen
out of that by beaſts and ſerpents: There
are men: but perhaps you had rather want
their company, when you know them, then
haue it. If one of you Patagonian Giants
ſhould catch your and eate you quite vp,
where are you then my fine diſcouerer? It is
good thinking of thoſe things, but it is dangerous
trying. O ſir (ſaith Beroaldus againe)
you know not that the Cape of good
hope lies ouer againſt this land. We muſt
hope, and wee muſt dare. Thoſe bug-beares
of dangers at fit to fright babies: but they
anymate bolder ſpirits. If we ſhould ſticke
at them, wee ſhould neuer looke out at our

owne dores. That was the cauſe America
lay ſo long vnknowne, and had done ſtill
(for ought I ſee) but that GOD ſent a
Doue from Heauen, which plucking of an
Oliue branch from this Continent, taught
vs by that, that there was yet more land, and
leſse ſea then wee dreamed of: O how ſacred
ſhall his name beheld with all poſterity! His
ſtatue ſhalbe aduanced, for vs al to gaze vpon,
whilſt earth keepes her foundation. It is
as great a glory (thinke I) to bee called The
new worlds diſcouerer, as her conqueror.
And why may not wee haue that ſucceſſe,
and the like glory? I am the more excited
to this, by that ancient, and famous
prophecy of Seneca, which remayneth vnto
vs to fulfill.
            
               Seneca in Mcdea.
               —Venient annis
               Secula ſeris, quando Oceanus
               Vnicula rerum laxet, & ingens
               
                  
                     •
                  ateat Tellus.
            
            —When certaine years are ſpent
Hereafter; ſhall the ſpumy Ocean ſhew

                  •
               is ſecret ſtore, and ope to mortals view
—A larger continent.
            
               
What can be ſpoken more plaine, to point
out this diſcouery? Here did Drogius replie:
What Man? beware how you raiſe
ſo great a building on ſo weake a foundation.
Your Doue hath fulfilled your Poets
coniectures, all of them, alreadie. The
ſumme of yeares is now runne: America
is that large continent. Dreame you of
any other either age, or diſcouery? I know
the generality of your opinion (quoth Beroaldus)
but I doubt of the truth, for Prophecies
are alwaies de futuro: and what if I
prooue the countrie America to be knowne
to former ages? If I doe, Senecaes wordes
are no preſage, but an intimation of a thing
done. Now I am fully perſwaded that ſome
part of theſe weſt Indies was that Ophir,
where Salomons and Hirams nauy had
their gold. For whereas there are fiue ſeuerall
opinioniſts touching this, viz. 1. Rabanus,
Maurus and Nicholaus de Lyra, affirming
that Ophir was in the Eaſt-Indies.
2. Volateranus, and Ortelius, auoutching
it to bee an Iſland in the Ethiopian Ocean,
from an apocryphall relation of one Lewis
Venetus; 3. Gaſpar Varerius, who affirmed

all that was contayned in Pegu, Malaca,
and Sumatra, to be whilom called by this
name. 4. Francis Vatablus whom Colonus
alſo (as P. Martyr ſaith) did follow: who
ſaid that Hiſpaniola was Ophir. 5. William
Poſtelius, Goropius Becanus, and
Arias Montanus, all which auoutch directly
that Ophir was this continent in which
Peru lieth. Of theſe the two laſt, and likelieſt,
make for vs, I care not which you take.
The firſt two, Varerius hath ouerthrowne,
horſe & foote: to ad more were too ſuperfluous.
Sufficeth only that I proue him erroneous,
in putting Pegu, Sumatra & Malaca
for Ophir. And firſt, holy writ ſaith plaine,
that thoſe two nauies were two years out, in
each of their voiages to Ophir: but ye ſpace
of 10. months, or 12. at the moſt, will ſerue
to paſſe and returne from the red ſea to Sumatra:
how then can this propoſition of
time agree with his opinion? what can Varerius
ſay to this: that nauigation was not
exact then, as the Portugalls haue made it
ſince, and therefore in ſuch a vaſt roome for
ignorance, the nauies might ſpend the more
in a wrong courſe.
            
               
Well ſir, but how came Salomon to the
knowledge of this farre diſtant land? From
God you ſay, I beleeue yee. So then, hee that
taught him that there was ſuch a land, and
that there was gold in ſuch a land, and
aduiſed him to ſend thither, would not hee
(thinke you) ſhew him the right way thether?
Againe, the time of their being out is
alwaies ſet downe but one: at the end of
which they euermore returned, neither ſtaying
longer, nor comming ſooner: which
proues the diſtance of the place, and not the
error of the ſailers. Laſtly, the very name
ſpeaketh for vs as plaine as may: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
do but tranſpoſe one letter, and they are all
one. Let mee therefore hold you for incredulous
obſtinates if you confeſſe not that America
was knowne long before Senecaes
time. You are victor Beroaldus, quoth I, and
may now lawfully triumph: But admit that
it was knowne to Salomon, and his nauigators;
doth it follow therefore that it was
diſcouered to the whole world beſides, and
ſuch as had no commerce at all with the
Iewes? or might not the memory of it bee
vtterly extinct before the later times of

the Romaines? Which if it were, your opinion
and Senecaes preſage are both ouerthrowne.
Nay nay, quoth Beroaldus, I am
not ſo eaſily diſheartened with ſhadowes of
reaſon. This ſit doubt of yours, giues mee the
ſtronger foote-hold. Hiſtory is not ſilent in
this diſcouery, but preſerues the memory of
it euen vnto the laſt poſterities of the Romans.
For you know that from Salomon
to the building of Carthage was little leſſe
then 150. yeares. But the Carthaginians
(as Ariſtotle witneſſeth, nor can I beleeue
that they did this in their Citties infancie)
after a tedious nauigation did finde an Iſland
beyond the Gades, (which can bee
none but this) ſituate in the Atlantike ſea;
wherevpon they made a law (which is a true
ſigne that neither did they people it, nor the
reſt of the world, as then, commonly knew it)
that none ſhould euer ſaile thether againe;
fearing leaſt the wealthy and pleaſant ſoile
ſhould allure the Citizens to leaue Carthage
and go dwell there. Now the Grecians
hauing this knowledge of it from Carthage,
how ſhould it bee euer kept from
Rome? But ſirs, kicke againſt the truth as

long as you liſt, or yeeld to it as I doe: I am
moſt firmely perſwaded that Senecaes
large continent is yet vndiſcouered, and
ſtaies to yeeld vs this glorie, if we dare venter
on it. For my ſelfe; I am comming (my
world) after ſo many vowes, and delaies,
now I come at laſt, all fraight with hope and
confidence, either to vnmaske thee to Europe,
or to lay my bones in thee. And you
(my friends and fellowes) if there bee any
true vertue, or loue of glory in your breaſts,
goe and ſhare with mee in my fortunes in
this great enterpriſe. Shame goe with thoſe
frozen boſomes that affect nothing but ſecurity
and in glorious eſtate; that like no ſepulcher
but of the nations earth where they
firſt breathed. We ſhall thirſt, we ſhall be
ſicke, wee ſhall periſh, O baſe hearing! vnſeemely
for a Philoſopher once to think vpō!
And ſhaming the thoughts of trauellers, of
ſuch as ſeeke out a new world, and ſcorne
this olde one. There wanteth nothing but
a good will. If yee bee men take that will
vnto yee, arme your ſelues againſt weake
opinatiueneſſe, and let vs undertake that
iourney which may be perhaps, delightfull,

and cannot but proue glorious vnto vs howſoeuer
it may ſeeme laborious. If not, lusk
at home with vigour without honor: I will
finde ſome that ſhall beare mee company in
this famous enterpriſe, whoſe after renowne
you may perhaps enuy too late. Here
he ſtopt his ſpeech, and beheld vs with an
eye ſomewhat diſturbed. His pithy ſpeech
(whereof I cannot rehearſe the tenth part)
mooued vs much, and ſo did our deſires
of nouelty and glorie: briefely, wee aſſented,
and reſolued all to aſſay this great diſcouerie,
and embarked our ſelues in a ſhip
called The Fancie, taking our leaues of all
our friends and acquaintance.
            After three daies wee arriued on the
Belgique ſhores, and at the weekes end in
Aquitane: but Drogius ſtaied behinde
at Delfe, and Beroaldus left mee here
and departed vnto Monutauban, againſt
both their wills: expoſing mee to the deriſion
of all mine acquaintance, after
their great expectation of this our diſcouerie
vnleſſe I would proceede, and aduenture
vpon all thoſe vnknowne perills
alone. Yet this vnexpected departure

of theirs did not ouer-come my reſolution,
but I would needes forwards, and hauing
(after two yeares) paſſed the Canaries, the
coaſts of Affrica, and Monomotapa: At
laſt I arriued at that promontory
of Tenter-belly, which
is called Il Cabo
Negro.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               The diſcouery of the land
of Tenter-belly, a part of the South
Indies, bordering vpon
Terra del fuego.
               THE FIRST BOOKE,
               
                   Of the ſituation thereof.
                  
                     THe land of Tenter-belly
is a region farre extending
both in longitude
and latitude, bounding
on the North vpon the
Ethiopian Ocean, on the
Eaſt vponFor Gluttony is the induction vnto lecherie. 
                     Letcheritania & Shee-landt:
on the South, vponA fat belly makes a leane braine. 
                     Fooliana the fatte:
and on the Weſt vpon Filtching-fennes.
It lieth in that vndiſcouered Continent,
where that huge and monſtrous Birde
calledThis birds picture is to be ſeene in the largeſt maps of the vvorld, with an Elephant in his pounces. And for his inſatiate greedineſſe, is held to be the Regions Genius.
                      RVC, ſnatcheth vp (now
and then) a whole Elephant at a ſtoope,
and ſwappes him vp at a bit. This is not
incredible, for what I auerre, moſt of
our Geographers in their moderne diſcoueries
doe confirme.
                  
                     
Touching the ſoyle, the fertilitie is
moſt worthily admirable: the ayre moſt
delicately temperate: ô how I haue pittied,
that ſo bad husbandmen ſhould
poſſeſſe ſo happy an habitation. In latitude
it lieth full ſixtie degrees, and in
longitude ſeuenty foure frō 
                     Cabo de bona
speranza, and is ſituate almoſt directly
oppoſite vnto the Southerne frontiers
of Affrica. Such Coſmographers as
write hereof, diuide it generally into
two Prouinces, Eat-allia (called otherwiſe
in the naturall idiome of the inhabitants
Gluttonia) and Drink-allia, or (in
the ſame language) Quaffonia: the former,
ſituate in the ſame longitude and
latitude (God ſaue the ſample) with
our England and the later, with the two
Germanies. Both haue one Prince, both
one lawe: and a little reformation
would make them concurre both in
Prince, lawe, habite and manners.
               
               
                  
                  Eat-allia, or Gluttonia.
CHAP. 1.
                  
                     EAt-allia, is in forme triangulare, like
the Greeke letter Delta, which beareth
this forme: [Δ] It isAnd ſo are moſt of you Belly gods, the inhabitants thereof. as broad
as long, and reſembleth the figure of the
old Aegypt; being full of high skie towring
hills, and yet ſo fertile, that the very
Birds (that flock thether from all places
to feed) if they ſtay but one three moneths
at the mangery this ſoile affords
them, are ſo ladened with the luggage
of their owne fatned bodies, that they
cannot poſſibly get wing ſo high as to
ouer-toppe one of the meaner mountaines,
but become ſworne inhabitants
of this fatte countrie all their liues after.
Fatte? why your Italian Ortolano,
or Beccafico is but carrion to them. No.
they are rarely fedde. This may ſeeme
a fiction, but hee that hath ſeene the
workes of nature in Scotland, where
the leaues that fall from certaine trees,
lying but a while to rotte, become

a goodly kinde of fowle calledHector Boetius, Hollingſhead, &c. 
                     Barnacles,
(which are a kinde of wild-geeſe)
or in Scythia, where (as an honorable
embaſſador of ours hath giuen an approued
teſtimonie) there are certaine creatures
grow out of the earth in the ſhapes
ofThe Dukes of Muſcouie haue the skins of theſe creatures kept for their ovvne vſes: they grovv in Horda zauolh a plaine in Scythia, and are called the skins of Samarchand. Of this lambe you may read in Scaliger, Excercit. 59. cardan. Baro Heberſtin. & Libau. tract de agno vegetab.
                      Lambes, which being faſt ioyned
vnto the ſtalke they grow vpon, do notwithſtanding
eate vp all the graſſe about
them: he (I ſay) that hath aſſurance of
theſe rare effects, cannot but aſſent vnto
mine aſſertions as moſt authenticall. But
(to leaue digreſſions, and to returne to
our purpoſe) The fiſhes of the Eat-allian
ſhores (and fiſh they haue in great aboundance)
are naturally ſo rauenous
and greedy, that (whether they pertake
of the nature of the nation, or likeIunenal. Satyr. 4.
                     Nero's Turbut, preſage their honorable
Sepultures) you can no ſooner caſt out
your angle-hooke amongſt them, but
immediatly, (like the ſoules in Lucian
about Charons boate, or Cole-miners
about the Rope when the candles burning
blew tels the dampe commeth) you
ſhall haue hundreds about the line, ſome

hanging on the hooke, and ſome on the
ſtring beſides it, ſuch is their pleaſure
to goe to the pot, ſuch their delight to
march in pompe from the dreſſer. Beſides,
the land hath diuerſe good hauens,
but they ſerue for harbour to no ſhip but
ſuch as comes fraught with good fare,
and is laden with delicious viands. If any
parcell of their fraight haue taken Salt-water,
or bee otherwiſe offenſiue to the
iudgment of theWhoſe name vvhen I vvas there, vvas Sir Spatious Mouth.
                      maiſter of the cuſtome-houſe,
it commeth not a ſhore by
any meanes. The ſoyle beares no tree
that beares no fruite: Aſhes, Oakes,
Willowes, & ſuch fruitleſſe fill-roomes,
ſuch ſaw I none, for none were there to
be ſeene. But all the hedges (and ſo it is
alſo in Drink-allia) were ſtuck thick with
Hops: and ſurely in my conceit, theShropſhire & Worceſterſhire.
weſterne Engliſh and the Lumbards had
this cuſtome (at firſt) from the Drink-alls.
                  
                  This territory of old, was (vnleſſe their
chronicles do miſtake) vnder the gouerment
of the Thriuingers (inhabitants of
Onely Fooliana lyeth betvveene Tenter-belly and Thriuingois: for if men vvere not fooles they vvould follovv thrift and flie luxurie. 
                     Thriuingois (a nation lying a good
way further into the maine land) for

their Annales report, how in the dayes
of old Saturne, the Thriuonian Princes
bare ſway ouer all this continent, and
had their principall ſeate in that part
now called Eat-allia, and that becauſe the
men of thoſe times liued moſt part vpon
Garlick (called in Latine Allium)
therefore was this region called Allia:
but forreine inuaſions enſuing, and thoſe
antient worthies being hereby chaſed
from their places of ſoueraigntie, the
conditions of the people grew to a great
alteration, & to proportionate the name
of the country to the natures of the inhabitants,
they added Eate vnto the ancient
name, Allia, & ſo from that change,
it beareth the name of Eat-allia vnto
this preſent.
               
               
                  Dreſſembourg, the firſt Canton
of Eat-allia.
CHAP. 3.
                  
                     DReſſembourg,
                     For meate muſt firſt be dreſſed and then eate. is the firſt part of
this great land of Eat-allia, & fitteſt

for vs to begin with in our intended
diſcouery. This Canton (were it not for
a greater inſtinct of naturall inclination)
is in too hotte a climate for any true
Eatall to inhabit: for the vttermoſt corner
of it, (which ſome Geographers name
the South cape,) lieth vnder the ſame latitude
with the moſt Southerne point
of Caſtile, and is about two and fortie
degrees diſtant from the Aequinoctiall.
The inhabitants be of a ſwartie tawnie,
and moſt of them haue their skins all
riuelled and withred, and for their conditions,
they affect deliciouſneſſe rather
then exceſſe. Vpon the foreſayd point
of this Canton which wee named the
Swarty cape, (as the whole countrie is
wondrouſly ouer-clowded with ſmoke,
partly becauſe the ſoile is very Fenniſh,
and partly becauſe of the neereneſſe of
Terra del fuego, the land of Fire, which
lieth as all the diſcouerers thereof doe
with one voyce affirme, immediatly vpon
the right hand thereof) ſtandeth
the citty Kitchin, the buildings of which
towne are generally very lofty, and yet

as generally ſmoakie and euill ſented:
I imagine that Cochin in the Eaſt Indies,
was a colony ſent at firſt from this citie.
In the midſt of this cittie ſtandeth a
goodly temple, dedicated toOf him here-after. chap. 11. 
                     God All-Panch, a vaſte and ſpacious building,
wherein there are a thouſand altars, burning
with continuall Incence (excepting
from Shrouetide vnto Eaſter-euen) vnto
the foreſaid Deitie. In the midſt of this
temple is a tower erected, of incredible
altitude, no worke made with mans
hand euer came neere it, the Pyramides
of Memphis are but mole-hils to it: the
inhabitants called it Chymney-turret,
and from the height thereof the whole
region round about it haue the vſuall
ſignall of warte giuen them; for whereas
wee vſe to giue notice of ſuch enſuing
dangers by fyring a tarre-barrell
on the toppe of a beacon, they on
the contrary ſide haue their information
from the ceaſing of the ſmoake,
for when-ſo-euer that eternall fume
ceaſeth to aſcend in caliginous clouds,
it is a ſure warning that the foe approacheth:

and this inuaſion is moſt
cōmonly attempted by the inhabitants
of the Starueling Iles, (otherwiſe called
Hunger-landers,) for theſe are the moſt
formidable enemies that the Eat-alls
haue, or can be annoied by.
                  Neare vnto the ſayd City Kitchin, are
certaine villages that are all within the
liberties thereof: and firſt, there is Cole-houſe,
a large towne truely, and all conſiſting
(a ſtrange forme of building) of
caues vnder the ground: then is there
Aſhe-ton, and that ſtands vpon the toppe
of Cole-houſe, on a moſt droughty and
barren ſoile. Tongeſ-worth, another little
village and this Aſhe-ton, are both in
one pariſh, and ſo is Fyer-pan andOthervviſe called vvarming-pan.
                     Ayre-bumme, two goodly ſweet farmes:
On the left hand you haue three others,
Three villages vvhere ſpits, kettles and ſpounes vvere firſt inuented. 
                     Spit-ſtead, Kettle-drop, and Spooneſ-by,
all pretty townes, and maruellous well
peopled. Kettle-drop hath a faire riuer
paſſeth through it, called
                        In Engliſh Moiſture. 
                     Ture-mois,
which (they ſay) boyleth euery 24.
houres, not much vnlike the fountaine
of theIn Darbyſhire.
                      
                     Peake, in England.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Banquet-ois, the ſecond Canton
of Eat-allia.
CHAP. 4.
                  PAſſing out of Dreſſembourg, the next
Canton yee enter is the very garden
of all Eat-allia, it is called Banquetois,
and is as it were a continuall forreſt of
nothing but Dates, Almonds, Figges, Oliues,
Pomegranates, Cytrons, and Nutmegs:
and the riuer of Oylebrooke hath his
courſe through the heart of all this
goodly territory. The Citty of March-paine
is the chiefe towne of note in this
Canton, beeing built after a ſtately manner
with turrets, and obeliskes all guilt
ouer, but indeede it is but of a ſlender
kinde of fortification, and lieth verie open
to the enemies cannon, a little aboue
this City are certaine mines, called the
Sugar-hills, whence they digge a certain
oare in collour whitiſh, in touch hard,
& in taſt ſweete, a ſubſtanceGalen knew it not. vnknown
of old, & ſince hauing bin counterfetted
by arte, and drawne by AlchymyPlin. lib. 12 chap. 8. out

of the Arabian and Indian Reedes. This
City hath very few inhabitants of any
yeares that haue any teeth left: but all,
from 18. to the graue are the naturall
heires of ſtinking breaths. Next vnto
this, lieth another little corporation called
Druggeſ-burge, and here they haue a
law, that none muſt bee made free of the
City but Apothecaries, Grocers and
Boxe-makers. The Shee-landreſſes vſe
much traffique vnto this place, but more
vnto Letcheri-tania, where they vſe to
make exchange by bartering chriſtaline
glaſſes, for vnguents and Pomanders.
Now for theſe Druggeſ-burgers, the very
heauens ſeeme to conſpire with the places
fitnes, to increaſe their trading: for
at certaine times of the yeare, you ſhall
haue the whole countrie couered quite
ouer with Aromaticall trochiſches,
comfits and confections, that fall from
the aire in as great aboundanceThat is alwaies in the Greeke Calends. neuer but then. (at
thoſe times when they do fal) as euer fel
ſhowre of Haile: Now I hold this to be
nothing really, but that ſame hony-dew
which we ſhall finde now and then vpon

the leaues of the Oke in a kindly ſpring:
the onely difference is in the ſolidity, for
where as ours falleth in ſmall dewy
droppes, theirs is congealed by the cold
of the ayres midle region, and ſo falleth
in round balls, that rebound in their fall
through this their accidētall induration.
               
               
                  Pewter-platteria, the third Canton
of Eat-allia.
CHAP. 5.
                  AS wee paſſed vnder the 55. degree
beyond the line, wee entred into a
ſpacious plaine, the inhabitants named
it Pewter-platteria, and wee for breuity
ſake, entred it in our mappe vnder the
name of Platters-plaine: it lieth in the
very heart of Eat-allia, and the firſt City
that we met within this tract wasBuilt in the ſame faſhion that Cambalu is, if you were euer there. 
                     Victullu,
through the midſt of which there
paſſeth a riuer calledFrom this riuer only the Eat-alls haue all their water wherewith they do dreſſe their meate. 
                     Sauce, whoſe water
is ſome-what tart in the taſte. In
the market place of this town we beheld
a tombe, which as far as I could gueſſe by

the weather-worne inſcription, conteined
the bones of the Romane Apicius.
                     Volaterr. It
was no rare peece of worke but it was of
a moſt ancient model,Autropol. l. 13. and the tombeſtone
was cut in forme of a Sea-crab.
And ſurely (let Seneca ſay what hee
pleaſe) it might very well be that this famous
Gurmōd hauing beſtowed a great
deale of loſt labour in ſeeking bigger
Crabbes on the African ſhores then the
French afforded, turned his courſe vnto
this country, (or els was forced hither by
tempeſt) and ſo here layd his bones, vpon
ſome deadly ſurfet. Let the Colledge
of Critiques be iudge.
                  I do here purpoſely omit the fruitfull
plaines of Goblet the great, and Fat-land
Forreſt: togither with the goodly citty
Like vnto Cartaegena in Spaine, but far better ſeated. 
                     Sauſagiena: oh there's a towne rarely
ſeated, onely it ſtands a little too neere
the ſalt-water: I ouer paſſe that ſtinking
Two ports where our Hollanders haue much traffique. 
                     Cheeſe-mongeria alſo, andTwo ports where our Hollanders haue much traffique. 
                     Butterkin
the fennie, the laſt towne of all Eat-allia,
and ſituate vpon the very borders
of Quaffonia, theſe I paſſe ouer ſlightly,
onely becauſe I would faine bee at the

metropolitane City of the whole region,
for that very place alone, in ſtructure
of houſes, manners of inhabitants,
and formality of diſcipline, is worth all
the reſt to one that wayeth it well.
               
               
                  The Metropolitane City of Eat-allia:
The peoples conditions.
CHAP. 6.
                  HEreabouts are but few villages, no
more then in other places of the
land, ſo that one may eaſily diſcerne that
theAnd reaſon good the land is called Eat-allia.
                      Cities haue eaten vp all the boroughs.
Neither are their Citties ſo aboundant
in nūber as they are in ritches
and inhabitants, but of them all, the
prime and mother Cittie is that famous
Fleſh-paſty-nople.
                  
                  Their old records doe report, that
in former ages there were two ritch
and potent Citties, Fleſhton, and
Py-nople, betweene whome (as is vſuall
amongſt great men, and great places,
in ſo much that theCambridge and Oxford. two beſt

vniuerſities of the worlde, both of
them my mothers, and one of them
my nurſe alſo, and both ſiſters, yet
can ſcarely for-beare this froward
contention) there was long and vehement
altercation about the ſoueraignity.
                  
                     Py-nople ſtood vpon hie antiquitie:
and aſſuredly in old Saturnes time, the
world afforded not hir parallell. But
Fleſh-ton counterpoiſed the others continuance,
with hir owne glorie, pleaſant
ſituation and powerfulneſſe: well,
a Parliament was called, and finally, the
whole houſe with one conſent gaue
the ſupremacy vnto Fleſh-ton. Such is
the vileneſſe of this depriued age, that
though it bee gray headed with decay,
yet wil it prefer proud and vnripe (or rather
to ſoone ripe nouelty) an hundred
degrees before pure ſimple antiquity.
This was Py-nople the plaine: but Oyſter pynople, and Potato-py-nople are Cities in Letcheritania, that flouriſh vntill this day: beeing both founded by Hercules, vpon his copulation with 50. women vpon one night. Georg Cap. currant. de punct. Aretinens. lib. 27. 
                     Py-nople being thus diſgraced, decayed
to nothing, it is at this daie almoſt
impoſſible to know where it ſtood
that was whilome a goodly Cittie
neuer had
                        Spencer in his ruines of time. Poets, Saint Albones
                     
iuſter cauſe to accuſe the malice of man
and of time, then this poore ruined pile
hath to condemne it. Now grew Fleſhton
into more and more luſtre, and both
to adde a magnificence to the name, as
alſo to paſt the foile of Py-nople vpon
the fore-head of all poſterity, it left the
laſt ſyllable of the old name, and aſſumed
the two laſt of Py-nople for it, ioyning
them, togither with the cement wherof
the ancient walls were made (called in
their language, Payſte) and ſo was
thence-forth called Fleſh-paſti-nople.
Touching the forme of it, it is rather
vaſt in compaſſe then comely in buildings:
and hath a ditch (or rather a riueret)
of ſpring water running almoſt
through euery ſtreete, in which water,
you ſhall ſee a thouſand ſeuerall impayled
Fiſh-ponds, wherein alſo they keepe
Swannes; Duckes, Diue-dappers, Herons,
Teales, and all water foules whatſoeuer,
(as they do now at Auſpurg, vpon
inſtruction from hence) and this current
is calledIf a paſty haue no grauy in it, it is not worth a doite
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      
                     Grauy-ditch. It is double
walled about, with the bones that

remained of their carniuall reuellings,
and theſe bones were moſt artificially
diſpoſed each in his due place, the great
bones ſtanding vnderneath as pillers to
the whole worke; the mid-moſt were
next in order aboue them, and the ſmalleſt
were ranked in the higheſt place, and
all very well faſtned togither with morter
made of the whites of egges; in
good ſadneſſe moſt artificially, and with
full iudgement. Their houſes with-in,
were neither too ſtately nor too lofty,
they needed noStrabo. Geog. lib. 5▪
                      
                     Auguſtus to forbid
the building aboue 70. foote high, nor any
Satyra. 3. 
                     Iuuenal, orContro. lib. 3. 
                     Seneca to complaine
of their ſtories vpon ſtories. No (faith)
they kept a very good courſe for that.
                  They loue no aſcents by ſtaires vp to
their dores, for two cauſes; partly becauſe
it is toileſome to climbe vp them
when their bellies are bum-baſted, and
partly becauſe it is dangerous to come
downe them when their braines are
throughly moiſtned, (as they muſt bee
moſt commonly vpon a great forfeiture):
Inſteed of lead, tile, & ſtates, their houſes

are all rooft with beaſts ſhoulder-bones,
very cunningly knit together I aſſure
yea: Their City conſiſteth not of any
ſaue ſuch as haue one dependance or other
vpon the good fellowes rack and
manager. The husbandmen, Carpenters
Millers and Butchers haue each their
habitations aſſigned thē in the ſuburbes:
who notwithſtanding if they can bring
their bellies vnto a certain ſet ſize, are
preſently carried to Gurmonds hall, and
there made free of the Wide-throates, or
Large-weaſands: but no ſtranger can haue
his freedome at firſt, vnleſſe he be either
a Cooke, a Baker, or an Inkeeper: the citty
is gouerned by a ſet number of gratie
Senators, peculiarly enſtiled Alder-guts,
who are not elected (as our European Burgomaiſters
are) for their wiſdome, their
wealth, or their horſe-taile beards, but by
the circumference of their naturall tankards
(their paūches) which at a ſollemn
ſet feaſt are euery yeare meaſured once:
and the more that each mans rotundity
of corpulence is found to bee enlarged;
vnto the higher place is hee preſently

                     
                        〈◊〉
                     : ſo that I haue ſeene ſome
come ſneaking out of the fagge end of
the ſuburbes, who had held theirA diminutiue of ſhops you ſhall find the word in Antony Mundaies diſcourſe of 
                              •
                           he ref
                              •
                           rmation of Redfaces.
                     
                     Shappikino
                           •
                        e in the verges of the Cities
Bodex; food knowes how many winters,
iuſtle notwithſtanding at length,
into and honorable place in the Citty,
and at laſticome to be a principal Syre of
this famous Common-weale. But
now 
                        〈◊〉
                      all heare or 
                        〈…〉
                      her ſickneſſe,
(as it often falleth out) or age, doe
chance to make theſe Alder-guts caſt
their Colloppes afterward, they are immediate
put off the Bench and looſe
both greace, and grace 
                        〈◊〉
                      one clap: this
is hard now but it 
                        〈◊〉
                      as hard as it is I
can 
                        〈◊〉
                      that. The 
                        〈◊〉
                      (which) admired
in a City otherwiſe ſo regardleſſe
of curioſity) are al paued with faire large
marble ſtones: becauſe (as I imagine) othewiſe
the inequality of pebbles lay
thē neuer ſo euen, would haue bin a troble
to the Gourmonds & other citizens in
making them lift their feete too high,
whereas 
                        〈◊〉
                      they are both eaſed of that
encombranced, and their Coaches haue

leſſe occaſion to ſhake their diſtended
Guts: for they neuer go abroad on foot,
nor on horſ-back, nor in Litters, but are
caried about the ſtreetes in great foure-wheeled
Coatches, that they may haue
the quieter means to ſit and ſpaule when
they are caried home from Wheeleing-in.
The Geometricall proportion of the
city is Circular, and hath foure gates at
which there doe ſit daily (courſe by
courſe) 4 Alderguts ſelected, and properly
inſtiled of that office Superuiſors of the
Paunſhery: and theſe are (like the Guales
guard in a town of garriſon) to examine
al Ingredients, and Egredients: the fatter,
to ſee that they go not out faſting (which
their long and graue experience in the
extenſion and contraction of gutts
makes them able moſt exactly to diſcouer,
and where they finde the perſon defectiue,
his Mulct is to eate two ſuppers)
and the firſt, to ſee that they come not
in emptie-handed: for not to go out fulbellied
and not to come in ful-handed, is
an heinous contempt of the citties right
health-ful gouernment. Euery month,

they are bound by their law, (and would
bee ſo were there no ſuch law) to celebrate
a ſollemne feaſt, where euery Aldergut
of the whole ſociety muſt prefent
himſelf, all excuſes and delaies ſet apart
what ſoeuer, to conſult (after dinner, for
before it is vnlawful for any one to giue
his voice) about the publique good. The
place where they meet is Gourmonds hall:
Euery one knoweth his ſeate, & hath his
Iourdan or chamber-pot ſtanding by him
in a little coffer made for the purpoſe.
Wel being met, & hauing turned their
wine into water, and their oyſters into
ſhells, euery one takes his chaire and to
dinner they go. Their daintieſt diſhes,
are euermore the firſt ſacrifices vnto
their ſtomakes, for they hold it fit that
the beſt meat meeteth fitteſt with the
beſt appetite. Now they may not in any
caſe haue their Boares, Sheepe, Goates,
lambs &c. ſerued vp in parcels & ioynts,
as we of Europe vſe, but they muſt haue
all whole (the old Romanes taught them
that) you ſhal ſee the waiters come ſweating
with an whole Hogge, or an whole

Calfe vpon a great pewter Engine, you
would bleſſe yee to behold it. Hee that
riſeth before ſix houres bee fully ruine,
runs his head vnder a rigorous fine and
al this while they eate & drinke by little
and little only (for that cauſe that made

                        In Ethic. his name was Philoxenus.
                      
                     Ariſtotles Paraſite with himſelfe the
necke of a crane) to take the more delight
in the delicacies. But for the breaking
vp of the feaſt, they haue this order.
They haue a dore in their hall, large enough

                        〈◊〉
                      the greateſt Gut-monger
that liues, and take him faſting. At this
dore, the Alder-guts enter when they
come to the feaſt, which beeing ended,
he that offers to paſſe the ſame way hee
came, and cannot get his belly through,
is let forth another waie: but hee that
paſſeth as eaſily as he came in, is ſtaid by
an officer appointed for that purpoſe,
called The Serieant of the Mawe, and
brought back againe (will hee nill hee)
where hee muſt ſettle him to a renewed
Rouſe, vntill his belly bee able to kiſſe
both the cheekes of the dore at once,
and then he is diſmiſſed. (I cannot bee

fully perſwaded but the creeping
throughWhich was whilom to be ſeene in Beuer caſtle.
                      Saint Wilfrids needle was a
deuiſe brought by ſome ancient Pilgrim
from this more ancient Alder-guts cuſtome).
The townſ-men of this place
haue the hugeſt gardens of the world,
but they are all out of order, nothing like
the gardens of Adonis, Alcinous, no nor
Where Lipſius pretendeth that Langius and he had that diſcourſe De Conſtantia.
                      
                     Langius-his neither, no ſir, come not
thether to looke for your arbours, your
alleies, or your conceited flowry knots,
mary if you looke for your radiſh, your
garlike, your cabbidge, your muske-melon,
or ſo, they are for you: Italy her ſelfe
had moſt of her more delicate rootes
from hence: an hundred Carthuſians
might haue a Chriſtmas dinner from
hence at an houres warning.
                  
                     
                        Martiall Epig. lib. 3. chap. 47.The goodly Colewort there you ſoone ſhould finde,
                     The Lettuce, and the Onions double kinde:
                     And Beetes, for him that would be looſe behinde.
                  
                  Nay marke but whether theſe men
haue a care of the Citties credite. They
haue a common hoſpitall (and that, I

may tel you, a large one) wherein al ſuch
as haue got the dropſie, the goute, the
cough of the lungs, or any ſuch malady
by too much gour-mandizing, are maintained
of the publike charge. But al ſuch
as haue loſt their teeth by age, or by eating
their broth too hot, are forth with
prouided for very conueniently & ſent
awayIles in the Atlantike ſea like our Orades, where they that haue the feweſt teeth are held in higheſt reſpect, and hee that hath none, is made a Clariſſimo of Suppington, the chiefe citty of the whole teritorie. into Spone-meat Ilands: there are
many belonging to this city that liue in
forme of ſlaues, and thoſe are appointed
to till the fields, and ſow the gardens. Euery
ritch Gurmond keepes diuers of theſe
labourers, who notwithſtanding when
the guts are at ſufficient growth, haue
their freedome giuen them gratis. If any
of the nobility chance to die of a ſurfet
(as there doth aſſuredly, more, then of any
other death) his Statue is preſently
forged of moſt ſelect & delicate diſhes,
and ſo he is laid forth for his ſlaues and
His hang bits. his p
                           •
                        ndentes per, to tire vpon: nor is it
lawfull for them to bee ſo idle as to
refuſe immeditate execution of this honorable
ordinance.
                  The, whole ſort of al theſe citizens are

generally of an vnmeaſurable groſeneſſe
(and ſeemed to mee when I ſawe
them walke iuſt like ſo many tunnes, mouing
each vpon two pottle pots): nor
is that man worthy of any (the meaneſt)
ſaluation in the world, that is not
                        Like him whoſe Epitaph this was: Here lyes ſir Iohn of Redcroſſe ſtreete: he was beard to th' belly, and belly toth' fecie. all
cheekes to the belly, and all belly to the
knees: and ſuch ſhapes doe the women
of this cittie walke in alſo: (The Germaine
Frowes doe prittily well in imitation
of theſe Fuſty-lugs, but the Barbarians
come very neere them). The yong
women may not mary till ſuch time as
before a bench of Matrons, they make
a publicke demonſtration to their huſbands
that ſhall bee, that their dugges
and chinnes may meete without any
forcing of either. They go for the moſt
part all naked, onely their Alder-guts
may weare gownes; mary thoſe muſt be
onely the skinnes of ſuch beaſts as they
are able to deuoure alone at one ſitting.
Yet there is no free-man of the towne
but weares a large knife, and a ſpoone as
big as a ladle bound to his right arme.
Before; vpon the breaſts, each one weareth

a poke of hayre-cloth to ſaue the
gobbets that chance to fall beſides, and
to wipe their mouths with-all, but thoſe
they vſe ſo long in this greaſie imployment,
that whether their ſhining exceed
their blackneſſe, or their blackneſſe their
ſhining he had need be well ſighted that
ſhould iudge. They are naturally dull of
wit, and ſlow of apprehenſion, and yet
notwithſtanding moſt perfect in all the
arts they reſpect. Their ſchooles haue
no lectures read in them, but onelyFor ſome ſuch bookes he wrote, witneſſe Suidas.
                     
                     Apicius his Inſtitutions of the Arte of
Muncherie: & there are all the yong fry
taught the Sciences of Caruing, chewing
and ſwallowing, oh moſt profoundly:
the Muncherie lecturer (when I was
there) was one Doctor Full-Gorge, a man
moſt rare in his profeſſion, and inſteed of
his Grammar, hee read the firſt ſection of
the foreſaid Inſtitutiō of Apicius. Their
library is a large roome, rancked full of
potts and kannes of all ſorts, euery ſorte
being enſeamed in their ſeuerall claſſes:
ſo the ſchollers haue alſo, each one
his full pott and his laden plat
                        •
                     er,

                     We haue ſome Vniuer ſide men that are too well read in theſe authors, yet verily, ſome ſtudy them ſo ſore that they bring themſelues of on their legs by it, ſaith Panurg. in his Le Tric-trac clericorum.
                      for his booke: the freſhmen haue leſſer
meaſures, the ſophiſters larger,
and ſo vp to the Graduates. The firſt perhaps
hath his pinte & his pullet, the next
his quart & his Gooſe, the third his pot
                     
                        •••
                     
and his fat Lambe, or his gammon of
Baton, and ſo vpwards: nor may any
leaue his taske, or haue leaue to play till
he haue made an end of what was enioyned
him. If any one ſtay ſeauen yeares in
theſe ſchooles, and benefit nothing, he is
forth-with baniſhed for euer into the
Starueling Iles, to Hunger-land is he ſent
away immediatly, to deale vpon Spaniſh
dinners, furniſhed with halfe piltchers.
Thether alſo they thruſt all Phiſitions
and preſcribers of diers: if any of
thē be ill at eaſe (let Aſclepiades ſwagger
& hang if he liſt) he preſently eates a raw
radiſh, drinkes a little hott water, ſpewes
a while, & within a quarter of an houre,
Viah, he lets flie vpon Aiax, & riſes from
his roaſt as ſound as a bell. Now all the
what you wil, that the voids at either end
during this purging time, is immediatly
confiſcate vnto the Dukes treaſurie

andNot ſtrained through a colander you muſt thinke, but ſeazed vpon by thoſe inquiſitors. 
                     ſtrained vpon in ſuch a caſe, by
certaine ſurueyors, eſpecially appointed
for ſuch commodities.
                  They loue veniſon dearely well, yet
can they not tell how to catch it: onely
ſuch Deere as comes willingly amongſt
them, thoſe they entangle in netts and
ſoyles and ſo take them. But the noble
Swine, oh they prize that beaſt aboue all
that euer nature produced; but whether
it be becauſe of their ſympathy of
natures, being both fatally conſecrated
to the table, or by reaſon that the ſwine
will feede on the courſeſt meate and yet
be ſooneſt fedde, this I leaue to a more
iudicious Cenſor to determine. What
man is he now would thinke, that in this
inundation of profuſeneſſe their ſhould
be any dry hillock left for Parſimony to inhabit?
yet (ſooth) there is many haue an
vnfit dwelling among ſuch Gulp-thrifts:
Certainly I haue obſerued an exceeding
care they haue in the reſeruing of the
ſmalleſt bit-bone, and fragment that remaines
after their banquetings; wherevpon
they neither keepe dogge, catte,

hawke, nor any creature whatſoeuer
that will eate fleſh: Nay which is more,
in the fatting of their Pidgeons, and Capons,
they will take them and make
them vn-gorge the corne that they haue
already halfe diſgeſted, and giue it for
meate vnto the others. The Venetians
haue learnt this pretty trick of them already,
andSo can our Poulters here in London, yea and worſe, as ſome report, the deuill con them thanke for it. can doe it very neatly.
Now as for the men themſelues, if any
one keepe any victuals by him vntill they
ſtinke, hee is forth-with condemned of
high treaſon, and ſpitted vpon a ſtake.
Onely two reſeruations this lawe agreeeth
vnto, the firſt is, they may keepe
their. Veniſon vntill it bee all hoarie,
and mouldie quite ouer, and the ſecond
is, they may lay vp (foh, naſty!) their
cheeſe where they thinke good, ſo long,
vntill it be ready to creepe quite away
with Maggots, and then they take theſe
wormes (the very putrification of a moſt
putride meate) and ſcraping a little ſugar
on them, craſh them vppe with
ſpoones as if they were Almond-comfites.
Out vpon them; I wonder our Low

Dutch would be ſuch logger-heads as to
follow them in this filthy faſhion.
                  This region aboundeth with riuers,
whoſe courſe is (moſt of them) vncertaine,
becauſe of the aboundance of ordure
that ſtops them, ſome-times heere,
and ſometimes there, but generally (take
this for an infallible rule)At Chriſtmas and at Shrouetide all the 
                           •
                        akesf
                           •
                        rmers termes at the beginning
of Ianuary, and the ending, or
about the ending of February, they are
ſure all of them to ouer-ſlow the bankes,
and (if the breatches bee not ſtop in
time) to do much harme in the paſtures
adioyning.
               
               
                  The warres of the Eat-allians.
CHAP. 7.
                  THe Eat-allians haue vnreconcileable
warres withGluttony is a deadly enemy both to hunger and good huſbandry. two other nations,
the Hunger-landers of the Starueling
Iland, and the Thriuingers of Thriuingois:
the firſt, inhabite certaine weſterne Iles
in the Atlantike ſea, not farre from Eatallia:
but the later lie ſomewhat further
of it, by reaſon of a great part of the tertorie
of Fooliana, and ſome parcell alſo

ofFor an whore wil euer ſtand between thrift and thee. 
                     Shee-landt, that puts in betweene
them: their hiſtoricall monuments relate
that the Plienger-landers being confederate
with the Theeuing-arians, haue made
many terrible inuaſions vp on the Eat-allians
borders: and one time gaue them
a ſore foyle, inſomuch that the poore inhabitants
were faine to hide themſelues
in hores and cauſes vnder ground: vntill
at laſt their gods guardions pitied them,
and made their foes owne chappes
their full deſtruction; for they did ſo
ingorge them ſelues after this ſudden
change, that growing hereby all diſeaſed,
there was not a man left of them in
three yeares, if you would haue giuen a
Spaniſh reall for a man: not a man to caſt
at a dog. The Thriuingers alſo, the ancient
inhabitauts of this land, haue made
many attempts to regaine their loſt
poſſeſſion, but (as fortune lightly lea
                     
                        •
                     eth
to the wrong ſide) haue beene
continually beaten backe by the Eatall
an
                           •
                        
                      good ſucceſſe. They march vnto
battell, armed onely before, for
what-neede any fence behinde, ſe
                        •
                     ing

they cannot turne them-ſelues to runne
away?) with Oxe-hides, ſheepe-skins,
& ſwines pelts,that you would imagine,
ſeeing them goe to warre, that it were a
heard of cattle that were a driuing to
the watring place: their weapons commonly
are ſpits, and fire-forkes, mary
ſome of them haue, gunnes, and croſſebowes
made of the bones of the largeſt
oxen they kill: But the very truth is (I
may tell it here to you in priuate, but 'tis
a rare point of pollicie.) The Drink-allians
giue them their beſt aſſiſtance, for
had not they beene, the Eat-allians had
beene downe the winde long ere this:
and there isAnd ſo it is: for giue one his liquor ſoundly firſt, and then ſet him on to ſight, and he will ruſh vpon dangers, the very thought whereof were inough to kil him, were hee ſober. the maine of all the
matter.
               
               
                  Of Idle-bergh, an Imperiall
free towne.
CHAP. 8.
                  BVt I haue ſome-what to ſay ofIdleneſſe hath a great ſway among Gluttons.
                     Idle-bergh, though I haue ſaid nothing
of it yet; it may not paſſe mee ſo

being ſo famous and free a ſtate as it is.
It hath a large territorie vnder command,
& is ſituate in ye fartheſt confines
of Pewter-Platteria, towards Fooliana.
There is not a towne either of more antiquity,
or worthy more admiration in
all Eat-allia then this is: The Citizens
liue in farre more happy eſtate then euer
Monke did: for they haue all things they
can deſire, in aboundance. For firſt the
towne is ſo ſtrongly ſituate, that it is vtterly
impregnable, and may iuſtly mock
at all the enemies enterpriſes, being built
vpon a rock'Tis no leſſe, beleeue it: if you will not, go and ſee your ſelfe, and truſt your owne eyes. But we haue Engliſhmen enow that haue beene in Idle-bergh, and can auouch this to be true. O Anglia quam ſegnis, quàm inſignis? Bucer. ten Germaine miles in
height, and withall ſo ſteepe, that it is vtterly
inacceſſible: At the foote of this
cliffe runs the riuer of Idle, whereof the
towne taketh her name: runs ſaid I? nay
it ſeemes rather to creepe: being more
like a lake then a riuer. There is but one
way vp to the towne, and that is not by
mounting the rock by degrees, and windings,
as wee ſee in other forts of this ſituation,
but the towneſ-men let downe
a roape and a basket, like the bucket of a
Well, and ſo hale vp the paſſengers.

They liue all vpon certaine birds naturally
bred amongſt them, I neuer ſaw
any of them elſe-where, the inhabitants
call themWe haue ſtore of them here in England, & moſt of your beds in court are ſtuffed with their fethers. I haue ſeene many of them together flying in companies from one tauerne figne to another, for the ſpace of an whole moneth together 
                     Gulls, and they are not
much vnlike to our bald Cootes. They
ſerue the cities vſe with three ſorts of
meates, fleſh, egges, and fiſh; fleſh, from
their owne carcaſſes, egges from their
neſts, where they lay them in great
aboundance, and fiſh which they bring
for the feeding of their young ones, in
huge exceſſe: and beſides, the ſticks of
their neſts finde the citizens perpetuall
firing. What, would yee more? and more
yee ſhall haue. Their fethers ſerue the
citizens for ſtopping of their beds, yea
and ſome to ſpare alſo, for tranſportation.
The grounds within the walls bring
forth both whole vintages of delicate
grapes, and whole harueſts of the pureſt
wheate. Nor is there any other thing
whatſoeuer that the Idle-berghers eſteeme,
but they enioy it within themſelues.
The people do liue an vncurious
life, and in Apuleius his ſence (who called
a fatte Lambe, an vncurious one)

ſelues are truly vncurious.Dauies in Fuſcnm Epig. 39. They ſup,
they ſleepe, they riſe, they dine, and they
ſup, and ſo round in a ring, (vnleſſe a little
whoring now and then chance to
adde one dance more to ye round.) They
haue a lawe (and that I thinke they had
from theThe moſt luxurious nation that euer was. 
                     Sybarites) that barreth all
Eunuches, and all Artificers from dwelling
amongſt them. Their ſwine ſerue
for their plow-men (as they did whilom
in Aegipt) they vſe no other husbandrie:
yet the ritcher ſort haue attendants:
one to open the maiſters eyes
gently when hee awaketh: another to
fanne a coole ayre whileſt hee eateth, a
third to put in his viands when hee gapeth,
a fourth to fit his girdle to his belly,
as it riſeth and falleth, the maiſter onely
excerciſeth but eating, diſgeſting, and
laying out.
                  There are diuerſe other cities that hold
of this Idle-bergh in capite, & vnder protection
of her, enioy the ſame priuiledges
with her, namelyThe two twins of Idleneſſe. 
                     Sleepe-on, and
Snort-apace: yet here the citizens are ſeldome
or neuer awake, but (aslib. 8. cap. 36 
                     Pliny
                     
writeth of the Beares) do generally lye
ſo ſoundly a iouking, that a man may
wound them ere hee awake them: and it
is ſtrange to ſee how fatte they grow by
this drowſie lethargie.
               
               
                  The Lawes of the Land.
CHAP. 9.
                  
                     GOurmonds hall is a very faire, large
houſe, ſtatefully ſet forth with arched
bay windowes, and vpon the front
of the entrance are theſe words fairely
engrauen in letters of gold, TO, REVELL,
AND TO, METHODE.

                        And vnder it were theſe verſes engrauen. Frolick fatneſſe here doth dvvell: Keepe leaneſſe out and all goes well. And within, there hung a table chained
to a Marble piller, conteining theſe
ſacred and inuiolable lawes.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              BE IT ENACTED.
                              
                                 1. THat eating but one meale a day, bee
hence-forth held for a capitall tranſgreſsion.
                                 2. That he that ouer-throwes a full diſh

or a cup raſhly, or howſoeuer, be forthwith by
vertue of this ſtatute enioyned to ſtand vpright
on his feete, and hauing a diſh of broth
ſet betweene his heeles, to eate it all vp with
a thimble.
                                 3. That none eate alone, nor violate the
lawes of the table by any priuate ſuppers:
but that euery Citizen do eate either in the
ſtreetes or in an open window, vpon paine
of eating his next meale with his heeles vpward.
                                 4. That whoſoeuer forbeareth to ſleepe
or eate foure houres together, do ſatisfie the
ſtate by eating two ſuppers.
                                 5. Yet if the mouth bee full, it ſhall bee
ſufficient to giue an anſwer by holding vp
the finger.
                                 6. That conſpiratours bee forth-with
ſtarued to death, and other malefactors puniſhed
by the loſſe of a tooth.
                                 7. That all Cookes that dreſſe not their
meate according to the iudicious palate, be
immediatly bound vnto ſtakes, & fleſh halfe
roaſted hung by them, vntill ſome pittifull
and hungry ſpectator take compaſsion on
them, and eate it all vp.
                                 
                                    
8. That to belch bee held not onely lawfull,
Sueton. in Claud. but honorable alſo: and that the gouerment
of the next future feast bee aſsigned
vnto him that broke winde the ſtronglieſt
at the last.
                                 9. ThatThe reaſon of this law is to bee read in the next chapter. if any one hold his breath
whilest his belly is a meaſuring, he be forthwith
made vncapable of all aduancement,
and condemned to faſt one whole day in a
grate, where he may behold the rest of the
Alder-guts at dinner and ſupper.
                                 10. That euery mans weekly maungery be
brought in a billa vera by his fellow Gurmond
vnto the Regiſter to be recorded, and
withall that if he haue not fulfilled the lawe
in that caſe enacted, hee may be accordingly
fined.
                              
                              
                                 Signed All-Paunch.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Thoſe that are the leaſt offenders, are
put for foure and twenty houres into the
Temple of Famine, a priſon directly contrary
vnto our
                        Beth-lehem in Hebrew, is the houſe of bread in Engliſh
                      
                     Bedlem. It ſtands without
the Cittie as Aeſculaps temple ſtood

without Rome: but not for healths ſake
(as Plutarch ſaith how that did) but onely
leaſt ſuch as are condemned vnto that
gaole ſhould ſo much as once ſent the
ayre of the Kitchin. The walls of it are
all painted about with all manner of
good victualls, onely to excite the priſoners
appetite vnto his greater plague,
and verily one Ieſuite or other hath
ſeene theſe walles, and there-vpon deuiſed
pictures for their Chambers of meditation.
They vſe no money: what haue
wee to doe, ſay they, with theſe ſapleſſe
and vnſauory mettals? no, they follow
that ancient cuſtome thatIn Politic. 
                     Ariſtotle
records, and barter goods for goods by
way of exchange. Two ſparrowes is the
price of a ſtare, two ſtares for a blackbird,
two black-birds for a hen, two hens
for a gooſe, two geeſe for a lambe, two
lambes for a calfe; two calfes for a goate,
& two goates for a cow: and thus they
do alſo in fiſh and rootes, at a ſet price:
the towle-mens eſpeciall care beeing
this, that neither their ſtuffe be too bad,
nor their price too great.
               
               
                  
                  Their Religion.
CHAP. 10.
                  THey cannot endure Iupiter, for he,
when hee thunders, sowres all their
wines, and ouer-wets their plants with
vnſeaſonable ſhowers. They haue a good
deuotion vnto God Trine, becauſe he eateth
vp althings before him, and ſhewes
himſelfe herein a true Eat-all. They haue
built a goodly temple vnto him, in which
I ſaw the picture of Saturne eating vp his
children, paſſing artificially portrayed.
On Shroue-tueſday, they offer ſacrifice vnto
the Genius of the place, whom they
hold for their chiefe Deitie, and almoſt
for their onely deity: Euery yeare once
doth this power appeare vnto them in
forme of a monſtrous Fowle, moſt huge
and moſt rauenous, (the inhabitants call
him RVC) and accepts the offrings of
his ſeruants, and they for their parts are
not behinde hand with him, but preſent
him with whole Hecatombes of raw-fleſh,
thus ordered.
                  
                     
In Pewter-platter-ia (of which you
heard before) there is a large plaine, lying
towards the South, circled in with
mountaines on each ſide. Vnto this plain
do al the inhabitāts flock at a certain day
appointed, bringing with them an ocean
of victuals, Elephants, Rhinocerots, Camells
(all which they feed for this purpoſe,
for other-wiſe they would neuer
keepe ſuch vnprofitable creatures) Oxen
of the largeſt size, Boares, Sheepe,
Goates, togither with a whole army of
Birds, all with the feathers pluckt off: all
theſe they put as it were into this large
cage; which being done, they get them
vp on the mountaines ſides, as if they
tooke their ſeates in a play-houſe, and
with bended knees doe there expect the
comming of this great Deity, old Ruc of
Rucs hall. At length ſir, you ſhall ſee
him come a farre off, with a noiſe, able to
deafe the whole nation three hundred
miles about, with a great crooked bill
as biggeAlmoſt, not fully ſo big: it wants ſome 359. degrees. 59. min. 60. ſeconds. (almoſt) as halfe the Equinoctiall
circle, with a paire of tallants,
like two broade ſpred Okes, with two

eyes in his head like two townes that
were on fire, and ſuch an inundation of
Harpies, Rauens, Vultures, and Haukes,
about him,! O ſtrange! ſtupendious
ſight, for man to ſee! with a cry, able to
procure an earth-quake they approach
the plaine, and by and by, their wings
eclipſe the Sunne, and bring a midnight
ouer the whole valley, they are ſo huge
a multitude.
                  Three times they flagge about the
plaine, while the people powre out
their very bladders in teares, and all that
is in their bellies in hearty praiers vnto
this route of religious birdes. By
this time, Generall RVC, the leader
of this ſtarued regiment hath ſpied his
pray, for hee out of all that Folio Catalogue
of Carcaſſes, muſt chooſe what
pleaſes his tooth firſt, ſupoſe hee take
ſome fiue Elephants, or halfe a ſcore
oxen, he is to be firſt ſerued, and then euery
one to his ſharke, tagge and ragge
there yee ſhould ſee one fly away with a
Calfe here another with a Lambe, ther
                        •
                     
one with a Boare and here anothe
                        •
                     
                     
with a Swanne, euery one fitting his
luggage to his ſtrength, and thus with a
reuerent and religious applauſe of all
the lookers on,Into the forreſts of Theuegen, whereof read the 4. booke. chap. 4. they depart euery
one with his cariage, and leaues the
reſt behind them: all which (and that is
an huge deale of meate) the people are
bound in conſcience to get ready and
eate vp ere they goe, whereby their bellies
are ſo ouer-ſtuffed, that they loath
fleſh almoſt forty daies after, during
which ſpace they liue all vpon fiſh (but
that is coſtly dreſt with ſirrups and ſauces)
and with the dainties of Banquet-ois:
both to refreſh themſelues with the delicacy
thereof, as alſo to returne to fleſh
againe which the ſharper appetite, hauing
thus long forborne it. Sure as
death the Pope had his Lent ſent him out
of this country, vpon the granting them
ſome odde indulgence, or vpon diſpenſing
with them for Ember weekes.
               
               
                  
                  The Election of the Great
Duke.
CHAP. 11.
                  NOw wee come to the Great Dukes
Place, and thether by good chance
came I, the very ſame day that a new
Duke was elected, according to the cuſtome
of the country. There is a Stately
Palace ſtandeth vpon a narrow ledge of
land lying iuſt betweene Eat-allia and
Drink-allia, which alſo ioyneth them
both together: This pallace was built
(as their moſt ancient Chroniclers auouch)
by a Giant called (in the ſayd
Chronicles) All-Paunch: who was of
an incredible height of body; not like
him whoſe picture the Schollers of
Cambridge goe to ſee at Hogmagog hills:
but rather like him that ought the two
aple-teeth which were digged out of
a Well in Cambridge that were little
leſſe then a mans head, (yet was not the
tooth that was found on the ſhore of

                     Vtina any way comparable to theſe)
Plinyes
                     Who was 7. cubites high. Plin lib. 7. chap. 16. 
                     Oreſtes, orWho was 16. cubites in height. 
                     Plutarches Orion
were but dwarfes in reſpect of this
ſame great All-Paunch. Suppoſe rather
that you ſaw Antaeus that was
three-ſcore cubites heigh, or him whoſe
carcaſſe being digged vp at Drepano,
was, (as Boccace affirmeth the Symetrians
to haue gathered by his thigh bone)
two hundred cubites in length, this later
I thinke might bee brother to him
wee ſpeake off.
                  This All-Paunch was the firſt that
conquered this countrie from the Thriuingois,
draue them all out of the land,
brought in a new people, and gaue
them new lawes: and his ſoule they
imagine (as Pythagoras his opinion affirmed)
to bee entred into that huge
bird RVC, in which ſhape (as I ſaid) they
do yearly adore him. The ſilly people
haue this fellow in as great reuerence
as the Turkes haue Mahomet. Hee lyeth
buried in the midſt of the Palaces
Baſe Court: Where for a ſacred memorial
of him, there is a Statue erected,

farre higher then Liſippus his brazen
coloſſus, neare vnto which his tombe is,
vpon which I diſcerned ſome markes of
letters, but antiquity had ſo eaten them
out, as Ouid ſaith.

                        Old time that razeth all and ſpareth none,
                        And age that eateth through the hardeſt ſtone
                     
had ſo defaced the inſcription, that I
could ſcarcely make any good ſence
of it.
                  The fragments ſtood in this manner.
                  
                     I ALL PANCH D
                        •
                     KE OF
TENTERBELLY LY
HERE A LORD A VICTOR A
PRINCE A DEITY. LET NONE
GOE BY ME FASTING NOR
NAME ME HVNGRY. NOR
SALVTE ME SOBER. BE
MINE HEIRE HE THAT
CAN. MY SVBIECT HEE
THAT WILL MINE
ENEMY HE THAT DARE.
Farewell Bellies and be fatte.

Now I imagine it ſhould conteine
theſe words; Iudge I pray the Gentle
reader, and if thou canſt reſtore the
fragments to their true contents better
then I haue done here, thou maiſt
doe the Antiquaries much pleaſure herein:
I thinke it is thus.
                  I ALL-PAVNCH, DVKE OF
TENTER-BELLYE, LY
HERE ENTOMBED. DYING
A LORD, A VICTOR, A
PRINCE, A DEITY. LET NONE
GO BY ME FASTING, NOR
NAME ME HVNGRY, NOR
SALVTE MEE SOBER. BE
MINE HEIRE HEE THAT
CAN, MY SVBIECT HEE
THAT WILL, MINE
ENEMY HE THAT DARE.
FARE-WEL BELLIES AND
BE FATTE.
                  This tombe is to bee ſeene in the
pallace of the Duke, who hath his
regalitie according to this firſt Dukes

inſtitution, not by ſucceſſion, but by election,
for there are foure chiefe linages,
or families in the land: The Treble-chins,
the Bacon-choppes, the Woolſacks,
and the Nimble-iawes: any one of
theſe foure houſes may ſtand for the
Dukedome, and vpon deſert obtaine it.
This now is the order of the election:
there is a yearely tilting ordained (not
any tilting with ſpeares, but a tilting of
barrells) whervnto euery one comes armed
with his teeth, all new ſharpened,
and to it they goe, where hee that vnhorſeth
moſt meate, and lifteth moſt
meaſures of wine out of their pewterſaddles,
is not onely honoured with a
crowne of cluſtered vines, but furthermore
is made Lord high Steward of
the Land, the Dukes next inferior:
which done, and the tournament ended,
each one ariſeth (if hee can) and
laying his hand on the ſacred tombe
of dead Duke All-Paunche, taketh an
othe by the deities of Bacchus, Saturne;
and the reuerend All-Paunch to
performe his duety in this election

without any partiall dealing whatſoeuer.
                  Then they depart vnto the Theater
which is prepared for that daies vſe
(not too high for feare of beeing
tired ere they got vp ſtaires) and there
they take their places to behold this future
election. Then firſt commeth
forth the new choſen Lord high Steward,
and he bringeth in his hand a golden
girdle, all enchaſed with Pearles,
Diamonds, Rubies &c. and this they
call The holie belt of State: and vpon it,
I eſpied theſe words, ſet in perfect Rubies;
NOTHING, IF NOT BEYOND.
                  Now firſt, the laſt yeares Duke puts
it on, and taketh the exact meaſure of
his owne Souſe-tub, and then al the reſt
of the Nobility doe ſo after him, and
hee that can ſet it on the tenters (without
ſtretching of his bellie, or holding
of his breath) ſo ſtiffe, that it
neede bee letten out one hole more;
Hee is the man that with great acclamations
is proclamed High Duke of

Tenter-belly. And then preſently commeth
his Cup-bearer, and vpon his
knees preſents him with a ſiluer tankard
of ſome dozen quartes, and intreates
his Grace to drinke a health vnto the
people.
                  Hee takes it, and lifting vppe the
Lidde, beginnes an oration to the
people befitting occaſion, or if hee
bee no good oratour, yet hee giues
them as kinde a congratulation as
hee can.
                  Truely I was verie attentiue to
itYee know that the fetteſt Geeſe haue the ſmalleſt wind-pipes. but they doe all ſpeake ſo in
the throate, that I could neither like
the ſound nor learne the ſence, vntill
mine interpretour told mee how it was:
and thus it was indeede.
                  After hee had yeelded thankes
(quoth hee) to Bacchus,
                     The God deſſe of all ſhambles and fleſh-markets whatſoeuer. 
                     Carnea,
and all thoſe fauourable deities, eſpeciallie
to his owne Great Mawe,
the giuer of ſuch high honours, and
had giuen gramercie to his eyes,
that had beheld him the beſt man
in all Tenter-bellie
                     The honeſter they, to ſtick ſo reuel to him. ere they fell

out, hee turned his ſpeach vnto the people,
and in moſt excellent and Rhetoricall
good tearmes, tooke a freſh oathe
by Saint All-
                           •
                        aunche,
                     The Dukes Oration to the people after his election. that hee would
be a Bulwarke to our liberties, a drudge
to our buſineſſes, a terrour to our enemies,
a childe to our aduiſes; a follower
of our counſells, a preſeruer of our ſtudies,
a father to our deſires, an enlarger
of our Weaſands, and an increaſer of
our meaſures: finally, he would preſerue
vs as wee were now, and make vs as
wee would bee. And then hee denounced
himſelfe a profeſſed foe to Hunger,
Abſtinence, Diet, Naughty Ale and
Meagerneſſe of wine, beere, and bodie,
and ſwore once more (to aſſure vs) that
while hee bare that roiall belt, none
ſhould either faſt vnpuniſhed, or bee
drunke vnrewarded.
                  Goe on my good ſubiects (quoth he)
I adiure you by the ſacred weight of
your well diſtended wombes, goe on,
bee yee all and alwaies free and frolicke!
O the royalty of reuells! O honorable
helter skelters! Let neuer

this goodlie formed Goblet of wine
(quoth hee, and tooke vppe his pot of
twelue quartes) goe Iouiallie through
mee, (and then hee ſet it to his mouth,
ſtole it off euery droppe ſaue a little remainder
which hee was by cuſtome to
ſet vpon his thumbes naile and licke it
off, as hee did, and then proceeded) vnleſſe
I doe from the bottome of mine
heart, will and wiſhe you continuallie
dronken heads, full bellies, and fatte
fortunes.
                  Then hauing made an end, the audience
made all ring with their applauſe, they
gaue it him ſo fully and ſo faithfully:
Longe liue Bounſingut, Wool-ſack, Caeſar,
Emperor of Tenter-belly, long liue he,
long reigne hee, long grow hee; this they
rattled yee vppe, at leaſt a dozen times
ouer.
                  Then were the armes of the Dukedome
giuen him, which was the Rampant
Eſtridge, ſwallowing of an Iron
horſhooe: the word Diſgeſt, and Do beſt.
For his ſword and ſcepter, the Lord
High-Steward preſented him with a

great knife, and a pretty golden Tunne,
and in deliuering them (according to
cuſtome) pronounced theſe words, Vſe
and enioye them. But then for the Coronation
dinner and ſupper! Oh mercifull
Heauens! what Caſtles of platters
and chargers, what mountaines of fleſh
and banquetry, what deluges of Wine
Ale and Vſquebath did I ſee there! I
will neuer ſtand vpon perticulars: onely
this I cannot ommit, the ſtreetes that
night were ſtrowed ſo thicke with
drunken carcaſſes that I thinke in conſcience
there was neuer more memories
left in the field, of the greateſt maſſacre
that euer this moderne age was witneſſe
of.
                  There are diuers Cities beſides in this
dominion, as Swallow-all, Hoggeſ-den,
Tickle-Chere, andLickingoa is a colony, ſent from Goa in the Eaſt-Indies, ſaith Pantagruel in his Merda Geographica. lib. 7 chap. 39. Sect. 594. 
                     Lickingoa, but their
formes of gouernment are peculiarlie
declared in the deſcription of Fleſh-Paſtinople,
and ſo need no perticular rehearſall.
               
               
                  
                  The Starueling Iland, or Hungerland.
CHAP. 12.
                  BVt wee had quite forgotten the remembrance
of Starueling Iland, take
it therefore with you now, as a pennance
for your tedious abode in Eat-allia.
It lieth vnder three and thirty degrees
of longitude, and foure and fifty of
latitude, beeing on the North, directly
oppoſite vnto Cabo Bianco, and on the
South, vnto Filtching-Fennes. It is a
ſtonie, ſwartie, barren, Graſſ-leſſe, ſandie
ſoyle: there are ſome trees in it,
but they haue neuer an inch of barke
left, nor bloſſome, nor budde: nay the
plentie of all places, the weede, cannot
finde in his heart to make any
(the ſmalleſt) reſidence in theſe quarters.
                  The Lands naturall barrenneſſe
affordes no diſtinction either of Summer
or Winter, whether it bee becauſe

the inhabitants ſnappe vppe there
herbes as ſoone as euer they peepe out
of the Ground, or that it bee the effect
of Ceres curſe, (who ſayling about the
world to ſeeke her Daughter, made
ſhip-wracke on the craggie ſhore
of this Ile, and therevpon, they ſay,
layde her malediction vpon it) it
lies not in mee to reſolue you.
                  There is none that dwells in this
ſoile willinglie, but all the inhabitants
are Exiles: and their hew is naturallie
betweene a pale and a ſwartie,
their skinnes crumpled like halfe burnt
partchment, and puckered like the
hide of an Elephant: The Sunne did
neuer ſee more meager creatures,
you would ſweare they were Anatomies
couered with freſh skinne, or els
one of Athenodorus his apparitions,
they looke ſo ghaſtly. You ſhall haue
one laying a plotte how to intrappe
the flies: another, contriuing a conſpiracie
againſt the wormes; nay
there bee they that ſitte ſhauing
of the Earthes (GOD knowes

already neere ſhorne) beard, to diſcouer
the rootes of the vngrowne graſſe: nay
they will lye in ambuſhes one for another
(like ſo manyOtherwiſe (although vnproperly) called Cannibals.
                      
                     Bald-Cannyes in
a dead vacation of butcherie) yet notwithſtanding
they haue a good excuſe
for this out of Ariſtotle, for you know
that the greater number of ſtrangers
arriuing, the greater ſcarcity of Belly-timber
muſt needs enſue. By this meanes
no ſtranger eſcapes them vnleſſe he bee
either too ſtrong for their aſſaults, or
too leane for their ſtomacks.
                  They are (moſt of them) Blackſmiths,
notwithſtanding that the Eatealls
baniſh all their Philoſophers and Phiſitians
hither, and ſo doe the Spaniards
all their ſlaues that haue ſerued out
their time.
                  They haue a ſtrange and fierce wilde
Beaſt rangeth continually in the night
all about the deſerts of this Iland, and
they giue it the name ofWe haue of theſe beaſts here in England, Duke Humphrey keepes a kennell of them continually. 
                     An Emptie-Maw:
It will keepe ſuch a terrible barking,
that it makes the hollow ayre eccho
againe: and he of this land that heareth

it not barke once in twelue houres,
growes deafe immediatly, but hee that
heareth it thrice in ſix and thirty houres
and giueth it nothing to deuoure ere
twelue houres more be runneProuided alwayes, that he can liue no longer. dieth
preſently, without all auoidance. Touching
other beaſts, I ſaw none in all this
whole Iland, but a ſort of Wolues, and
ſomeA Munkey will eate the owne taile for hunger. 
                     Monkeyes that had eaten of a
great part of their owne tailes. Not any
elſe could I eſpie, Indeed I durſt not
make any long aboade in ſo leane a land,
it was no wiſdome, was it thinke yee?
                  Thus farre of Eat-allia, and the adiacent
Iles; now come we to Drink-allia,
and ſo good night.
               
            
            
               
                  Of Drink-allia, the ſecond prouince
of Tenter-belly.
CHAP. 1.
                  The Conditions of the Inhabitants.
                  LEt none expect any exact deſcription
of Drink-allia in this place, for I

durſt not for mine eares offer to go into
any Cittie of the whole Prouince, vntill
it was darke night, that all the citizens
were wrapt in wine and warme clothes,
and then (you know) how was it poſſible
to diſcouer any thing? you may perhaps
ſay, what ſhould you feare? faith
Ile tell yee: harke in your eare! I feared
the Burgomaiſters bountie: for their
faſhion is, as ſoone as any one ſettes
foote in at the Cittie gate, to giue him,
by my troth I wotte neere how many
lifts of Wine for his welcome; oh
they receiue him in pompe; and all of
the common purſe of the Cittie: now
ſo many ſtoopes muſt hee pull of, or
elſe hee is held an vngratefull, vnmannerly
fellow, and which is worſe, a
direct foe to the common good of
the Cittie. Now I feared both this
honour and this danger, and now I
hope you are anſwered. To our purpoſe.
                  This Prouince is ſome-what larger
then Eat-allia, and what that hath in
wealth, this hath in intemperancie. It

is as broad or rather broader then both
the Germanies: nor is there any nation
vnder the cope of heauen ſo fortunate,
nor ſo aboundant in the delicate iuice of
the grape, as this is. The peculiar wines
of all our kingdomes of Europe, the Germaines
Rheniſh, the Frenchmans White
and Claret, the Spaniards Xeres, Malaga,
and the Canaries, tuſh, they haue them
all here in exceſſe. The temperature of
their bodies are ſomewhat different
from the Eat-alls, for theſe delight in the
qualities of heate and drought, whereas
the Drink-alls eſpecially affect heate and
moiſture: ſo that the bordering neighbours
doe ieaſtingly call the Eat-alls,
Blackmen, and Kitchin-Tenter-bellyes, but
the Drink-alls they name Read-men, and
Cellerian-Tenter-bellyes. But their bodies
and their wittes hold both one key in difference:
for the Drink-alls as they are
more ingenious then the Eat-alls, ſo are
they much more laſciuious: In their
young yeares they are generally very
quick witted, but being come to a more
grauer age (eſpecally old age) they

grow ſo forgetfull, that you ſhall not
haue one amongſt twenty that can remember
his owne name.
               
               
                  The Shires of the Countrie.
CHAP. 2.
                  THe Inhabitants affirme the whole
Prouince to bee diuided into three
Counties: the countie of Wine-ceſter,
the county of Vſque-bathe, and the countie
of Hoppe-Sack, or Strong-biera.
                  
                  The firſt of theſe, Wine-ſhire, is parted
from Eat-allia, vpon the weſterne verge
thereof by the riuer Piſſ-on, a ſalt current
that ebbes and flowes. This riuer
runnes round about the Dukes Palace,
and as for the ſaltneſſe, the Philoſophers
of this countrie ſay it hath it not from
the ſea, but from an ayrie humor that
often-times falls vpon it. The firſt towne
that I came vnto in this region, was called
Vine-ſpring, and was in forme of a
fiue-angled trencher: it lay downe as
farre as Vine-prophils, and ſo ſome of it

became part of the ſuburbes of Cluſter-beg,
a pretty fine Cittie, walled about
with ſtones of the colour of bricke, but
ſome-what deeper of dye. This Cittie
ſtands in the bottome of Preſsing-dale,
(a valley ſo called) through the which
runnes a delicateriuer called Iuice, which
paſſeth along by three or foure pretty
citties, (ſeated vpon the bankes thereof,
moſt iudiciouſly, and to the founders
eternall commendations) their names as
I remember were Tankards-bridge, that
was the firſt, then Tunning-trie, then
Broachingford, & laſtly, Carouſi-kanikin.
Tunning-try I remember was fotified
with a wall of wood, and Broaching-ford
had neuer but one gate open at once, and
that when it was ſhut, was made faſt
with nothing but the end of a faggotſtick.
There is not in all the world any
one riuer comparable to this that runs
through theſe cities; Donaw, Thames,
Volga, Seyne, or Sir Walter Rawleys riuer of
Guiana, put them all in, they are but kennells
to this: for beſides the pleaſing
Meanders that hee makes in his wanton

courſe, the water is ſo ſweete and delicate,
that neither the beſt Europes wine,
nor the Turkes deliciousA drinke made of honey and water. 
                     Zerbeth can
poſſibly goe beyond it. This worthy
ſonne of the Ocean, hath one peculiar
fiſh belongeth vnto it, called a Tappe,
and this fiſh will ſome-times lye by the
ſhore, and ſpoute a huge deale of the
water aloft, (mary the remaining of it
in his belly hath made it ſome-what
more pleaſing to the taſte then it was
before) and this the inhabitants watch
for in boates, and when they get it, make
great ſtore of it. This riuer (as I told
you) paſſeth through Tuning-try: maſſe
I had fotgotten one towne, it goeth from
thence to Celleridge, ere it come to
Broaching-ford, and ſo by Broaching-ford
paſſeth directly vnto Carouſi-kannikin,
the prime Cittie of the whole Prouince.
               
               
                  
                  The deſcription of Carouſi-kanikin, chiefe
City of Drinke-allia, as alſo of the
faſhions and conditions of
the Drink-alls.
CHAP. 3.
                  
                     CArouſi-kanikin, is a name that I vnderſtand
not, further then that I
haue a little light of it from the Germaine
tongue, but as for the citie, it is built vpon
an hill, and carieth the forme of a
Tankard, from what quarter ſoeuer you
behold it. It is of ancient renowne, and
one of the beſt ſeated ports for traffique
in all the whole land. On the Eaſt
part it is ſtrongly fortified with Barricadoes,
and Bulwarkes built all of Barrels,
and the roofes of the houſes are moſt
of one and the ſame manner, tiled with
the boords of broken Caskes. In the
entrance of the gate, from morning vntill
night there is placed a double canon
of Pewter, (for their lawe commandeth
this to bee duly obſerued) the citizens

call it the Flaggon of Hoſpitalitie, and
round about it, are theſe words engrauen,

                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , ſuch an inſcription is vpon the Dolphin in Cambridge. 
                     Aut bibe, aut abi: Drinke or bee
gone. Hee that ariueth, muſt either lift it
all of, or elſe he is caried before the Magiſtrate,
to render accompt of his contumacie.
The armes of the Citie are aduanced
ouer the Gate, and they are the
three horſe-leaches vpon three naked
feete, in a bloudy field; the word, Plaenae,
quieſcimus. Being full, we reſt. Here by a
fortunate chance, did I meete with another
ſtranger, a Letcheri-tanian borne,
who was bound for the Citie as well as I,
his name he told me wasAn Italian word expreſſing the noiſe that the wine maketh in running from the tap. 
                     Cinciglion. He
(being acquainted with their faſhions)
brought mee ſecretly by night into the
towne, and ſhewed mee ſuch things as I
ſhould neuer haue diſcouered of my
ſelfe. Their buildings are not much vnlike
the Eat-alls, but that the fronts of
their houſes are ſo wholy hidde with
ſpreading Vines, that had I not ſeene
the ſignes hang out on euery ſide, I
would haue ſworne I had beene in a
Vineyard and not in a Cittie: in ſadneſſe

it was a pleaſant ſpectacle. In the Market
place are all the meaſures hung vp in
chaines, ſealed with the Dukes ſtampe
on their tops, and by them, hangeth a
table of the lawes of the land, which
you ſhall haue truely ſet downe hereafter.
The inhabitants go all naked, but
for a wreath of Vines about their foreheads.
But their skins are all carued with
figures, and painted after the maner of
the ancient Picts, and Brittons. One hath
himſelfe drawne into the forme of a
Centaure, another of aA beaſt that is halfe like a Goate, and halfe like a Stag. 
                     Tragelaphus, a
third of a Pidgeon (a terrible drinking
byrd) and you ſhall haue ſome painted
ſo perfectly like a flaggon, that if hee ſet
but his hands on his ſides you would
ſweare it were a liuing flaggon. I did ſee
one alſo ſo directly in the ſhape of a
Whale, that when hee vomited, no man
in the world but would haue taken him
for a liue Whale, ſpewing vp the Ocean.
I had a great affection to ſee the maner
of their publike feaſts, and yet not bee
ſeene by the citizens. So mine hoſte at
laſt agreed to performe my requeſt, and

ſatisfy my longing, mary hee gaue mee,
withall, certaine cautions of danger,
that might enſue if I were diſcouered,
and likewiſe informed me in ſome neceſſary
points of behauiour: ſo hauing
mine inſtructions about me, I and mine
honeſt hoſte, my leader, got vs into the
Townes hall, in the euening, vnſpyed
of any. By and by come the feaſters,
and take their places, iuſt as the Eat-alls
doe (as you haue heard) onely they had
more drinke and leſſe meate. Euery
one had his purueyance at either elbowe,
a piſſe-pott for his vrine on one
ſide, and a bowle for his vomite on the
other.
                  At firſt, they begin a ſacrifice to
Bacchus, their Generall God: not as the
Romanes did of old, with powring a
little wine vpon the ground; no, no,
farre more religiouſly, and with more
ſtately ceremonies. At the vpper end
of the table ſtands a ſtatue of Bacchus,
holding in his right hand a monſtrous
great Goblett of ſuch weight,
that (as Virgill ſayde once) the left

hand is now and then faine to helpe her
ſiſter. Into this Goblet or ſtanding Cup,
the maiſter of the ceremonies in the
name of the whole company, powres an
hoggſ-head of wine, (it holds no leſſe I
can aſſure yee) which paſſing in pipes as
if it were in veines vnto his mouth, and
his t'other thing both at once, makes a
pretty ſhew as hee both piſſed wine and
ſpewed it, all in one moment. And this is
the houre-glaſſe proportioning the continuance
of the feaſt, for when he leaueth
powring out, they muſt all leaue powring
in, and that vpon paine of ſacriledge.
Then ſir comes me vp a ſeruice of ſhooing-hornes
(do yee ſee) of all ſorts, ſalt-cakes,
red-herrings, Anchoues, & Gammons
of Bacon (Weſtphalia may goe pipe
in an Iuie leafe, if it ſeeke to equall theſe)
and aboundance of ſuch pullers on.
                        Here is no vſe of the ol
                              •
                            Romane caution, vſed in their meetings, Drinke three potts, or fiue, but neuer foure. Plutarch. Sympoſ. Acad. 3. Athanae. l. 10 Plaut. in Stich.
And then begins the full potts to goe
round about the table, and the empty
againſt the walles, ſo that you cannot
poſſibly tel whether they are ſooner filled
to be emptied, or emptied to be filled; but
(as Plautus ſaith of one) the drinke is ſure

to go, be it out of Can,A Quoniam is a glaſſe as well knowne in Drink-allia, as Chaucers old Queynt is in Letcheri-tania.
                      
                     Quoniam, or
Iourdan. Now when one of them will
drinke to another, he firſt challengeth
him with a ſolemneThe reliques of ſome 
                           •
                        auerne ca
                           •
                        ch. ceremoniall ſong.
and then they ioyne hands faſt together,
and giuing a ſound ſhake or two, the
challenger aduanceth his moiſtened weapon,
and blowes it drye: hee may puffe a
little, or talke a few gentle words among
hands, but the pott is diſrobed of his liquor,
ere it bee ſeuered from his gripe:
and then the tother anſwereth him at his
owne weapon. The ſecond courſe is not
very dainty, but howſoeuer, they moyſten
it well with redoubled rouſes. Then
comes the fruite with the third courſe,
and that in truth is very rarely furniſhed,
which being almoſt finiſhed, and the
cloth being now thruſt vpon an heape,
the maiſter of the ceremonies cryeth
Healths, three times with a lowd voyce.
I imagined that this had beene a ſummons
to the breaking vp of the companie
and was a going hence; when mine
hoaſt pulled mee by the ſleeue, why how
now yee ſleepie ſpectator (quoth hee)

and the feaſt is ſcarcely begun? ſtay and
ſee the concluſion of it I pray yee: doe
yee not ſee how faſt God Bacchus his
houre-glaſſe runnes? So I ſatte downe
againe and ſtayed. Then ſteps mee out
one of the company, and taking of his
wreath, downe vpon his knees he goes,
(I thought hee had beene going to his
prayers) and preſently calls for a quart
pott. An health (quoth hee) vnto Great
Bouſing-gut; Woolſack, Arch-duke of Tenbelly,
and preſently the potte ſtops his
mouth: he drinkes, he puffes, he belches,
hee talkes, vntill within a while hee had
gulpd downe as many quartes as his
name had letters, and when he had done,
hee falls a ſpewing, till all cryed twang
againe, and dyes (as Horace ſaid)

                        The pauement where he ſtood,Mero tingit pauimentum ſuperbo.
                        
                        With proud Lyaean bloud.
                     
Well, they all follow in order from the
higheſt to the loweſt, each one with the
ſame pott, execution, & eiection: proouing
him-ſelfe hereby a faithfull citizen,

and (which is more) a ſtrenuous Emptykan.
This paſt, vpſtarts another, with
this catch, A health to you and vs, this day,
and health to all Drink-allia, ſeaſoning his
ſong with many a goodly belche, and ſo
downe vpon hi
                        •
                      mary-bones, & vp with
the pott hand-ſmooth, the deuill a bone
finds hee in the drinke. After him they
muſt all follow wo be to him that hangs
anarſe. This ſhowre ouer-blowen, out
ſteps a third, and hee aduanceth a quarte
of plumpe Lyaeus to the health of all the
Quagmiriſts (which is the generall name
of the Nobility) of the moſt famous and
eternall Citie of Carouſi-kanikin; briefly,
after him they goe, and thus euery man
in order brings in his foundation of a
new Round. Now euery man hauing his
ſhare, they muſt each one in his order
(poxeon't, that madded mee) goe play
theOf one of theſe might Horace haue truly ſaid, Aut inſanit homo, aut verſus facit, the man is mad, or elſe he maketh verſes. Poet, out of the inſpiration of
Bacchus onely (the Muſes may go hang
for any roome they haue here) & herein
according to the old maner that Plutarch
ſpeaketh of, euery one ſings his ſong, &
inſteed of his Harpe, he had a knife and

a quart pot, and truly they plaid fine muſick
on it. One, in his ſong commended his
miſtreſſe, another, the goodneſſe of the
wine, a third related all the paſſages betwixt
him and his wife at home, ſo that it
m
                        •
                     de mee remember t
                        •
                     at old ſaying of
Laberius:
                     Ebriulati mentem hilarem accipiunt.
                     
                        When wines effect the braine doth binde,
                        Then mirth doth caper in the minde.
                     
An other rimed all in Satyre againſt one
that was not at this drinking: and euery
one (mee thought) keptHe was a drunken Poet and dyed of a ſurfet. Aske Francis Meres in his VVitts Commō wealth if you will not beleeue me. 
                     Anacreons
meaſures; (Like will to like quoth the deuill
to the Collier.) But in the meane time,
while theſe ſongs were a ſinging, it was a
world to ſee their ſeuerall behauiours,
euery man had his humor to himſelfe: you
ſhould ſee one, for very pure loue, weeping
in his fellowes boſome, and another
ſitte a kiſſing of his companion, one ſetting
his mouth on the racke with laughter
(wiſe were the man that could tell
at what,) another downe vpon all foure

in deuotion to Bacchus, a third ſwaggering
& ſwearing godts hundred thouſand
tufels, becauſe the bowle of wine
was brought him no ſooner; a fourth arguing
of religion and matter of ſtate: &
here in a corner you ſhould haue a fift
ſit nodding and ſlauering, it would doe
a blind-mans heart good to ſee him. But
now at the beginning of the feaſt, becauſe
they are generally ſo ſlippery of
memory that they quickly forget what
they haue to doe, they haue a publike
Notary, whom they callThe wind-pipe office there, is farre greater then the Pipe office here in England.
                      
                     Clarke of the
wind-pipe, and he regiſters euery perticular
carouſe, and ſo files them vp for
common records: what each man hath
drunke, and vnto whom; which done
after ſupper hee readeth them to the
company (if any man be awake to heare
them)
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Pottle-gulp. vnto Swolne-gut.—iii. Gallons.
                                 Swolne-gut. vnto Gultche.—iiii. Gallons ½
                                 Dry-mouth. vnto Lurtch-cup.—iii. Pottles.
                                 Draw-large. vnto Broken-belt.—vii Pottles ½
                                 Sup-it-off.
 vnto Full-brink.—halfe an hogſhead
                              
                              
                                 Concordat cum originali.
P. Skinker.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
If any one haue failed in the taking of
his liquour, hee muſt forth-with make
preſent ſatisfaction, (if hee bee able) otherwiſe,
at the next meeting hee is ſure
to pay ſound intereſt for his forbearance.
Well the roll being read, and the
houre-glaſſe runne all out: Mary quoth
I to mine hoſt but how will they get
home now? that maruell I at moſt. Oh
well inough ſir (quoth hee) feare ye not.
Do yee not ſee thoſe ropes there in the
court, that are faſtned vnto them Iron
rings? Theſe, their ſeruants (who may
not touch a droppe of wine till the feaſt
bee done) beeing ſo ſober as to know euery
one his owne rope, doe take hold
of, and the other end of it beeing faſtned
to their maiſters dore, ſo draw
themſelues and their Maiſters both in
one cart, directly home, for theſe ropes
are as good vnto them as a thred in a
labyrinth. Maſſe you ſay true (quoth I)
but what if one ſhould come in the
meane-time and tie the ropes further
end to a wrong dore? Why doe you
thinke (quoth hee ſmiling) that any

one wakes this night? Yet I haue known
it done, & the cart go to a wrong houſe
and the man to another mans wife; who
perhaps beeing as drunke as hee, neuer
diſcouers the matter vntill next day at
noone; and then, that which they ignorantly
committed, they doe wittingly
laugh at: for it is a principle here, that
a drunken man can neuer offend, for it is
the effects of Bacchus, that hee is but inſtrument
vnto, and nothing elſe. But I
remembred that place of Lucian;
                     In Dialog. 
                     Bacchus
neuer biddes them drinke more then they
neede.
                  
               
               
                  Of the Knights of the Golden Tun,
and of the lawes of this
Citty.
CHAP. 4.
                  IN the townes Hall, (properlie called
Gulpers Court) there hangeth
vp that ancient embleme of the
order of their Knights, the Golden

                           •
                        unne; Hee that can drinke this veſſell

thrice off and goe his waies without indenting,
for this good ſeruice is preſently
knighted by the great Duke himſelfe,
& hath a chaine of extraordinary value
beſtowed vpon him beſides. Theſe
knights haue a large Charter, and are
allowed many goodly priuiledges;
they haue abſolute commaund in al Tauernes,
& at al Tables. They may furniſh
ſo many ſoldiours in pewter-coates out
of any mans celler in the towne, Gratis;
and beſides they haue full authority to
ſet what limmets they pleaſe vnto euery
mans pot-licking. Theſe hardy men
haue great conflicts at euery ſollemne
meeting (as theOr as the Helots had with the Lacedaemonians. ſword-plaiers had in
Rome) their weapons are full charged
cuppes, and hee that carrieth moſt of
them away cleere, is conquerour, and
leads the reſt about the towne (if they
can goe) in triumph. And this is their
triall of the victory. If hee can put his
finger iuſt into the flame of the candle
without playing hit-I-miſſe I, let
him ſpew whole fiſh-ponds, hee is held
a ſober man.
                  
                     
Now gentle Reader will I preſent
thee with the lawes both of Carouſi-kanikin,
and of all Drink-allia: read and if
thou wilt not laugh, chooſe.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              IT IS DECREED, AND ABſolutely
enacted, by the high and mighty
Duke of Tenter-belly, and the
whole States both of Eat-allia
and Drink-allia.
                              
                                 1. THat all promiſes, othes, bills, bonds,
indentures or any other conueyances
whatſoeuer, made, or cauſed to bee made
in the after-noone, bee vtterly voide and of
none effect.
                                 2. That no man of what ſtate or degree
ſoeuer hee bee, haue his cuppes priuate vnto
himſelfe, vpon paine of drinking two daies,
after in a fire-ſhouell?
                                 3. That if any one caſt away any ſnuff,
but meere froath, he be forthwith enioyned
to goe downe vpon his knes and lick vp the
otherwiſe perriſhing liquor.
                                 
                                    
4. That euery one pledge his challenger
in the ſame cup, and on the ſame faſhion,
vpon paine of beeing debarred from
drinke two daies after.
                                 5. That the Pottes in banquets bee either
alwaies full, or empty: the waiter that
preſents a pot halfe filled, and the perſon
that takes it ſhalbe both guiltie of breach
of goodfellowſhip.
                                 6. That hee that beeing ſober ſhall
ſtrike him that is drunk, be immediate diſabled
for euer giuing teſtimony in any
cauſe whatſoeuer: but the drunken man
ſtriking the ſober ſhalbe acquitted.
                                 7. That he that being ſober ſhall robbe
him that is drunke, bee forbidden wine for
euer: and if he kill him, he ſhalbe put to death
by thirſt.
                                 8. That hee that ſhall ſpeake euill of
the Duke of Tenter-belly, as in ſaying, God
ſend him a dry health, or ſo, bee held guilty
of high treaſon.
                                 9. That hee whome either nature or
ſickneſſe hath made abſtinent; bee baniſhed
the land.
                                 10. That hee that goeth from any

publique meeting, without ſtaggering,
bee accompted a malefactor in the higheſt
degree.
                                 11. That all that ſtay three daies in
the Cittie, doe offer ſacrifice vnto Bacchus.
                                 
                                 12. That the calling of a Citizen
theefe or whore-maiſter, beare no action,
that to call him abſtayner, ſhalbe lyable to
the lawe.
                                 13. That hee that mixeth water with
his wine, bee ſent to ſuppe amongſt the dogs.
                                 14. That hee that ſweareth by Bacchus,
and keepeth not his word, bee vtterly
diſabled from making any will, and bearing
any witneſſe.
                                 15. That hee that ſtriketh with a pot▪
and either ſpilleth the wine, or breaketh the
pot, bee enioyned to touch neither pot nor
wine for foure and twenty houres after.
                              
                              Ouer the portall of the hall were theſe
verſes written.
                              
                                 The houſe of youthfull mirth, and luſty cheere:
                                 Peace, wine, ſport, reſt, haue al their manſions here.
                              
                              
                                 Subſcribed
STILLYARD.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The artes, and Military diſcipline of
the Drink-alls.
CHAP. 5.
                  THe people of this Prouince are almoſt
all bleere-eyed, and troubled
with the palſie, with goodly Chowles
about their necks and chinnes whereof
the mountainers of the Alpes and the
Pyrenaeian hills are ſo proud. They are
very good Painters, when drinke and
age hath made their hands to quiuer,
that you would thinke verylie (as Lucian
ſaith) that hee were ſober that did it, when
indeed hee is as foxt as forty beggers. They
haue alſo ſome Poets amongſt them,
whom their principall neuer crowneth
with lawrell (becauſe that tree is a
foe vnto the vine) but all with iuye:
theſe Poets are the very off-ſcum of the
baſeſt raſcally rabble, I am as much
greeued that they ſhould beare that ſo
ſacred a name, as Antigenides in Apuleius
was, that horne-blowers ſhould be called

Cornetiers. They are the verieſt Lacklatines,
and the moſt Vn-alphabeticall raggabaſhes
that euer bred lowſe: they cannot
make two rimes in their mothers
tongue in two houres, and yet theſe
ſhake-ragges liue by other mens trenſhers,
filling all the tauernes in the town
with Epithalamiums, Elegies, and Epitaphes,
your eares would bliſter to heare
them, theſe are they that haue the managing
of maskes, and the diſpoſing of
Pageants and haue the ſame ſway ouer
the vſes of balets that the knights of the
tunne haue ouer the barrells. They
had but one good Poet (as it is ſaid) in
an whole age, and hee was ſtarued to
death for telling truth out of ſeaſon.
They goe often to warre, in aſſiſtance of
the Eat-alls; but they neuer goe armed,
not ſo much as with an Iriſh ſteel-coate,
a ſhurt on their backes; their lances
are ſapplins of Elmes, ſharpned and dried
at the ends in the fire, but yet notwithſtanding
(for ſtand well they cannot)
it is admirable to behold both
their valour in fight and their fortune

in conqueſt. Indeede they haue a law
that none muſt goe ſober to the field,
ſo that the wine maketh them as bold
and valiant as Lyons, and you know full
well, Audaces Fortuna iuuat, fortune
helpes the forward.
               
               
                  The funeralls of one of the chiefe
Quagmyriſts: and the
Sacrifices of Bacchus.
CHAP. 6.
                  THE ſame night that I was a ſpectator
of their more then rambling reuells,
one of the Quagmyriſts, whoſe
houſe was of ſome height, beeing looſe
in the breech, intending to goe thether
whether neither Pope nor Emperour
can ſend an Embaſſador, and being truely
tapp-ſhackled, miſtooke the window
for the dore, ſo ſtepping raſhly on,
downe hee came with the wrong end
forward, and in plaine Engliſh, broake
his neck. His funeralls were very ritchly

ſet forth: I can tell, for I was at them. Euery
man was died, all ouer with black,
and for that day ware a cypreſſe wreath,
in ſteed of his vines. The body was not
layd in a coffin, nor vpon an hearſe, as
we vſe, but being put into a caske halfe
full of wine was ſo borne to the graue,
and when hee came there, it was to lie
rather in a ceſterne of ſacke, then in a
graue of earth, and to bee drowned rather
then buried. For whereas the
Romanes vſed to caſt balls of frankincence
vpon the pile wherein the bodie
was burnt, they did not ſo here, but
each one powred his kanne of wine into
the graue, and bidding thriſe Adieu
moſt ſweete and corpulent countriman, put
finger in their eye, wept ſome quart of
Rheume and to it they went, hand in
hand to the Tauerne. This Quagmiriſt it
ſeemes was well eſteemed amongſt
them, for hee had a ſtatue erected him in
Bacchus his court, and vnder it theſe two
verſes in faire Romane letters.
                  Although he tooke his window for his dore
                  His valiāt death ſhal make his honor more.
                  
                     
And vpon his graue they ſet vp a
pritty obeliske, and a brazen flaggon on
the top of it, with theſe verſes carued
round about it.Three ſuch Epitaphes in Lattine are to be ſeene at Siena, two in San Domingo, and one in S. Spirito.
                  
                  
                     By wine I liu'd, and wine me kild, men ſay:
                     For being ſober, I could nere ſee day.
                     Gone is my fleſh, yet thirſt lies in the bone:
                     Giue me one rouſe my freind, and get thee gone.
                     Farewell fellow toſſe-pots.
                  
                  Now had I ſtaid too daies in this
towne, without euer beeing demanded
what I was, but then mine hoſt came and
told mee, my friend quoth hee, you haue
had a faire reign; if you ſtay one day longer,
you muſt perforce do ſacrifice vnto
god Bacchus: I may not conceale you
further vnleſſe you would haue mee
forſworne. No, quoth I? what cuſtome
is that I pray you that you are
ſo ſtrictly bound vnto? Tell mee the
courſe, and Ile either performe it and
ſtaie longer, or els Ile get mee preſently
gone, and ridde vs both from future

danger. Well ſir (ſaies hee) ſaw yee
not the ſtatue of Bacchus yeſterdaie
in Gulpers Court, and the huge goblet
hee holdeth, wherein they powred the
wine that runnes out at two paſſages?
yes that I did. Well then, you muſt
ſet your mouth to one of them (chooſe
you which) and ſuck vntill yee bee able
to ſtand no longer, but fall flat to the
ground, and ſo muſt you lie vnder the
ſpout, wallo-wing in the wine, vntill
all bee runne out vpon you. How like
you this? Faith not altogither ſo delightfull
(quoth I) but I pray tell mee,
was there euer any ſtrangers that
offered this ſacrifice? All, all, (quoth
hee) not a man nor a mans taile eſcapes
it, but to it hee muſt, maugre
his beard; ſome will come ſpiritfullie
to it, but others are faine to bee haled
to their teate, like a Beare to the
ſtake.
                  Well ſir (quoth I) but Ile be iogging
hence: Onelie I would intreate yee
to informe mee which country in this
tract is next in dignitie vnto this of

yours and worthieſt of trauell. So faith
hee told mee: Hot-waters quoth hee) is
the beſt, ſome call it Liguour-ardente, it
is vnder the gouernment of Sir Limbeck
Stillitorye, a knight of the noble
familie of the King-Cuppes: and ſo ledde
mee forth, ſhewed mee the way, as
plaine as Dunſtable roade, and then curteouſlie
gaue mee the Baſcio los manos,
and I thankt him heartily for his Valienado,
and parted.
               
               
                  Of Hot-watrea, or Licor-ardente, and
of the pilgrimage of Saint
Borachio.
CHAP. 7
                  NOw gan I all alone to take my way
towards the North, leauing the riuer
of 
                        
                           •
                        roath, behinde mee, vntill I came
atIf Bucklerſbury ſtood alone it were very like this towne. Sure as death there is ſome affinity betweene them▪
                      
                     Spewerſ-burie, the filthieſt towne
that euer I ſaw ſince my mother cradeled
my head. Well I ſtaid not long
there (I had not neede) but on I paſſed
vntill I came to Cooperſ-nor-ton, a

pretty well ſeated village, but not a
droppe of water was to bee got in it
for loue nor money: the reaſon is (as I
heard afterward) leaſt they ſhould mixe
it with the wine and ſo prooue euill
common-wealths men. Onelie this I
muſt tell the reader: by the way, for I
promiſe yee it put mee often to a ſhrewd
putther, I was as much troubled with
pottes and flaggons in my iourney, as
the traueller that hath farre to goe, is
with the Spaniſh and Italian Croſſes: I
could neuer goe three miles to an end,
but I ſhould finde a bouncing tankard:
kenneld vnder an arch, and drinke I
muſt needes, no gain-ſaying the lawes
of the Lands holie hoſpitality: at laſt I
ouertooke a traueller, in an old tatterd
Caſſocke of haire-cloath, bare-foote
and bare-head. I demaunded
whether hee went ſo faſt. Sir (quoth
hee) I haue vndertaken a long Pilgrimage
vnto Saint Borachio of Bottleſ-brooke.
                  
                  I wondered at this new name, and
this as yet vndiſcouered Pilgrimage, ſo I

queſtioned him at large of the country,
of this townes ſituation, and diſcipline,
and finally of the vertues of this Borachio.
Bottles-brooke ſir (quoth hee) is ſeated
in the confines of Hot-watria, and Let
cheritania, and is of great fame through
out both the ſoiles. Beſides diuers
other ancient monuments in the towne
there is a temple of Bacchus Fiery-face,
they call it the Chappell Ardent, where
a ritch and rare ſtatue of his is erected,
not like a grown man as elſe-where it is,
but of an informed birth, iuſt as his father
tooke him from the burning womb
of Semele, ſo is it, hauing beene long ago
ſo cut, out of the hard Rocke of Rubies.
The top of this temple is al ſet with Carbunickles▪
& golden ſparks, moſt ritch to
behold, & from the embowed arch there
drops they ſay, a kinde of hot fuming liquour
(as theHackluits voyages affirme as much. 
                     Cataracts doe in ſome
places of Mar del zur) and is receiued
into a Borachio that ſtandes placed
accordinglie, whoſe vertue is ſuch,
that if one drinke a large draught of
it with good deuotion, he ſhall neuer in

all his life after be either drunke before
noone, or a thirſt before midnight: both
which helpes may doe mee much good,
for I am a man ſo employed in my countrie,
that I can neuer lye in my bed vntill
mid-night for thirſt, nor neuer riſe in the
morning but before noone I am drunke
and faſt a ſleepe againe. Therefore haue I
gone this three dayes without drinking
at all, (ſaue that I dranke one diſh of water
this morning) becauſe I would merite
the more of this holy Saint Borachio
when I come there; nor dares any man
importune mee to drinke, or any in
my company as long as I weare this
weede. Bir-lady ſir you muſt thinke
I was not meanly glad of ſo good a priuiledge,
and therefore I intreated both
his company and patronage. Well, wee
went chatting on, vntill I obſeruing the
ſoile altered, asked him where we were
now. This country (quoth he) euer ſince
wee came ouer the Lake Metheglin, is
called theOur ordinary paſſe to Ireland is through Wales. Countie of Vſquebath, being
the firſt ſhire of Hott-watria: It is
not ſo well husbanded, but it is farre

more fertile then our country of Wineceſter,
exceeding both in fatneſſe of ſoile
and pureneſſe of ayre. So when I heard
the name I vnderſtood preſently both ye
originall and the definition thereof. Vſquebathia,
becauſe they drinke there Vſque
ad 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , euen to the bottome: there
are other deriuations thereof, but
thoſe I leaue vnto the ſix wits to cenſure
of. The people of this nation are generally
fulſome and ſlouenly, and of a continuall
fearce and terrible aſpect (vnleſſe
they be drunke) yet they vſed mee very
kindly for my religious pilgrims ſake (as
they are very much giuen to ſuperſtition)
who lodged with me the firſt night
in the common hoſpitall of an obſcure
little cittie (I forgot the name) yet we
lay very quietly, for wee found all the
towne dead drunke at our comming, and
left them ſo at our parting, much other
matter paſt vs, but I leaue it as vnworthy
of regarde. At length through many
craggie, fennie, woody paſſages, wee
ariued at a famous port towne, called
Puerto d' Aqua forte. Now quoth I (being

as weary as a dog) whether goe we now?
is not this Bottlesbroke? O Lord no quoth
he: but cheere vp your ſelfe, we haue not
a foote of ground more to paſſe vntill
we bee there, all the reſt of our iourney
lyes by water: which when we haue paſſed,
we ſhall coaſt a little by the pleaſant
ſhores of Hott-watria, and preſently we
are at Bottlesbroke: (this country is like
Denmarke parted into two by the ſea, &
that was the cauſe of our croſſing the
water. Well, to ſhip we went, and away:
By this time imagine vs in the midſt of
the ſea: well, my heart is cold yet to
thinke but what a danger wee eſcaped
there: for looke yee ſir, our Mariners
were all drunke to a haire, not a man
could guide himſelfe, if hee might haue
a kingdome. One was a ſleepe at the
ſterne: another going about to row, had
Palinures deſtinie, and fell ouer-boord,
whō two more ſeeking to hale vp again,
had not we two held thē, had both falne
after. A third falls into choller, & laieth a
fourth ouer the pate for not helping his
fellow: he ſt
                        •
                     ikes againe, & to it they go,

fight Beare fight dogge: and all the reſt
diuided themſelues on two ſides. Now
flew the pondrous oares about their
eares, and clubbs and pumpe-ſtaues, all
their armes appeares, the water was quiet,
and euery one vſed his oare in the
aire. But indeed they are eaſily knockt
downe, whoſe ham-ſtrings Bacchus hath
already cut in two. Flat they lay, all but
a couple of conquerors, who being too
late weary of the maſſacre, fell vpon vs
two, laying all the blame vpon vs. But
wee two, ſcorning to bee put downe by
two walking tankards, got vp a couple
of cudgels, and gaue them their due, diſarmed
them, bound them faſt to the
Maſt, and plaide the ſailers our ſelues.
But our boat (ſympathizing belike with
hir ancient maiſters the drunkards) did
ſo welter from ſide to ſide, that had not
Aeolus ſent vs a ſtrong gale, and forced
the boate on againſt hir will, wee had
laide our bones in the bottome of thoſe
ſeas, for ought that I ſaw, and my religious
fellow had neuer ſeene Saint Borachio.
As we ſailed on, I deſcried a farre

of, on the left hand, a certaine high Iland
couered with ſnow, and asking him how
he called it, It is (quoth he) the Frozen
Iland, where Bacchus liued for feare of
his ſtep-dames wrath, when hee was
young: and the inhabitants vſing him
churliſhly, and at length chaſing him by
force from thence, his father being offended,
laid a plague of perpetuall ſnow
and darkneſſe vpon them. But whence is
that ſmoake I ſee a farre of? That ſmoake
comes out of Mount Denis,
                     
                        Dionyſius is Denis, and Bacchus both. wherein the
ſoules of ſuch as either liued too ſoberly,
or killed themſelues deſperately, are
purified by fire; and there they burne,
vntill ſome of their liuing friends go in
Pilgrimage to Chappell Ardent for a bottle
of St. Borachios water, & powring that
vpon their tombe, they are freed. I ſmiled
at this, and thought, now ſurely I
haue found the originall of Purgatorie;
let Abbat Odilo, and his Monkes of Corunna
tell mee neuer ſo many tales of
mount Aetna, and many good morrows:
'tis here or 'tis no where.
                  Well, at length we came a ſhore, and

found it a pretty ſweete towne in truth
(to giue it the due) marry it was both
paued with bottles, and roofed with letherne
bougets. I doe not remember I
ſaw any attificer in all the towne but
letherne Iack-makers, and taylors for
Bottle-caſes; ſo that now I ſaw what vtterance
the Eat-alls had for their hides.
The reaſon is, the men of this towne and
country, vſe no pure wine, as the other
Drink-alls doe, but certaine diſtilled waters
mixt with the ſtrongeſt grape they
can get, which are ſo forcibly hott, that
the brittle glaſſe cannot hold them, and
therefore they are driuen to fortifie
their bottles with letherne Ierkins, riuerted
together with pitch and roſen. The
citizens are fiery of face, and cholericke
of condition, enuious, ſuſpicious, paralitique,
and of a ſtaggering manner of
pace in their going: but that which is
moſt terrible of all, they drinke and they
breath nothing but meere flames. As
much cold water, or ſcarr-gut, as one of
vs will drinke, ſo much fire will one of
them take: that a man would verily imagine

when hee ſaw them, that they were
ſo many fire-drakes, or Saint Georges dragons.
I was in danger of water before,
but now I feared nothing but that I
ſhould be ſtifled with fire. So that I left
my companion in his oriſons vnto Bacchus
(I loued him well, but I loued my
ſelfe better) the very next morning I got
me out of this Vulcans ſhop, for ſo it was,
and a very Cyclops forge, rather then a
Citie of Bacchus. Now being vpon my
way, I began to reſolue with my ſelfe to
paſſe by the verges of Lecheritania back
againe, and ſo to ſee ſome-what of the
faſhions of theOtherwiſe called Strong
                           
                              •
                           ieros.
                      
                     Hop-ſackers, the third
countie of Drink-allia; but iuſt as I was
plodding on with this thought in my
head, ruſhes mee forth an Ambuſh of
armed Sheelandreſſes (you heard of
Shee-landt before) beſette mee, tooke
mee, and carryed mee priſoner (the
more vnfortunate I) a long and toyleſome
iourney, euen to the chiefe cittie
of the land, called Goſsipingoa.
                  
                  I would not haue the reader take any vnkindneſſe
at my hands for omitting ye reſt

of Drink-allia, for as my Pilgrim told me,
it is the baſeſt part of the land, this countie
of Hop-ſack; and but that it is more
beaſt-like, different in nothing from the
others which you heard
deſcribed before.
               
            
            Finis lib. 1.
         
         
            The ſecond Booke.
            The deſcription of Shee-landt,
or Womandeçoia.
            
               Of the ſituation and the
parts thereof.
CHAP. 1.
               
                  THE new diſcouered
Womandeçoia, (which
ſome miſtaking both
name and nation) call
Wingandecoia, & make
it a part of Virginia)
                  
otherwiſe called Shee-landt, lieth in that
part of the Southerne continent, which
our Geographers of Europe
                  Ouer againſt Moleture and Beach.
                   called
Pſytacorum Regio, the land of Parrots. On
the North ſide it boundeth vpon Letcheritania
(a nation that is a great enemy
to it) on the South, vpon Thriuingois: on
the Eaſt, vpon the two Fooliana's, the
Fickle and the Fatte. The ſoile thereof
is very fruitfull, butTwere pitty it ſhould be otherwiſe, being ſo ſhrewdly wiued. badly husbanded:
It is diuided into many Prouinces, both
large and ritch, yet all of ſeuerall conditions,
habites and languages. The principall
of them are theſe; Tattlingen
Scoldonna, Blubberick, Gigglot-angir the
high and the lowe; Cockatrixia, Shreweſbourg,
and Blackſwanſtack, otherwiſe called
Modeſtiana. Not farre from theſe is
alſo an Iland called Ile Hermaphrodite, or
more properly, Double-ſex. Many of theſe
Prouinces did I paſſe through, ſore againſt
my will Ile bee ſworne. But to
ſpeake the truth, Tattlingen is the beſt
country of all the reſt, & hath many faire
cities in it, as Pratlingople, Taleſ-borne, &
Lypſ-wagg, through the laſt of which

there runneth a great riuer called Slauer,
which ſome-times will ouer-flow the
bankes, and drowne all the lower part of
the country, which they call Chinn-dale,
but the countrimen haue now deuiſed
very ſtrong rampires of bones and bend
lether, to keepe it from breaking out any
more, but when they liſt to let it out a little
now & then for ſcouring of the channell.
But of all the citties of Tattlingen,
or of all Shee-landt, Goſsipingoa is the
principall. Thether was I brought, and
deteined a great deale longer then ſtood
with my good liking: I will (for paſſing
away a little time vntill the Capon bee
enough, we haue nothing elſe to do) diſcourſe
the whole progreſſe of their dealing
with mee here, and then Ile goe on
with the conditions of this new nation.
            
            
               How the Goſſipingoeſſes vſed the Author
of this diſcouerie.
CHAP. 2.
               AS ſoone as theſe cruell conquereſſes
had taken mee vpon the borders of
Lecheritania, they brought mee away to

their chiefe city, & ſo to the court, told
a bell and preſently all the inhabitants
came flocking thether in a trice, & began
to prie more narrowly vpon mee who
ſtood bound ſure enough (god wot) for
offering them any falſe meaſure. At
length, one of the rout, (their Captaineſſe
it ſeemed ſhee was) gaue a ſigne to the
reſt to be ſilent (as ſhe had need) and then
beſpake the company thus. What, or of
whence this fellow is, I doe not know,
onely wee tooke him in the confines of
yonder damned country Letcheritania,
and ſeeing they haue offered vs ſo much
iniury, I hold it very fitte now (if it bee
not too late) to begin to take reuenge of
them, and firſt with this priſoner. Now
ſhe hauing made an end, I got leaue (with
much a doe for noiſe) to ſpeake, & ſo declared
my nation, and the cauſe of my
wandring as well as I could, and told her
Womanſhip that for my part I had not any
acquaintance at all in Letcheritania, I was
one that wiſhed her Madam-hood and
all hir ſex all the good I could, and that it
would derogate much from her nature,

clemencie, and from the honor of her
iuſt gouernment to condemne an Innocent
pilgrim, and one that had not offended,
without hearing of his cauſe. Well
theſe good words I can tel yee wrought
ſo prettily well, that the poore yong
wenſhes began many of them to weepe:
yet the old counteſſes were not ſo much
ouer-ſwaied by mine oration, but that I
muſt to priſon to a great houſe in
the market place called Cold and comfortleſſe,
vntill my country and cauſe of
trauell were truely manifeſted vnto the
Shee-counſell. Well to warde I went, and
but that my countries name (theIt is a prouerb in France that England is the paradice of women, the purgatory of ſeruants, and the Hell of horſes. true
Paradice of women) pleaded for mee, I
had neuer come home aliue, for all the
Lecheritanians that they take, they either
faire hange vp, or els put them vnto
moſt ſlauiſh offices in this priſon. Herein
plaging them for their iniuryes offered;
for that Nation, although it bee
moſt laſciuious, yet it rūneth a madding
eirher after whore, or els in beſtiality,
either neglecting their wiues vtterly, or
els keeping them continuall priſoners

through mad-braind ielouſie. O how many
noble captaines did I ſee here wearing
out their liues in ſpinning, carding
woll and knitting? faith at length, for my
countries ſake, I had my liberty, but not
without an oth for I was brought to
Iunos Altar, and there laying my hand on
the ſame, tooke a ſollemn oth to obſerue
all theſe conditions following.
               
                  1. That I ſhould neuer goe about to iniure
this noble ſexe by word nor deed.
                  2. That I ſhould neuer interrupt a woman
in her tale.
                  3. That wher-ſoeuer I liued, I ſhould leaue
the rule of the houſe to my wife.
                  4. That I ſhould neuer more come in Letcheritania,
for it is the common phraſe
here, Many go thether good men, but
come away againe euill husbands.
                  
                  5. That I ſhould neuer aime at more then
the loue of one.
                  6. That I ſhould neuer bewray my wiues
ſecrets.
                  7. That I ſhould neuer deny my wife any
womans ornaments.
                  8. That I ſhould continually giue women

the prick and praiſe for beauty, wit and eloquence,
and defend it againſt all men.
               
               This oth II beleeue yee ſir with a little aequiuo
                        •
                     cation. willingly tooke, & would
haue taken one ten times ſtricter, rather
then haue ſtaied there. So therefore you
ſee my tongue is tyed by mine oth, not
to tell all the fine Conundrums that I
ſaw among theſe mad wenches. Somewhat
I may ſay, but no harme, no more I
would in truth, if I had not beene ſworne
at all.
            
            
               Their formes of Gouernment, and
elections of perſons of ſtate.
CHAP. 3.
               THeir ſtate (for ought that I could
obſerue) is popular; each one ſeeking
ſuperiority, and auoyding obedience.
They haue no lawes at all, but do euery
thing by the numbers of voices. But the
giuing vp of their voices ſtruck me into
a wonder, being vnacquainted therewith
for they ſet vp a erie all together, none
giues eare, but each one yells as if ſhee
were horne mad. Is not this able to abaſh
a good mans ſpirit.
               They hold a continuall parliament about

their more weighty affaires of
ſtate,In Collo qui ſo that Eraſmus were he aliue now,
would be able to giue a ſtrong teſtimony
of womens turning ſutors. Now this
continuance is neceſſary becauſe of their
lawes vncertainty: for the decrees of
this day, may bee all diſanulled to morrow,
but the ſame day they cannot, leaſt
their law-giuers ſhould ſeeme vnconſtant
in their edicts. Euery ones voice is
alike in worth, the whole citty thorow,
but not euery ones dignity, for they haue
a ſet number of choſen women, they call
them Graueſſes, & theſe haue the authority
of moſt honor in each particular citie:
But they are not borne to this dignity,
but elected either for their beauty, or
their eloquence, for by theſe two are all
elections ordered. They had once a cuſtome
to elect theſe Graueſſes by voices,
but afterwards, euery one giuing her
voice onely for her ſelfe, it bred a confuſion,
& ſo made them aboliſh that maner
of election: and then they made a decree
yt only thoſe ſhould haue the ſway in this
enuious contention, who would profeſſe

themſelues neither faire nor eloquent.
But this brought all to ſuch a paſſe that
in the whole multitude of them, you
ſhould not find one that would be Electreſſe,
the elder ſort holding that they
had the eloquence, and the yonger ſtanding
as firme in it that they had the
beauty. At length they all agree to paſſe
ouer theſe places of Electreſſes vnto
twelue of the moſt aged matrons of Old
Mumpington (a ruinous village hard by)
and ſo they did, giuing them the glorious
title ofThe chiefe of whom when as I was there were theſe, The Dutcheſſe of Cackletout, The Counteſſe of Banne-alleyla the Arch-preſsbytereſſe of Slauerſperg, the Counteſſe Pratline of Twitlecome and eight more Subordinate Electreſſes. 
                  Electreſſes Graueſsiall, to ſet
them the more a gogge to performe
their charges. And beſides this honorable
ſtile, the hony of age, wealth and abundance,
comes continually vpon thē;
for the ambitious young wenſhes will ſo
bribe and ply them with giftes, to haue
their voices at the day of election, that I
hold there is not a court either more
corrupt in giuing voices, or more
wealthy in giuen ritches. In ſtead of
ſcepters and ſwordes, the Graueſſes
haue fannes and glaſſes borne before
them: huge Chriſtall glaſſes, and ſtill

as they paſſe through the ſtreetes, they
pranke vp their attires by the ſayd glaſſes,
and ſet all their gew-gawes in order
as they go along.
            
            
               The originall of the Shee-landreſſes.
CHAP. 4.
               THere are few Shee-landreſſes borne
in this Nation, but ſuch as either
will needes weare their husbands breeches,
or els ſuch as their husbands iealouſie
will needs either baniſh or make
priſoners, thoſe runne flocking from all
parts hether. Now all ſuch as are their
husbands maiſters, and are therevpon
baniſhed for their vniuſt clayme vnto
ſoueraignty: theſe are aſſigned to inhabite
the frontiers of Shee-landt eſpecially
in the countries of Shreweſ-bourg, and
there they are all put in garriſon. But
as for thoſe that are voluntarie exiles,
they are generally of meeke and vnmanly
ſpirits, and theſe are ſeated in the

heart of the Land, to become Votareſſes
to Peace and to Beautie, and yet you
need neuer dreame that this weale-publike
(how euer weakely founded) ſhould
go to ruine for want of perticuler members:
and Ile tell you why: there are ſo
many voluntaries, (eſpecially free women)
come to this campe, that the feare
is that rather here will want roome for
new inhabitants, then otherwiſe. Truely
I am in a great perplexity leaſt my country
women ſhould haue any vnderſtanding
of this ſtate: For if they haue, wee
may goe ſnicup for any female that will
bide amongſt vs, but all will away, wee
ſhould not haue one big belly left to lay
the foundation for a future age by, and
therefore I pray you ſir (whoſoeuer
you be) as you loue the preſeruation of
our linage and the generall multiplication
of mankinde, bee ſilent in this ſo
important a ſecret: for it lies vs all vpon
to keepe it vndiſcouered from our giddie
females, vnleſſe wee can find a better
meanes of generation.
            
            
               
               Of Gygglot-tangyr.
CHAP. 5.
               AT Goſsipingoa, I got (beſides my
freedome) the Cities letters, for my
paſſe-port, and ſo from thence I tooke
my way towards Giglot-tangire, a country
lying vpon the South part of Womandecoia,
towardes Letcheritania; The
Land of it ſelfe in this part, is the worlds
paradiſe: I was not many leagues from
Loueſ-den, the firſt towne of this County,
when I entred into an ayre as delicatly
ſented, as if all the perfumers in England
(doe yee ſee) had lately plaied their
prizes there for eternal ſoueraignty: the
whole country round about is ſo ſtuft
with Apothecaries, andThe ſtates Magnificoes. 
                  Pomendrificoes.
The reſt I omit. The women of this
wapentake are generally tall, gracefully
adorned, and (were it not that they
practiſe the art of Cheeke-oyling ouer
much) very beautifully. They
weare nothing on their faces, nor
on their breaſts: as for the reſt of

their habite, it is faire in ſhew, light in
weight, and eaſie to mount, as is the
aire. But their naked parts are ſo cruſted
ouer with ouer-groſſe painting, (as
they vſe in Muſcouia) that you would
verily imagine, you ſaw ſome ſtatue on
a Weſtminſter tombe, rather then a liuing
creature, ſuch a cart loade of falſe
colours enſconce their faireſt beauties.
               The women ofThe Sepulchre of Modeſty is in this towne. 
                  Shameſ-graue, (for
ſo they call the ſhire towne of Gigglot-tangire)
haue their houſes made all of
Muſcouia glaſſe, as tranſparent as ayre:
And it is labour loſt to ſeeke any of
them at home, vnleſſe you make your
inqueſt immediately vpon their dreſſing
time, or ſome what before: But lay
your plot to ſeeke them at a Play-houſe,
or in a Tauerne, or ſo, and it ſtands vpon
a good foundation: for there you are
ſure to finde your femall, either a laughing,
a ſinging,Dauncing is here taken in the largeſt ſence, including both the moderne, as galiard, pauan 
                        •
                     ig &c. and the ancient, called the beginning of the world vide Rab. Apodemat. 17. chap. 3. a dancing, or vpon
ſome ſuch employment in ſtate. You
neuer ſaw ſpider contriue a more artificiall
net for a flie, then theſe women do
for the Lecheritanians (how euer their

countries deadly enemies) yet ſome of
theſe men ſerue their deſires as voluntaries,
for prouant, and preferment. Others,
they lay their ambuſhes for, and
fetch them in firſt by looſe allurements,
then by praiers, and then by pence, and
if none of theſe meanes will worke, they
compell them to ſerue their wanton deſires
by force. And when they haue
done ſo, iuſt as you ſee ſtallion horſes
kept for breede, ſo are they ſtowed into
cuſtody, dieted with Eringo's, Potatoes,
Culliſes, and other diſhes of luſts
deuiſing, vntill Venus ſend her ſecond
ſummons. This I no ſooner heard, but
I hated, and no ſooner hated it, but I auoided
it as neither daring preſume of
my learning, nor policy, but that I knew
my ſelfe neither for proper young man,
nor very fine Gentleman (none diſpraiſed)
I otherwiſe durſt not haue hazarded
mine honeſty vpon ſo ſlight foundations.
But you may ſee; It is ſometimes
good to want a good face:
and thoſe things with many a man doth
oftentimes blame nature moſt for, may

at one time or other ſtand him in more
ſtead then her greateſt benefits in ordinary
eſtimations.
            
            
               Of Double-ſex Ile, otherwiſe called
Skrat or Hermophradite
Iland.
CHAP. 6.
               NOt farre from Guaon, the laſt Ile of
the Moluccaes, betweene Cape Hermoſe,
and Cape Beach, lies Double-ſex Ile,
much like vnto our Ile of Man on the
coaſt of Lancaſhire. In this Ile nature
hath ſo orderly diſpoſed all things to
one forme, that I could finde no one
plant in all the ſoile but was of a double
kinde; no tree, but beare two kinde of
fruites or one fruite of two ſeuerall
kindes & names: there was your Peare-apple,
your Cherry-damſen, your Date-alimond,
your Cheſtnut-fylberd, and a
thouſand of theſe concluſions of nature.
Yea in ſo much that the very inhabitants
of the whole Iland wore all their habits

as Indices of a coaptation of both ſexes
in one. Thoſe that bare the moſt man about
them, wore ſpurres, bootes and
britches from the heeles to the hanſhes:
and bodies, rebatoes and periwigges
from the crupper to the crowne: and
for thoſe that were the better ſharers in
woman kind, they weare doublets to the
rumpe, and skirts to the remainder. Nay
their very names bare notes of their perticipations
of either ſide: There was
Mary-Philip, Peter-alice, Iane-andrew, and
George-audry, and many more that I remember
not. All of their owne nation
that haue not ſhewn themſelues perfect
both in begetting, & bringing forth,
are made ſlaues to the reſt: & when they
take any that are but ſimply of one ſexe,
Lord what a coile they keepe about thē,
ſhewing them as prodigies & monſters,
as wee doe thoſe that are borne doubleheaded,
or other ſuch deformed birthes.
Their onely glory which they eſteeme
moſt, is that in their conceite they haue
the perfection of nature amongſt them
alone, of all the world beſides them.

For ſeeing nature (ſay they) hath beſtowed
two hands, two feete, two eyes,
two eares and two noſthrills to euery
meaner perfect bodie, why ſhould not
the moſt excellent creature of all be perfect
in two ſexes alſo? And againe: the
ancient ſacrificers to Cybele, and the
Pathiques of old Rome were faine to vſe
forced meanes for that which wee haue
giuen vs by nature. Thus are they wont
to protect their deformities: and truely
you may obſerue in them all,The Mule is held both to conceiue and to beget, in Syria, Ariſt. and ſome hold the like of the Hare.
                   beſides
their ſhapes, both a mans wit, and a womans
craft. They haue no Cattle in this
countrie but Mules nor any wild beaſts
but Hares. They liue moſt vpon ſhelfiſh,
for that is their beſt and moſt ordinary
ſuſtenance.
            
            
               Of Shreweſ-bourg.
CHAP. 7.
               IN my returne from the confines of
Gigglot-tangia, beeing now vpon the
moſt weſterne angle of the ſame, I light

(iuſt as my ſtaffe fell) into the Country
of Shreweſ-bourg, the onely garriſon
of this feminine gouernment, and the
onely defence it hath againſt forreigne
incurſions. Now the country fearing
no foe but the Letcheritanians (for the
Thriuingois are a quiet nation and neuer
will offer to moleſt them, and the Foolianders
cannot though they would) doe
therefore place their fortes and townes
of garriſon vpon the Eaſterne frontiers
of Letcheritania.
               
               Here was I truely guld; for eſpying
perſons in the habites of men, maſſe
thought I, this is good, I am now gotten
out of Womendecoia: but when all
came to all, I was flat couſned with a
borrowed ſhape: for in this countrie
women weare britches, and long beards,
and the men goe with their chinnes all
naked, in kirtles and peticoates; ſpinning
and carding wooll, whileſt their
wiues diſcharge the maine affaires of
the ſtate.
               In this tract is an ancient and ample
towne ſeated, generally called Pepuzia,
                  
and I do not thinke butAriſt. de haereſ. Pepuzian Heretiques
were of this originall, who held
that women ſhould be both Princes and
Prieſtes as well as men. The Barbarians
inAriſto-Polit. lib. 1. 5. 1. 
                  Ariſtotles time neuer vſed their
women halfe ſo imperiouſly as the men
are vſed here: I had great compaſſion
vpon their ſlauery: Yes verely had I:
The poore ſnakes dare not ſo much
as wipe their mouthes vnleſſe their
wiues bidde them: not ſo much as
(ſauing your preſence) goe piſſe,
nor paſſe a word with their beſt friend,
but they muſt firſt come to their wiues
with a writ of Quaeſo Magiſtra, good
Miſtreſſe giue me leaue to goe &c. I obſerued
this cuſtome to bee more ſtrictly
looked vnto vpon one certaine daie
whileſt I was there, then at other times
by far: and the reaſon was, becauſe that
while ſome of the better ſpirited husbands
diſdayning to bee chained in this
vnmanly ſubiection by their wiues, had
laid a plot amongſt themſelues to riſe
on a ſet night (as it might bee this night)
in open armes vpon the ſudden againſt

wiues, and ſo ſhake off this infamous
and diſgracefull ſeruitude.
               This plotte had come to verie
good effect had not miſfortune croſſed
it: for one cowardly fellow of
their confederacy, beeing threatned
by his wife to bee ſoundly cudgelled
for ſome other priuate eſcape
that hee had made; to procure himſelfe
a pardon, went and reuealed
all the whole plat-forme of the conſpiracie,
iuſt the euening before the night
appointed.
               The women ſitte at meate and
the men attend, the women ſleepe
and the men watch; ſo doe they ſcold
and fight, whileſt the men are faine
to beare off with eares, head and
ſhoulders.
               Happy may they call that daie
whereon they are not lambeaked before
night. I imagined my ſelfe amongſt
the Turkiſh ſlaues, but that
theſe diſtinction of habites aſſured
mee this was a more baſe kinde of captiuity.
               
                  
Ah what a beaſtly ſight was it to ſee a
diſtaffe and a ſpindle in a mans hand,
and a ſword and buckler in a womans▪
Yet I concealed my diſlike as well as
I could, deſiring but to ſee without ſuffering.
               If any woman vſe her husband ſomewhat
gentlier then ordinarie (as ſome
of them bee tender hearted) ſhee is
preſently informed againſt, cited to appeare
before the Court Parliament of
Shreweſ-bourg, and there endited of high
treaſon againſt the ſtate. Her next
neighbours giue euidence againſt her
with ſuch noiſe & furie, that it is ſtrange
to ſee how farre they are ouer-borne
with impatience. If ſhe be but conuicted
by the ſmalleſt euidence that is, ſhee is
condemned to this puniſhment. Shee
muſt firſt change attires with her huſband,
and then ſhaue off all her haire,
aud ſo beeing ledde through the market
place muſt ſtand for one whole
daie vpon the pillorie, as an obiect vnto
all the fleering ſcoffes of the beholders,
nor ſhall the man eſcape ſcot-free, for

beeing ſo audacious, as to take the fauours
offred by his wife without a modeſt
refuſall: but when the woman
comes home (be ſhee all couered with
durt, graines, rotten-egges, &c.) ſhe may
not put off her veſture vntill ſhee bring
a cudgell into the Court, all died with
the freſh bloud of her husbands broken
pate. He that out-liueth his wife, muſt either
marry his maide and bee ſworne to
her ſeruice as hee was to his former
wiues, or els hee muſt become ſlaue to
the next neighbours wife. For no man
may bee the ruler of his owne houſe, in
this country: when the wife goeth forth,
either to warres, conſultations, or for
pleaſure, ſhe leaueth her keyes, & therewithal
her gouernment vnto her maide,
or her daughter: Either of which if the
husband but once mutter againſt, his
ſhoulders are ſure to pay for it ſoundly
at his wiues returne, vnleſſe hee can either
begge or buy the ſilence of the deputie
gouerneſſe. They
                     
                        •
                     uſt court faſhion in England.
                   neuer lie
with their husbands but when prouander
prickes them: For that (they

hold) would procure too much familiarity,
notwithſtanding if the husband
ariſe not out of his cabbin in the entry
before the wife bee warme in her bedde,
and comming vppe ſtaires bare-foote,
knock thriſe gentlie at her Chamber
dore, and offer her his ſeruice in a ſoft
voice hee is ſure to haue on the rubbes
the next day.
               The women of this tract obſerue a
faſhion directly contrary vnto ours,
for theyThat there may bee leſſe ho
                        •
                     d taken by their aſſailants, and more by themſelues. clip their haire and let their
nailes grow long. There are alſo certaine
amongſt them that are Proffeſsitrixes
of the Noble Science, and keepe
free ſchooles, wherein the reſt are
taught al the wards offenſiue and defenſiue,
both of heeles, nailes and teeth: as
alſo the moſt exact and iudiciall method
of clawing off the skinne of mens faces,
pulling out eyes; byting of armes,
wringing of eares, and tearing of beards:
Theſe lectures they are inſtructed in
both by precept and practiſe.
               Now you would thinke it incredible
if I ſhould tell you of the neateneſſe of

their houſes, yet the men are all their
drudges to waſh, wipe, ſcoure and
ſweepe all that is done: yea and dreſſe
all the meate beſides: ſo that I imagine
that it is but mans eſteeme of the
vndecencie of ſuch buſineſſes, (not any
of his vnableneſſe to diſcharge them)
that maketh him eſchue ſuch employments.
There is no foule ſpot to bee
found in any houſe here, ſauing on the
mens clothes, but thoſe are ſo filthie
that they are true notes how they neglect
themſelues as much as the women
neglect them; Notwithſtanding goe
but abroad into the fieldes (which are
the womens charge to ſee to) and
there you ſhall finde all moſt beaſtlie:
The verie walls of the Citties are
halfe downe and that which ſtandeth is
ſo diſgracefullie framed, that the verie
ſtones ſeeme to begge to bee at mans
diſpoſe, and to abhorre the ordering of
womankinde.
               I know gentle Reader thou marueleſt
much how I gotte ſafelie away
from ſuch a daungerous place, and

from ſo miſchieuous a forme of gouernment.
Faith Ile tell thee truely, mine
age, my habite, and good aduiſe were
my patrons in all this perrilous aduenture.
My habite was manlike, my face
womanlike (for I had yet no beard) and
beſides I met a many of my owne countrimen
(a ſtrange chance in a region ſo
vnknowne) whom I knew by ſight as
well as the begger knowes his diſh▪ verily
I did, and theſe (like true friends at
need) gaue me ſuch good directions,Aeneid. 6. that
(as Aeneas did by Sybilla) I following
their aduiſes got at length (though with
much toile and daunger) through all
the dirty fennes ofWhere the women will fal a weeping vpon any wager, euen when they liſt. 
                  Blubber-ick, ouer
the Muſhrumpallian Mountaines,
and ſo finally into the confines of
Fooliana.
               
               But now you may come vpon me with
another queſtion, and aske me why I trauelled
not in that part when the Modeſtinians,
the women of Black Swan-mark had
their habitation. Truely I hold my
ſelfe infortunate in that one thing
alone, that I could not come to ſee their

ſtate as well as the reſt, ſeeing that my
minde preſageth vnto me, that it excelleth
all the fore-named. There is ſuch a
people my friend I tell thee plaine: but
the region wherein they inhabit I could
neuer come to diſcouer, onely the name
I brought from their ancient chronicles
of the other ſtates, and that as I ſayd is

                     A chaſte and modeſt vvoman, is Rara anis ia terris, nigro
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſimillima cigno Iuuenal. 
                  Black-Swan-marke. Indeed there are
ſome of them that liue as Anchoreſſes,
and Hermiteſſes in the craggie deſerts
of ſome other parts of Shee-landt, but
their habitations are generally vnknowne,
and almoſt inacceſſible: theſe
notwithſtanding are the moneſtaries,
whether (as it is reported) the faireſt,
chaſeſt, and moſt zealous of the Sheelandreſſes
doe voluntarily retire themſelues:
hee that will take the paines to
ſearch thoſe vaſt deſerts, may queſtionleſſe
meete with ſome of thoſe holy Votareſſes:
I light by chance of one or two
of them, whoſe variety of vertues, beauties
and behauiours haue left mee in an
extaſie vntill this very houre: but our
young trauellers being too idle to enter

vpon ſo hard an inqueſt, that is the cauſe
why they haue no other colour to couer
their ſlouthfulneſſe by, but by vniuſtly
alledging the ſmalneſſe of the number of
honeſt women.
            
            Finis lib. 2.
         
         
            The third Booke.
            
               The Diſcouerie of Fooliana.
The ſituation and populouſneſſe of
Fooliana. CHAP. 1.
               
                  
                     FOoliana is the moſtStultorum plena ſunt omnia.
vaſt and ill-husbanded
region that euer mine
eyes beheld, and yet
withall, the moſt populous.
If a man ſhould
but goe into the Burſe of any towne of
traffique in this whole nation, he would
ſweare, (as one did once of Paris) that
the whole world came to trade thether.
I am not ignorant of the number of the
people that are imagined to be in all Europe,
take it therefore as from the Hiſtoriographers,

and not from mee. Italy is
ſaid to conteine 9000000, more or leſſe:
Spaine, a number ſomewhat leſſer; England,
3000000; the Low Countries as manie;
both the Germanies, 15000000;
France as many; Sicilia 130000: Wee
know alſo what they (that vſe to amplifie
vpon all things) ſay of the number of
the inhabitants of China, that they do amount
vnto 
                     •
                  0000000. That countrie
paralelld with the whole country of Fooliana,
is rather an vnhabitable deſert thē
a peopled nation: it lieth iuſt vnder the
Antarctike pole, as the
                     Mercator in his Atlas Geograph, affirmes as much. 
                  Pigmey-land lieth
vnder the Articke: and hence doe I
gather (as any man elſe may) that the extremity
of cold in both theſe oppoſed
regions, is cauſe both of the Pigmees littleneſſe,
and the Foolianders blockiſhneſſe

                     •
                   nature ſo well gracing hir ſelfe
by effecting the defect of body in one
place, and counterpeyſing it with as
great a defect of witte in another. To
confirme this, doe we not ſee that ſuch
as inhabite the temperate Zones are
generally perfect both in body & mind:

But let this be remooued vnto the cloiſters
of the Philoſophers, I muſt proceed
with my purpoſe.
               
                  Fooliana, on the South butteth vpon
Tenter-belly, on the Eaſt vpon Shee-landt,
and the fartheſt corner of Thriuingois,
and finally on the Weſt, vpon Theeueſ-wijck.
               
            
            
               The parts of Fooliana: the peoples
conditions in generall.
CHAP. 2.
               
                  FOoliana the great, is diuided into fiue
leſſer Fooliana's, as namely there is
Fooliana the fickle, in the Eaſterne frontires:
Fooliana the craggie, iuſt vnder the
Pole: Fooliana the fatte, towards the
South-weſt, Fooliana the fond, betweene
both: and Fooliana the deuoute, towards
the Weſt. Now the inhabitants of all
theſe fiue, are generally tall of body (for
all the vehemencie of the cold climate
wherein they liue) their haire a pale flaxen,
their headsAs Homer ſaith of Therſi
                           •
                        es, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . like ſugar-loues; their
lipps bigg like a Moores, and their eare
                     •
                  
                  
thick and ſpacious. But their conditions
do not keepe all one forme: ſome things
they haue generally in them all, and they
are theſe: what euer ſtranger arriue amongſt
them (vnleſſe he light in Fooliana
the craggie) they preſently entertaine
him with all the pleaſures that their
towne-houſe, & table can by any means
affoord: Come wee to any of them all,
with a duſt-licking congee, & ſome three
or foure voſtra Signioria's, Spaniard like,
and either commend his good face, his
new coate, his fine hand, his faire houſe,
or ſeaſon but his affections with an admiring
applauſe, and this your obſequiouſneſſe
ſhall purchaſe you an hoſte
whoſe curteſie will imagine nothing too
deare for you; good words & faire promiſes
are all the moneys that this nation
vſeth; yet they haue great ſtore of gold,
which they barter away for feathers,
bells, timbrells, and garlands, happy hee
that hath the beſt ſtore of ſuch commodities
to vtter at theſe Ports. The inhabitants
are of a hard conſtitution, going
bare-breſted, & thin attired in the depth

of winter, to take ayre the better: marry
in the heate of ſummer, they were rugge
gownes, and cloakes aboue that, to keep
out heate the better: yet they haue ſome
Philoſophotericall profeſſors amongſt
them, that will go almoſt naked in midſt
of winter, in contempt of the colde, and
their reaſon is this, that ſeeing all creatures
beſides man can bee content with
haire and hide onely, why ſhould not
man that is made maiſter to them all,
make ſhift to breake through all the
battalions of colde, being armed onely
with his ſhirt of nature, his skin? I promiſe
you, a ſtrong & ſenſible argument.
               You ſhall neuer take any of them ſolitary,
for they doe continually talke and
contend in argument with them-ſelues
when they are alone and in game: you
ſhall haue them fall terribly out ſometimes
with themſelues onely; one word
prouoking him to teares, & another immediatly
procuring laughter, & the perſon
being all this while ſingle by himſelfe.
They haue alſo certaine ſects of
people, generally called Fool-oſophers
                  
amongſt them, and theſe haue the ſame
credit there, that the Bonzoes haue in China.
I haue well neere forgotten their ſeuerall
orders: ſome of them run vpō my
tongues end, and I thinke (I am not ſure)
that there was one ſort called Browne-backs,
and another calledCluniacenſes. 
                  Clunches:
beſides (as I remember) there are theThe Trinitarians with ſquare caps.
                  Quadricornes, the Barly-faces, the Greenegeeſe,
the ſocieties of Saint Patch del Culo,
Saint Gynny come home at noone, & many
more that are far frō my remembrance.
all theſe giue their own allowances vnto
others, and begge for ſcraps themſelues,
wandring through yt verges of Fooliana,
& where they finde a ſtone with any picture
vpon it, (be it what it will) downe
they go vpon all foure, with curtſies, and
cringes, 'tis more thē ſtrange to obſerue
them: gold is ready change with them for
led, prouided it haue a taile of parchmēt
at the end of it. Tapers and noone day
meete ordinarily at euery dinner time amongſt
them. To eate fleſh is altogether
vnlawfull for them; but for fiſh, take
your gorge full gratis, and neuer breake
ſtatute for it, Ile bee your warrant:

It is a ſinne inpardonableThe tale of the Franciſcan and the Dominican is common. for ſome
of them to touch gold or ſiluer with
their bare hands: as it is alſo their generall
cuſtome ſcarcely to ſalute any man,
yet may they neither omitte croſſe, nor
carued ſtatue without a religious duck:
They whip them-ſelues cruelly; theWho were ſolemnly ſcourged at the altar of Diana. Plut. in Apoph.
                  
                  Spartans boyes ſcourging was but a flye
blowing vnto this of theirs: firſt becauſe
no man but themſelues will vndergoe
ſore laſhes, and ſecondly becauſe in the
obedient times, they had a tradition giuen
them yt calues bloud was a pleaſing
ſacrifice to their gods noſthrils. Their
crownes are ſhauen, eyther to put the
world in minde that all men are borne
bald, or, for auoyding heate of the head,
or elſe, leaſt the haire growing betwixt
heauen and the braine, ſhould bee any
hindrance to the minde in her celeſtiall
meditation. Onely two things (in my
ſimple iudgement) they are iuſtly to be
accounted too wittie in: firſt in that
they bring the people into ſuch a fooles
paradice, that they fetch all the fruits of
other mens labours into their platters,

whileſt themſelues ſitte at eaſe in their
cells: and ſecondly, in that they can ſo
cunningly auoide the bearing of their
croſſes at home, by getting graſſe for
their ſtallions abroad, and by keeping
their foles at other mens mangers. There
is witte in this beleeue me.
               If any of theſe monaſticall men be ſick,
the couent neuer ceaſeth weeping till he
either goe for vp, or take a longer day:
Phiſick hee muſt haue none: yet when
they are in their pangs of death, their
fooloſophers anoint them with oyle:
They meaſure not ones wiſdome by his
ſilence (for ſo may one of Iohn of Paules
Church-yeards blocks, prooue wiſer then
he himſelfe) but by the choiſe compoſition
and deliuerance of good & gracefull
termes: Hee is held a wiſe man, that
ſpeaketh not much vnto little purpoſe,
not he that ſpeaketh little vnto none at
all. They neuer come on horſe-back, nor
a ſhipp-board, but hold it fondneſſe to
hazard their liues either on a ſtumbling
iade, or in a weltring barge: they ſuck vntill
their beards come: nor do they euer

bury their dead, holding it a ſlauiſh part
for a man to tumble his parent, wife, brother
or ſo, into an hole, becauſe that life
is out of them, & to make a feaſt of them
vnto the wormes, becauſe of the lack of
a little breath, & therefore theyAs the Indians of Braſilia, Peru, and other places did when theſe parts were firſt diſcouered. Petr. Mart. ab Anglcria Decad. Ocean.
                   hang
them vp in the aire, in their beſt attire, &
euery yeare keepe a ſolemne obite in honor
of their departed ghoſts, iuſt in the
place where they are hung vp, and this
forme of buriall is moſt ancient as may
bee gathered out of many monuments
yet extant in Fooliana the deuoute.
               
               The women of this nation are the principall
gouerneſſes alſo of the ſtate, but
their dominions more tolerable in that
their witts cannot informe them of the
true ſtate of Soueraignty. But what they
haue (as I was told) grew firſt vpon this:
The Shreweſ-burgeſſes whilom ouer-run
all the whole region of Fooliana,
                  Annal. foolian denſ. Centur. 19. ſect. 7. li. 3. cap. 293. which
not-with-ſtanding by reaſon of the barrenneſſe
of the ſoile, they would not poſſeſſe,
but left the inhabitants in poſſeſſiō:
prouided, they held it no longer then
they did homage for it vnto them; paying

them an Aſſe laden with gold, for
their yearly tribute. This rent was paied
along time, vntill at laſt the Foolianders
brake out vpon theſe conditions, that as
for the gold, they did not reſpect it, ſo
that the Shrewſ-burgeſſes would demand
it when it was due: but for them to force
a louing creature, and one of their naturall
towne-borne country-broode, with
ſtroakes and battes, to beare this burden
out of their land againſt his proper will
and pleaſure, this was a condition very
hard, nay to their iudgments intollerable;
beſides that their quiet hereby ſtood
in doubt; for one aſſe (you know) being
heauier then another, if gold and aſſe and
all, weighed more or leſſe this yeare
then they did the yeare before, the
Shrewſ-burgeſſes might alledge that they
had not their due: eſpecially (which is
a maine reaſon of this breach) ſeeing
that the poore creature, though ſeeming
neuer ſo able to beare out his burden at
firſt, yet after a few dayes iourneys hath
beene forced to lay him downe vnder
his loade. This meſſage incenſed the

                  Shrewesburgeſſes much, where-vpon to
armes they go, & entring Fooliana, came
without any reſiſtance vnto Blocksford,
otherwiſe called Dunſ-ton, the chiefe citie
of the land: alarum was giuen: out
comes all the Blockſ-fordians hurling vpon
an heape without armes or order.
The foe was fairely ranged, and gaue the
charge: downe falls a citizen or two,
which the reſt beholding, fell all vpon
their knees in ſubmiſſion, with prayers
for mercy, and proteſtations of innocencie:
The weapons were held, and by and
by one of the graueſt Foolianders beſpake
them in this maner.The Foolianders oration vnto the Shrewefburg
                           •
                        ſſes.
                   Ah what a
violent inundation of cruelty hath ouerflowne
your good hearts, you right valiant
Shrewes-burgeſſes? that for one poore
Aſſe you ſhould kill thus many proper
men, and pritty ſchollers: eſpecially (and
oh let this eſpeciall reaſon rule yee) ſeeing
that one quick aſſe, or one aſſe being
quick (do ye vnderſtand me) would haue
bin more ſeruiceable to your eſtate then
a thouſand (a thouſand ſaid I? may then
fiue and forty) men being dead, as naile

in dore? take, (miſtake me not, I bid you
take) take euery one his aſſe, and his burden
of gold, we had rather liue without
them then to die for them: you ſhall all
haue aſſes (aſſes are not ſo ſcant in this
country of ours) once more I ſay, you
ſhall haue aſſes, Gods plenty: ô then put
vp your ſhining things, & ſpare the liues
of a many weaponleſſe men: I know (&
to your honor be it ſpoken) I do vnderſtand
that your valour ſcornes to ſtand
in defence againſt a weaponleſſe wretch:
O ſpare vs then I do beſeech you, & free
vs from that preſent feare! Wel, the conquereſſes
are moued by this patheticall
oration, & conſented to giue them their
pardons, mary vpon this condition, that
the women of Fooliana ſhould euermore
in domeſtique employments, haue
preheminence before the men. The vanquiſhed
gaue their humble conſents,
and wee thanke yee too, for it was a noiſome
toile to them to bee euer-more in
the taile of a ſlow-back, egging him on
to performance whether hee would
or no.
            
            
               
               Of Fooliana the fickle.
CHAP. 3.
               
                  FOoliana the fickle, is the Eaſter-moſt
part of all Fooliana the great, and next
vnto Shee-landt. Expect not here (gentle
reader) any exact deſcription hereof:
how I found it, and how I left it, I know
thou ſhalt know as well as I: but if you
chance to go thether your ſelfe (as many
a fine Gentleman I can tell yee, and men
of good worſhip haue done within this
few yeares) and finde not the ſtate as I
deſcribe it vnto you, blame not any defect
in me: for their formes of gouernment
are ſo dayly altered, that one may
deſcribe yee the ſhape of Proteus, or the
colour of the Chamaelion or tell what wether
it will bee to morrow, ſooner then
giue you any true notice of their diſcipline.
The Portugales may brag of their
trauels and diſcoueries, let them do ſo,
but I durſt venter a large wager, that if it
could be tried, the ancientIt is naturall to the French-man to be a wether cocksape, and to an Engliſh-man (pardon me you few of firmer ſpirits) to bee his ape. 
                  French-men
did firſt diſcouer this country, there are

as yet ſo many monuments remaining
that ſhew it, both in the names of the
townes▪ their moſt ancient lawes, and
their chiefe coines. Their grounds neuer
cary any one certaine forme two yeares
together: that which is paſture this
yeare, ſhall bee arrable the next: that
which was all high mountaines this
yeare, ſhall be all carried away to fill vp
dales withall, the next. Nay they turne
the very courſe of their riuers alſo, ſo
that ſometimes, as Virgil ſaith.
               
                  Virgil. Plauſtra boues ducunt quà remis acta carina est.
               
                  The plough now teares that vp, yt whilom was
                  A way for nothing but for boates to paſſe:
               
               So do the inhabitants ſhut out their
ſwelling riuers on one ſide, & they themſelues
(raging at their forced ſtops)
carue themſelues a new courſe out on
the other ſides. They haue great ſtore of
magnificent cities, but they change their
faſhion euery other day at the fartheſt:
The chiefe of which, at my firſt comming
thether, was calledWhich is in Italian a
                        •
                      Butter flye. 
                  Farfellia,
                  
but ere I went away, it was decreed by
the whole body of the counſell, that it
ſhould thence-forth bee called Butterflieux:
the whole frame of this city goeth
all vpon wheeles, & may be drawne like
a cart, whether the councels pleaſures is
to haue it. It is recorded to haue altered
the ſituation a hundred times ſince the
foundation, & thirty times it hath quite
loſt the former ſhape. In the time that I
was there it ſtood ſeated bySir Thomas Moore in his Eutopia hath a riuer of the ſame name, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   the riuer
of Water-leſſe, and was very ſhortly to be
carried vp to the height of Mount Wantwood.
The riuers are all ſo frozen ouer
with the extreame colde, that if any
towne be wearie of the old place it may
paſſe the waters vnto a new one. Euery
moneth the forme of the city changeth,
for euery houſe is ſeparable from the
next vnto it: ſo that as ſoone as euer
they finde any the leaſt fault with the old
neighbors away goes houſe and houſehold
and all, to ſeat themſelues in a new
ſtreet. The armes where-with this cities
ſcutchion was whilom charged, was a
Snaile with her ſhell on her back, on a

chiefe argent: the words, Mea mecum,
I cary mine owne about mee: but now it is
the Butterflie deſplaied, in a field vert
and floured: the word, Vbilibet: Where
I liſt.
               
               
                  Of the peoples conditions,
and attires.
Sect. 1.
                  THe Inhabitants goe all in painted fethers,
as the Indians doe; for ſeeing
that theſe light things kept the little
birds warme enough, why (ſay they)
ſhould we deſire now beeing farre more
able to beare out could then thoſe poore
and tender creatures are? Now when
they would ſeeme to haue new-coates,
then they change the places of their fethers:
ſo that that which in the morning
wore on their heads, commeth before
night to wipe the duſt from their heeles,
and ſo the reſt, that which kept the knee
warme but now, by and by getteth vp
aboue halfe a yard higher.
                  They do marry wiues, and loue them

peſtilently well for a while; keping them
ſelues truly loyall to their eſpouſalls, vntill
they either take ſome occaſion of
diſlike in their old bedfellow, or chance
to behold another that is fairer then ſhe:
and then, farewell wife, and welcome
with all mine heart husband ſayth ſhee;
for the wife is commonly as willing to
make exchange,Iuſt as our Citizens vſe a man as long as hee hath caſh, you haue him, brow and boſome, but that fayling, my maiſter is not within ſir. as the man is: (aſſure
your ſelues that ſhee taketh the firſt diſlike,
if her husbands Cocke-ſhippe bee,
any way declyning). They vſe a ſtranger
for the firſt daie as if hee were their
owne brother, (though they neuer ſaw
him before): marry the next daie they
will paſſe you by, and forget that euer
they knew yee.
                  They ſeldome or neuer proferre any
thing which they doe not call backe
againe at the next breath they take, before
the promiſe bee confirmed: Nor
doe they euer promiſe, but they afterwards
forſweare it, vntill it bee performed:
nor doe they euer performe any
thing which they doe not afterwards,
(though all to late) repent and bee ſorie

for. They will not ſell you any thing to
day, but if you diſlike it, they will giue
you double the price you paid for it to
morrow. They make their lawes new
euery yeare once: for it is not fit (thus
they defend it) ſeeing all mans life is
mutable, that the rules of life ſhould not
bee mutable alſo as well as the effects:
beſides, mans ſecond cogitations being
generally more perfect, it were a ſtrange
ſlauery to bee tied ſo to a firſt decree,
that although the after-wit diſlike it neuer
ſo, may not be altered.
               
               
                  Turne-coates tombe. The nations
ancient Coines.
Sect. 2.
                  IN this Citty, neere vnto theBuilt in the faſhion of our Exchange & far better traded. 
                     Aſſe-change,
is a tombe of one Turne-coate,
of ſmall antiquity, and of ſmaller beauty,
vpon it I reade this inſcription.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                              PASSENGER.
                              
                                 Stay, Reade, Walke. Here lieth.
                              
                              
                                 Iuſt ſuch an Epitaph is there in Bologna in Italy in Saint Peters, beginning, Aelia Laelia Criſpis, nec vir nec inulier, nec Androgynan, nec caſta, &c.
                                  ANDREVV TVRNE-COATE, VVHO
VVAS NEITHER SLAVE, NOR SOLDIOR,
NOR PHISITIAN, NOR FENCER, NOR
COBLER, NOR FILTCHER, NOR LAVVIER,
NOR VSVRER, BVT ALL: VVHO
LIVED NEITHER IN CITTY, NOR COVNTRIE,
NOR AT HOME, NOR ABROADE, NOR AT
SEA, NOR AT LAND, NOR HERE, NOR ELSVVHERE,
BVT EVERY VVHERE. WHO DIED
NEYTHER OF HVNGER, NOR POYSON, NOR
HATCHET, NOR HALTER, NOR DOGGE, NOR
DISEASE, BVT OF ALL TOGETHER. I, I. H.
BEING NEYTHER HIS DEBTOVR, NOR HEIRE,
NOR KINSMAN, NOR FRIEND, NOR NEIGHBOVR,
BVT ALL: IN HIS MEMORY HAVE ERECTED
THIS, NEITHER MONVMENT, NOR
TOMBE, NOR SEPVLCHER, BVT ALL: VVISHING
NEYTHER EVILL NOR VVELL, NEYTHER
TO THEE, NOR MEE, NOR HIM, BVT
ALL VNTO ALL.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
Somefoure miles from Giggumbobbia,
there is a plaine where there were certaine
old coines digged vp whileſt I was
there, I care not much if I ſhew you the
formes of ſome of them.
                  One was a ſquare peece, hauing a Ianus
head with two faces on the one ſide,
and the ſemblance of a globe-like ſtone
vpon a ſmooth table on the other, and
in darke ruſt-eaten letters, this about
it. FBR. VAR. DVC. the forme
was this.
                  
                  There was another that was round, hauing
on one ſide one in a gowne, ſeeming
to bee of a middle age, leaning
his right hand vpon the head of a little
prettie dogge, and holding in the left
hand, a booke; and on the other ſide
was a Chamaeleon enameled in all her altering
colours, and ouer her, theſe

wordes, Conſt. Lipſ. This figure, as I remember
it bare.

                  
                  The third was larger, and of more
value it ſeemed; bearing the figure of an
egge: hauing on one ſide a leane face
with a long noſe, and a wreath of lawrell
about the fore-head: on the other,
a
                        Polipus is a diſeaſe in the noſe, called Noli melangere aſvvell as a many footed fiſh. 
                     Polypus (a many-footed fiſh called a
Pour-countrell, vpon a ſtone, paſſing well
cut verely: the word was Pour-Bon.
                  
                  The inuentor of this coine, I neither
know nor care to know: nor what hee
meant by this deuiſe can I poſſibly imagine.
Notwithſtanding a little skill in
antiquities would ſoone fetch to light
the true ſcopes of all theſe inuentions: I
would ſome of deeper iudgement
would take the paines.

                     
                        Pour.
                        Bon.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Of the Vniuerſity that is in Fooliana
the fickle.
Sect. 2.
                  AS I traueled along the valley Capritchious,
I chanced to light vpon a
towne that bare ſome ſhape of an Vniuerſitie.
The name they told mee was
Whether-for-a-pennia. Here met I with
ſome ſhadowes of Philoſophers, but
neuer a ſubſtance: You may go whiſtle
and ſaue your labour, as well as to
come and looke for any lectures, rectors,
bookes or ſchooles of the ſeauen
ſciences here. Euery peculiar man
here is both his owne teacher and
his owne Auditor. Yet are there

two Colledges in the towne: one of
thePhiloſophers that held themſelues diſcuſſers and exact inquirers of all things. Gell. lib. 11. chap. 5. 
                     Skeptikes, who deny that their
is any truſt to bee giuen to the ſence:
and they are ſuch abſolute ſuſpenders,
that they dare not for their eares decree
any thing poſitiuely, no not this, that
they ought to hold al things in ſuſpence.
Steale away any one of their purſes,
cloakes or victuallsIn Diog. Laert. De lacyda. (as one of them
was ſerued once) and hee preſently
falls into a doubt whether euer hee had
ſuch a thing or no: Strike one of them
as hard as you can, he doubts of it, both
whether you ſtruck hard or no, & whether
hee feele it or no. Speake to him or
touch him, hee heares, ſees, and feeles
you, yet he dare not aſſure himſelfe that
any one thing of this is true.
                  The other Colledge conſiſteth wholie
of Gew-gawiaſters, who giue them
ſelues wholy to the inuention of nouelties,
in games, buildings, garments,
and gouernments. Hee that can deuiſe
a new game or a new faſhion, according
to his inuention hath a place of dignity
aſſigned him by the Duke.
                  
                     
He that firſt deuiſed to blow out bubbles
of ſope and ſpettle forth of the walnut
ſhell, is of as great renowne amongſt
them, as euer was the firſt Printer, or
Gun-founder amongſt vs of Europe: theſe
Gew-gawiaſters, are in great eſteeme
in Court, yea and amongſt the meaner
ſort alſo, in ſo much that many of them
will not put on a tatter, nor once
moue, without their directions.
                  Nay theſe I can tell yee are ſchollers
indeed: they haue deuiſed a new language
wherein they kept the miſteries
of their knowledge, onely to themſelues:
it is called theSo do the Parace
                              •
                           ſiſts call their balde
                           •
                        daſhe. 
                     Supermonicall tongue.
Some of the words I will ſet downe in
this place, for the good of ſuch as ſhall
trauell thoſe countries hereafter, that
they bee not vtterlyCedarine, in Paracelſiſme is blockiſh or ignorant. 
                     Cedarine in this
language when they heare it ſpoken.
                  They call the earth; Silo.
                  
                  The ſoule; Adek.
                  
                  Al thing within the skin; Chohos.
                  
                  The inner part of the midriff, Cooſtrum.
                  
                  Aquality borne with the body; Relloleum.
                  
                  
                     
A thing naturall: Cherionium.
                  
                  
                     Salt: Al, and Malek.
                  The earths vapor: Leffas:
                  
                  The waters mouing: Lorindt.
                  
                  Wilde hony: Tereniabin.
                  
                  The euill fumes of the elements; Realgar.
                  
                  A mandrake: Aroph.
                  
                  A male Cony, Ircub.
                  
                  A beginning, Ilech.
                  
                  A thinke ſupernaturall, Ieſadoal.
                  
                  An vnguent; Oppodeltoch.
                  
                  Vineger, Xiſinium.
                  
                  Star-ſlime, Noſtoch.
                  
                  Iupiter, Cydar.
                  
                  Succeſſiue generation, Dordo.
                  
                  An vncertaine preſage, Erodinium.
                  
                  A certaine one, Eſſodinium.
                  
                  Puſtules, Bothor.
                  
                  Lame, Artetiſcus.
                  
                  Crooke-backed, Naſda.
                  
                  An amulet againſt the plague, Xenechtū.
                  
                  But I wondered much more at the
names of their mineralls and ſpirits, for
they call brimſtone, Chibur, Alcubrith,
Kibrit, and Alchur.
                  
                  
                     Quickſiluer, Sibar, pliſſadā, azoth, vnquaſi.
                  
                     
Vnfined lime, Wiſmadt.
                  
                  The Philoſophers ſalt, Alembrot.
                  
                  Mercury precipitate, Diateſſadelton.
                  
                  A mettall like Iron, Bobolt.
                  
                  Iron, Edir.
                  
                  
                     Mercury, Miſſader, Zaibar.
                  Minerall gold, Chifir, Fido.
                  
                  Copper, Maelibeum.
                  
                  The ruſt of copper, Almizadir.
                  
                  Vitriol, Colcohar.
                  
                  A compound of corall and the lobſter,
Dubelcolep.
                  
                  And now come the ſpirits names, with
whom they are wondrouſly familiar.
                  
                     Eueſtrum, Is the good Genius.
                  
                     Xeniphidei, Good ſpirits that reueale ſecret
things to man.
                  
                     Trifertes, Spirits of the fire.
                  
                     Caballi, Goblins.
                  
                     Trarames, Apparitions.
                  
                     Operinethiolin, Minerall ſpirits.
                  
                     Gamahaea, An image impreſſed in the
Phantaſie.
                  
                     Sylphes, Ayry ſpirits.
                  
                     Paracelſus was prouoſt of the colledge,
who inuented thē this ſtrange language:

But indeed I am not ſure whether this
tongue continueſtill amongſt them, or
hath by this time giuen place to ſome
language of the later edition. How-ſoeuer
it bee, I haue done my duty in warning
you of it before hand.
               
            
            
               Of Fooliana the
Craggye.
CHAP. 4.
               
                  FOoliana the Craggy lieth iuſt vnder the
pole: the fartheſt of all the Land
Southward: it is a Mountaynous, ſtony,
and eternally froſty country, lying in
an ayre extreamely cold, and as extreamely
dry. Here there is an Iron
Rock, iuſt like that Rocke of Lode-ſtone,
which the Geographers ſay is vnder
the North pole: and this is the reaſon
why the compaſſe, af
                     •
                  er you are
paſt the Epinoctiall, declines towards
the South, the cauſe whereof no Geographer,
or Marriner could euer as yet
declare.
               
                  
This land is diuided into two dutchies
rather ſpacious then fertile, commonly
called Solitary and the ſad, Cholerik-oye.
               
               
                  Of the Duke, and inhabitants of Solitaria
the ſad.
Sect. 2.
                  THE Duke of Solitaria is generally
called by the name of Grumble-doro
the Great, a teſty and ſeuere man, whoſe
ſubiects are as like in conditions vnto
him, as they are vnlike to all the reſt of
the other Foolianders. Hee hath a huge
& ſpacious pallace called Hearts-griefe-Court,
built all of Ebonye and Iet, in a
moſt magnificent kinde of ſtructure.
Ouer the portch are theſe words enchaſed
in Corall.
                  Merentum locus eſt:Written by Ranizouius in a chappell nere to Sigeberg. procul hinc diſcedite laeti:
                  This is the place where ſorrow dwels and care:
                  Fly far, far hence, all you that mirthfull are.
                  The people of this nation are generally

al haire-be growne, leane, ſlouenly,
ſwarty complexioned, rough headded,
ſternely viſaged, and heauy eyed, fixing
their lookes as in amazement, and ſeldome
mouing their ey-bals: their optike
organs ſtand far into their heads, making
them looke like ſo many hollow-eyed
ſculls. Here it is in vaine to looke either
for citty or village: they dwell euery
man in a place far from other, as Hares
chooſe their ſeates: and profeſſe a kinde
of life moſt truly Heremiticall: partly becauſe
they are of too ſuſpicious and
fearefull a nature to dwell in companie;
& partly becauſe the Duke hath expreſly
forbidden all men to build any one
houſe within the ſight of another, or
within the diſtance of thus many miles
from any habitation whatſo-euer. They
ſeldome or neuer ſtirre forth a dores,
partly for the continuall darkeneſſe
that couereth all this climate, and partly
for their owne, and their Princes pleaſures:
and when they doe goe abroad
they doe very ſeldome ſalute any one
they meet, for this is one ſtatute in their

lawes: Let no man ſtirre abroad, but vpon
neceſsity, nor ſalute any man hee
meetes but vpon
                     This the Ca
                           •
                        thuſians obſerue very duly, and deuoutly. 
                     Thurſdaies. Goe to
any of their houſes, and knocke at the
dore, you ſhall ſtand a good while to
coole your toes, and at laſt bee ſent away
with a ſnappiſh anſwere: for they
are the moſt inſociable creatures vnder
the cope of heauen. But how doe they
ſpend their time thinke you? Faith in
imagining & framing fictions to themſelues
of things neuer done, nor neuer
likely to bee done: in beleeuing theſe
their fictions, and in following theſe
beleefes: This is the reaſon why
they abhorre company, and hate to
bee interrupted in their ayrie caſtle
buildings.
                  You ſhall haue one of them directly
perſwaded that hee is dead, and lying all
along vnder the ſtoole, like a dead carcaſſe.
If any one come to queſtion
him, hee flieth in his face with moſt
violent furie, ſuppoſing him ſome
Necromancer, that hath called his
ſoule backe againe from the dead, by

his magicall enchantments, and from
that time forwards,So did one Piſander in a melancholy fit. Cael Rhodig. lib. 9. chap. 26. he wanders all about
the country like a Ghoſt, imagining
himſelfe hence-forth wholy inuiſible:
but if any of his fellowes take him
and binde him, hee forth-with deemes
him a fury ſent from Pluto, to fetch back
the ſoule that lately brake away from
hel, and now is he in the moſt pitiful taking
that euer was man; imagining his
houſe which he held to be but his graue
before, to be a direct hel to him now. Another
is of opinion that he is become a
Mole, and lieth in a caue vnder ground,
hunting for wormes, and turning vp the
earth with a pike vpon his noſe prouided
iuſt for the purpoſe: if any one follow
him, and giue him but a little pricke,
hee preſently beleeueth himſelfe taken
by the Mole-catcher, and with miſerable
cries prepares himſelfe to bee hung vp
on the hedge. A third holds himſelf to
be Atlas, the worlds ſupporter; and ſo
ſtandeth immoueably ſtill, now and
then fetching a ſigh or two, ſometimes
lifting vp his ſhoulder, and ſometimes

ſhrinking it downe-wards: now when
hee hath ſwet a little with this exceſſiue
toile, if any one come and thruſt him
from his ſtation, he preſently falls flatte
downe on his face with roares and cries,
expecting euery moment when the
skies ſhould fall vpon him, and railing at
the wickedneſſe of man, that had ſo little
reſpect of his owne preſeruation, and
the ſafety of the whole world. Another
auowes himſelfe to bee Megaera, one of
the furies, & affrighteth the paſſengers
with terrible geſtures: ſhaking his haire
(which he thinkes is nothing but ſnakes)
hiſſing, and running at them that come
by him, with open mouth: if hee catch
a whelpe or a catte, ô how hee will torture
it: and imagining it the ſoule of
ſome ſinner, taketh great pleaſure in the
cries of the poore beaſt (as it is ſaid Aiax
in his madneſſe did by the Rammes).
Another beleeues his noſe to be grown
of ſuch a ſize, (as Cyngar did inThe inuentor of the Macaronicall tongue, hee wrote of the geſts of Bal
                           
                              •
                           us, Cyngar, Fracaſſo, Vin
                           
                              •
                           azzo, Seraffus, &c. all in Strambottologicall verſe. 
                     Cocaius)
he gets him a great many thongs, to bind
it vp at his back for the more conuenient
cariage. Another ſuppoſeth himſelfe

made all of glaſſe or Potters earth, and
ſo flieth all mens company, leaſt hee
ſhould be broken amongſt them. Thus
hath euery particular man in the whole
land ſome conceit or other, vnto which
he holds his ſhape to be conformed.
               
               
                  Sect. 3.
                  FRom the foot of Mount-eye, the riuer
of Teares hath his firſt ſpring, running
through moſt part of this Prouince,
which is parted into two, by a continuall
ledge of mountaines, called the Noſeautems,
iuſt as Italy is diuided in the
midſt by mount Appenine. Theſe mountaines
haue nothing in them but dire and
frightfull deſolation, nor giue harbor to
any liuing thing ſaue Beares, and Witches,
and theſe abound all the deſerts
through. The Beare (a moſt lumpiſh melancholy
creature) will lye yee all winter
through, in a lightleſſe caue, liuing onely
vpon ſleepe and licking of his feete. The
witches being bleare-eyed & toothleſſe
old hags, do nothing but ſitte muttering

of charmes to raiſe winds and waters, to
cure maladies, and call vp the dead, ouer
all which they promiſe them-ſelues aſſured
authority, and yet in the meane time
are ſtarued to death for want of meate.
Theſe hills on the one ſide are all couered
with a thick darke wood, called
Owleſ-wood, which is continually haunted
with ſpirits and apparitions, and not
for mā to enter, or to paſſe through. Here
ſhall you haue your
                        Lycanthropi, they are men or women that by ſorcery can put on the ſhapes of wolues, & yet reſerue the reaſon of man. 
                     Witch-wolues in
aboundance, whoſe howling if you know
not their cuſtomes before, will ſet your
haire an end with terror. In Diuelſ-dale
at the foote of theſe hills, you ſhall ſee
many whom that famous Enchantreſſe
By a Me
                              •
                           tatheſis, otherwiſe called Melancholy.
                      
                     Choly-melan is ſaid to haue tranſformed
intoAll melancholie is Aſſe-like, or Lion-like. Lions & Aſſes, and yet left
them both the faces and voyces of men.
               
               
                  Sect. 4.
                  HEre we may not ouer-paſſe the onely
wonder of ye whole co
                        •
                     ntry, 'tis this.
On the ſide of the higheſt mountaines of
all the Noſe-autems is Cholly-melans caue.
                     
It hath a narrow entrance, and is almoſt
frozen vp with Ice, but it is as it ſeemeth
by the ſound, of a large compaſſe within.
All the ſides of the entry are hung
with huge Ice-hickles, which ſhewing
like teeth, do make the place ſeeme like
the picture of Hels-mouth. In this caue
they ſay the ſoules of melancholike perſons
are plagued with continuall and extreame
cold: whoſoeuer offers to looke
in (as few will that wiſe are) is preſently
ſtruck downe ſenceleſſe, where his body
lieth a good while dead, expecting the
returne of his tormented ſpirit: but hee
that layes his eare to the ground a little
without the hole, oh what howling, ſighing,
ratling of chaines, and falling of
Ice-ſickles ſhall hee ſeeme to heare? Or
hee that ſleepeth vpon any part of this
mount (which I more hardily then warily
aduentured) good God what Chimaera's,
Centaures, and thouſands of ſuch amazefull
apparitions ſhall hee (to his
horror) behold in his dreames!
               
            
            
               
               Of Cholerikoye, the other Dutchie
of Fooliana the craggie.
CHAP. 5.
               NExt vnto this is Cholericoye, a barren,
burnt, ſandie ſoile; producing
a brood of haſty, furious, haire-braind,
mad people:The naturall token of choller. low of ſtature, pale-faced,
read headed, ferret eyed, trembling lipped,
& vnequally (though ordinarily haſtie)
paced. Theſe are all vnder the gouernment
of Duke Swaſh-buckliero, the
model & Embleme of all tyrranny. The
reader will admire, and hold it incredible,
that he ſhould vſe his ſubiects as he
doth. The famous Ruſsian tyrant was a
mercifull Prince in reſpect of this man:
there was neuer Caeſar, neuer Cannibal ſo
bloud-thirſty as he is. Here now the ingenious
ſearchers of nature may make
a great doubt, how a nation ſo exorbitantly
cold, ſhould produce ſuch extraordinarily
fiery conſtitutions, the bodies
of others generally following the nature

of the clime wherein they are borne. O
ſir, content your ſelfe whoſoeuer yee be
(if not, yee may chooſe, I will neuer intreate
yee) wee Philoſophers know well
inough, that where the heat is kept in by
the ſtronger Antiperiſtaſis, that is, where
it is the ſtronglier bound in by encircling
cold, there it breaketh out into a more
violent operation. Doth not Affrica, that
burnt region, produce ſerpents of the
coldeſt nature of all others? are there not
flies bred in ye furnaces of Cyprus,
                  Mercurial. va
                        •
                     . lection. Georg. Agric. lib. de Subterean. whoſe
cold do quite extinguiſh the heat of the
fire? hath not the thunder and lightning
their firſt originall in the midle region
of the ayre? and is not the whole earth
often-times ſhaken by a fire, hatched in
the depth of her owne cold bowels? wel,
Philoſophy is on my ſide, and I dare
therefore be hold to ſay what I doe ſay.
On with our deſcription.
               This Dukedome is diuided into foure
weapentakes; Sallow-hew, Grene-chekes,
Blew brow, andAs much to ſay Fiery-front. Rouge in French, is red in Engliſh. 
                  Rougeux: the people of
the firſt, weare all tawny: the ſecond all
greene, the third all blew, and the fourth

all red. There is none of theſe that euer
ſtirre abroad vnarmed; hee that is but
halfe ſufficiently apparelled, will bee
ſure howſoeuer to haue his armour vpon
him A capo a pie: and like a Porter
hyred by Mars, ha's his Musket on one
ſhoulder, and his Halberd on the tother,
his ſworde there, and his great
bumme dagger here, with two boxe
hilts, a man may boyle two ioynts of
meate in them, and at his back hee bore
his bow and ſhafts; thus is hee accoutred
if he goe
                     Iohn Fiſticankots, Aiax his ſonne and heyre, according to the pedigree drawne by Peter de qui, in his Catalogus Dunſor. Ioannenſ. lib. 2. Cap. 17. but to my neighbour
Iohns, hee muſt haue his mooueables
about him. If hee meete any man that
will not giue him the wall; catzo del diablo,
ſlaue, drawe, or prepare thy ſelfe
to kiſſe my pumpe, for the reſarciation
of mine honour. They neuer make any
iourney forth, but they eyther bring
blowes home, or leaue ſome behinde
them. If one chance to kill his enemy,
hee feedes vpon him immediatly, for
they eate raw fleſh altogether, and
drinke warme bloud, and this is the
beſt eſteemed fare.
               
                  
They haue no lawes, but all goes by
might and maine. Hee that is wronged,
either reuengeth his owne wrong, or
elſe hee may go home ſitte him downe,
and ſo turne ouer the leafe & ſing: All
the rules they follow is but one and that
is this, Conquer and poſſeſſe.
               
               If you haue any minde to reuenge a
wrong, to regaine what was your owne,
or to take from another, you may call
him to the field at any time, and he muſt
come, or looſe his eſtate. If any come to
interrupt yee, and ſo begin a ſedition
all that remaine vnſlaine, are forth-with
forfaited to furniſh the Dukes ſhambles,
which crafty lawe doth both ſuppreſſe
conſpiracies, that were otherwiſe very
likely to bee daily practiſed vpon the
ſtate, and alſo furniſheth the Dukes table
in farre greater aboundance, and at
farre leſſe charges. The chiefe ſeate of
the Duke is calledBuilt iuſt after the forme of Tangir in Africa.
                   
                  Fierce-fooliangir, a
great citie, but it is built onely of wood-worke,
the Duke would not haue it
otherwiſe, that hee might the better
(vpon iuſt cauſe giuen) ſet iron fire, and

ſo burne cittie and cittizens when his
pleaſure is. It is inhabited with none
but Tinkers, Black-ſmiths, & Butchers,
in whoſe ſhops you ſhall as commonly
ſee legges of men hang vp, as here with
vs you ſhall finde peſtels of Porke, or
leggs of Veale. Through this citty runs
the riuer Furieuſe, with a courſe like a
torrent, which in winter they ſay will be
exceeding hotte (aboue your fountaines
in froſt) and giueth vp vnwholeſome
fumes. Hard by it ſtands the Dukes Pallace,
on the top of an exceeding high
hill, called Mount Scalpe, and it is reported
how it is growne to this height onely
by the multitude of dead mens heads
that haue beene throwne on an heape
continually in this place. The Dukes
Pallace is built of brick, very ſtrong, yet
liueth hee in a continuall ſuſpect of his
ſubiects loyaltie, and had rather truſt his
owne Iron gates, then their glaſſie obedience
Hee hath a guard of 10000.
                     Eps, ware, Things, and Welſh Dauie, were whi
                        •
                     om of his gard, as I was credibly enformed by ſuch as knew.
                  Hackſters, who are miniſters both to his
furie and gluttony. If any ſtranger come
heere, that knoweth not how all goeth,

he is preſently ſeazed vpon, & his head
preſented to the Duke for picking meat
at ſupper, which hee holdeth more delicate,
and hunteth more after, then euer
did Vitellius after theSueton in Vitelio. 
                  Phoenicopters
tongues, or Lampreyes intrailes. Hee likens
a Negro to a Thruſh, and a white
man to a Quaile; but ſuch as dye onely
to doe his gutts ſeruice, are farre better
vſed then the reſt, for they (asDiod. Sicul.
                  Olympias offered Euridice) haue their
choice what way they will dye, whether
being hangd or beheaded.
               The moſt famous mount in all this
Pallace, is the Inquiſition chappell, they
call it Saint Shambles: dedicated vnto
the powers infernall, whoſe ſtatues ſtand
all therein, in horrible figures, wrought
all with Ieatt and Corall, and theſe doe
they offer their oriſons vnto. Here
might you behold all the ſorts of deaths
and tortures poſſibly to bee deuiſed:
Wheeles, Iibbets, Hatchets, Halters,
Swords, Clubbes, and ruſty Piſtols, ſo
old, that I dare paſſe my worde for the
Chinians, they will confeſſe that they

had their firſt Gunnes from hence. A
thouſand Altars are in this Chappell,
fuming with continuall ſacrifices to the
Deuill, and the Duke, offering the ſoule
to appeaſe the furie of the firſt, and the
body to ſatiate the couetouſneſſe of the
later; and for the bloud, they haue a
certaine Arte to keepe that from congelation,
and ſo caske it vp like Aligant,
for the Dukes owne weaſand. Through
the middeſt of this chappell runneth a
channell called Naſtie, and downe that,
they ſcowre all the filth of the bloudſtained
pauement.
               Theſe men doe neuer goe, but runne
altogether, and generally you ſhall
not miſſe to take them all on a ſweat.
But there are two ſtrange things, and
worthy obſeruation in this countrie,
the firſt is, you ſhall not finde one
man in this whole region, but hee is
either lame in body, or deformed in face:
which the more ſcarres that it beares,
the more beauty it is held to adde vnto
the bearer: and the ſecond is, that a man
of three ſcore yeares old, is here held for

a miracle. For it is more then extraordinary
for any of them to attaine to the
middle age of man, they are fleſht ſo
young.
               Neere to the heart of the countrie is
a fenne called Full-gall, as large and as famous
as euer was the ancient Meotis,
now calledOrtel. or 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      della Ta
                     
                        •
                     a: Bellonius 
                        
                           ••
                        ch the Ita
                     
                        ••
                     ans, call it 
                     
                        •
                     ar Bianco. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Scythia it is 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      Ca
                        •
                     pa
                     
                        •••
                     , as Tzetz
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  Mar delle Sabacche: The
water of it is of a deepe yellow to the
eye, and moſt bitter to the taſte: it ouerfloweth
the bounds very often (but at
no ſett times) and ſome-times drownes
the moſt part of Cholerikoye: that which
it doth drowne, the ſulphurous nature
of the water doth burne, as Phaetons ill-guided
waggon did the whole world:
and at theſe times do all the inhabitants
bottle vp this water, imagining that being
drunke it annimateth their ſpirits
vnto the moſt dangerous attempts. But
here I would not haue my reader too
credulous, for I haue this but by heare-ſay,
by my faith ſir I durſt not goe to ſee
if it were true or no, I rememberd that
French-mans ſaying too wel, Il faut menager
la vie. This part of Fooliana was too

dangerous a region for me to trauell: I
ſtaid at mine eaſe in Blockeſ-ford, and held
it better to take this relation vpon credence;
then to confirme it with mine
owne experience.
            
            
               Fooliana the fond. CHAP. 6.
               THis part of Fooliana is both the largeſt
and the moſt ancient of all the
reſt: the inhabitants of it affirme themſelues
to haue been created in this country,
before any other part of the world
was peopled: ſo that is held theHad not our firſt parents 
                        〈◊〉
                      fooles, in 
                        〈◊〉
                      not beene 
                        〈◊〉
                      but now it is▪
                   mother
of all nations, as Blockſ-ford is of citties.
It lieth in the very middeſt of all the
reſt, as the nauell of this goodly body.
On the South it hath Fooliana the craggy:
on the Eaſt, the Fickle: on the Weſt, the
Deuoute: and on the North, the Fatt. The
ſouth part of it is called Cockſ-combaya,
peopled with ſlouthfull & flegmatique
inhabitants; but the northren part therof
is poſſeſſed by more induſtrious and
actiue ſpirits. Had I not beheld the
ſtrange behauiours of this ſtupid ſort of

people with mine eyes, I ſhould neuer
haue beleeued that nature had beſtowed
ſo diuine a gift as reaſon vpon ſuch brutiſh
creatures. For all thoſe that border
vpon Fooliana the craggie, goe directly
like beaſts vpon all foure, nor doe they
know (ſilly things) any other way of going.
There is no houſe in all this part of
the country: becauſe the inhabitants
neither can build any them-ſelues, nor
dare aduenture to come into any that
are built by others, leaſt they ſhould fall
vpon their heads. There are euery yeare
great multitudes of them ſtarued, and
ſtormed to death, in that they can neither
make ready their meate, nor frame
themſelues apparell, nor beds: nay they
can ſcarcely ſpeake true ſence: not a
man of them that knowes his owne father,
nor his owne ſonne, nor wife: nor
how to returne the ſame way he came:
nor how to diſtinguiſh a Beare from a
Sheepe, or a Lion from a whelpe. Nay
you haue of them that cānot tel whether
they ſhould put their meate in at their
mouth, at the noſthrils, at their eares, or

at ſome other more vnſeaſonable hold.
finally, to be briefe imagine but that you
ſaw a Camane Aſſe in an humaine ſhape,
and ſuch an one is a true Cockſcombayan.
               
               
                  Of Aſſe-ſex. Sect. 2.
                  
                     ASſe-ſex
                     
                        Aſſex in Fooliana is larger then our three ſexes in England here, Eſſex, Middleſex & Suffix.
                      the Northerne part of
Fooliana the fond, is ſome-what better
furniſhed with wit, and worthier of a
trauellers preſence and obſeruation. The
people hold themſelues wonderful wiſe,
and profeſſe the ſearch of natures moſt
abſtruſe effects: neuer leauing till they
haue drawne one reaſon or other, from
the very depth of inueſtigation. They
haue but one eye a peece: They are not
borne ſo, but the parents at the childs
birth plucks out the other, as being of no
vſe in nature, in that when the one eye is
ſhut, the other hath a more ſtrong facultie
to diſcerne. Part of this nation go all
naked, to auoid the labour of putting on
& off: part of them haue houſes, but with
out either dores or walls, yt the freſh aire
may haue the freer acceſſe: part of them
build neſts like birds in the higheſt trees,

both to bee nearer heauen, and for their
bodies exerciſe in climing vp to them;
euery particular man of them hath both
his peculiar opinion and profeſſion. Ambition
& deſire of glory draweth diuerſe
of them into moſt ſtrange & incredible
actions: you ſhall haue ſome going vp &
down the ſtreets on their heads & hands;
& others flying about with wings made
of wax & fethers, you would verily imagine
thatThe two winged brethren ſonnes vnto Boreas: they ridd Phineus of the Harpyes. 
                     Zetus and Calain were come
againe from the dead, if you but beheld
how boldly theſe fellowes dare truſt
their wings with their necks.
                  Others, like your Italian Mount-bankes,
draw the people together to ſee yt effects
of ſome rare vnguento, diſtilled water, or
ſome ſtrange engine: others, out of the
baſeſt of mettals, by a ſecret art (and that
by St. Patrike a gainfull one too) can draw
the pureſt gold. But in faith it is worth
the laughing at, to ſee the toyleſome follie
of theſe extractors: they are guld, and
guld, and terrible guld yet can they not
finde in their hearts to giue ouer. A
ſort of them of late (as I was informed)

would needes to the Oracle, to
know the euent of that weighty buſineſſe
they had in hand. The Oracle preſently
gaue thē this anſwere
                        Libauius ſets downe this rime of Alchimy. Alchymia eſt ars ſine arte Cuius ſcire eſt parscum par
                           •
                        e, medium eſt ſtrenue mentiri. Finis, 
                           〈◊〉
                         dicatum 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 
                     Trauaillez
that is, take paines. Pho, home come
they as if they had gotten their God in
a boxe: and forward they goe with
their circulations, their ſublimations,
their coniunctions, their fermentations,
till all this head-leſſe action ended in
putrefaction, vntill reputation and reuenues
were both dead and rotten.
                  
                     
                        Arioſt. Orland. Furioſ.Thus each man ſeekes, to be an Alchymiſt
                     Till all be gone, and he his number miſt.
                  
                  Whereas indeede the oracle gaue
them better counſell then they could
comprehend: Take paines, that is,

                        A mattock and a ſpade will get you gold▪
                        
                        Sooner then Chymiſtry, a thouſand fold.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Of the Cities of Cockſcombaya and
Aſſe-ſex, and of Blocs-foord, the
metropolitane ſea. Sect. 3.
                  THE firſt Citty I light vpon in this
country was Hollow-pate, a towne

of good antiquity, and well contriued:
but it affordes no rarityes, and therefore
I leaue it and paſſe on to Bable-dock,
a corporation moſt worthely famous
for the wiſedome of the Aldermen.
Theſe men a little before my arriuall,
held a ſitting vpon this occaſion. They
skie was verie cloudy, and raine was
generallie feared on all ſides: the Maior
calls a benſh, and fell to conſultation,
how to diſpell the feared ſhower.
                  The firſt mans aduiſe was to ring out
all the bells of the towne: another aduiſed
them to burne ſtinking ſauour in
the open ſtreetes (as the Italian women
doe to driue away tempeſts): At
length, the graueſt Foolianders opinion
was demanded, who ariſing, told them
in plaine tearmes, their policy was
vn-auaylable, and that the onelie
quirke to fetch ouer this peremptorie
ſtorme, was to ſuffer all the moiſture
to fall that thoſe bigge faced
cloudes contained, and by that meanes
(and by no other) the tempeſt would

bee ſo braue (ſeeming to haue no reſiſtance)
that as Hanniball did at Capua, it
would ruine it ſelfe or euer it were aware:
was this an idle plotte? no beleeue
it: the whole benſh liked it and
allowed it. Twitlecome twattes, wiſdome
is not ſworne to ſitte in Europe
onlie.
                  The very Venus,
                     The Author had this deſcription from an experienced Geographer, or Fooliander.
                      the eye, the luſtre
of all Citties terreſtriall, is here ſeated:
Ciuitas Angelorum? Why tis a
verie Peticoate Lane, a Peaſe-market hill
to it: The name of it is Blockſ-foorde:
for ſite, it ſtandeth partlie vpon a plaſhie
plaine, and part vpon a little mountaine:
both of them lying in the deſcent,
Northward: farre from any wood, or
any riuer.
                  The vpper part of the towne ſerues
the lower with ſnow water, and the lower
doth the like for the vpper with
ſpring water, mary that is of Iohn a
Cragges ſtanding. There are in the
whole circumference of the walles iuſt
ſixeteene gates, wherein (according to
the intent of the founders) it exceedes

all citties of the world, by foure.
                  The geometricall forme therof is neither
circular, nor ouall, but of a meane
proportion betweene a Cylinder,Spell the meaning. and a
renuerſed Pyramide, iuſt like vnto the
portraiture of a mans body. What now?
are your vnderſtandings vn-aquainted
with ſuch a geometrical draught as this?
why then you are but Scioccoes, & neuer
ſaw Belgia in the forme of a Lyon, Italy
of a leg, Morea, of a plaine tree leafe,
Spaine, of an Oxe-hide, the Weſt Indies,
of a fiſhes lunges, nor all Europe in the
ſhape of an Empreſſe. Hee that hath
ſeene theſe, and ſhal but view this towne
(as he cannot lightly chooſe) muſt needs
avow directly, that he beholds the lineaments
either of ſome Coloſſus, laid all along,
or elſe of Prometheus, as hee lieth
bound vpon mountSo doth Theuet call Caucaſus.
                      
                     Adazar▪
                      The
market place is on the hills toppe: for
that it is the head of the citty, and ſo
adminiſters life and ſence to the reſidue.
                  But (honeſt Reader) if thou conſider
but the toyle that the poore porters

endure by both horſe and foote, whileſt
they lugge vppe all neceſſaries, euen
hogſ-heads of beare and wine againſt
the ſteepe deſcent of the hil: Vpon mine
honeſt word I know not whether I
ſhould bidde thee laugh or lie downe:
thou woldeſt ſweare thou wert in hell,
and ſaw an hundred Siſiphi at once, rowling
ſo many reſtleſſe ſtones. And when
they are gotten halfe vp the hill (nay by
Saint Loye ſir, perhaps almoſt to the top)
with halfe an hogſ-head of ſweate vpon
their quarters: then (beſhrew that then,
may they ſay) down comes another barrel,
which hauing ye vpper ground, holds
it ſelfe the better man, and laies all the
poore mens labour in the durt, and
that not without endaungering themſelues.
                  On this mountaines toppe, the Magnificoes,
and the whole Signioria of the
Cittie haue their habitations, to the end
that the whole towne may lie as a fitter
obiect to their proſpect: this, as I ſayd,
reſembleth the head of the towne:
down from thence you deſcend a narrow

which reſembles the neck of this head,
and this is inhabited onely with Serieants,
Beadles, Deputy-conſtables, and
Hangmen, and other executioners. 
                     Derick-iaſtroes. From the lower end
of this ſtreet, do two other extend themſelues
on either ſide, expreſſing the
armes and hands in mans bodie, and
theſe are peopled (but ſlenderly God
hee knowes) with handicrafts men, but
not ouer many handicraftes maiſters.
The bulke of this fabrike lies in a broader
ſtreete, and here you haue all your
Innes, Alehouſes, Tauernes and Hoſterians
whatſoeuer, and theſe haue houſes
downe to the very loynes, where (as
mine author affirmes, but I was neuer
ſo farre in the towne) they keepe the
Burdello.
                  
                  Here indeed (ſaith hee) dwell the Cocatrices,
the Roffianaes, the Makquerells,
& all thoſeThis is a mataphor that needes no gloſſe. ancient fiſh wiues that ſell
Ruffes, Mackrell and Whiting-mops whatſoeuer;
and then if you deſcend a little
further, (all in one pariſh) you come into
A Iakes farmers burden in the night is called a Bride, as I haue heard. 
                     Bride-ſtreete, and there haue all the
Scauingers, Scoure-Aiaxes, and eleauen

a clocke Perfumers, tagge and ragge:
this is called the Draffe-ſacke of the Citie:
The legges and feete of the towne
are boxes to the Ragmans Rolles of
Porters and Panier-iſts: and here your
poore Traueller is (now and then)
full faine, to take vp an hourely rooſt,
bee his pennie neuer ſo good ſiluer.
I am ſeges eſt vbi Troia fuit. Swine-troughes
and Sepulchers are ſome-times
ſworne acquaintance. But Parcius iſta
viuis.
                     Tamen obijcienda memento.
                  
                  The houſes of this towne (faire
though it bee) haue none of them any
foundation: for what alledge they?
had not wee rather giue honeſt buriall
to the harmeleſſe ſtones, then teare
them out of their graues? hold yee content
my friends, this is no laughing
matter.
                  The Magnificoes build their houſes of
a ſtatelie forme, and a loftie: to bee
thereby the nearer to the skie, and the
more eleuate from this vnrefined garbe
of terreſtrial conuerſation. Their houſes
are all paſſinglie well
                        Muro bianco carto di matto. A white wall is a fooles booke. painted within,

eſpecially with the names of their anceſtry,
their gueſts, and acquaintance,
gracefully delineate with coale and
candle.
               
               
                  Of the Burguemaſters of Blosk-foord.
Sect. 4.
                  THE Gran-dunſonioes (for ſo the Burguemaiſters
will haue themſelues
enſtiled) of Blocks-foord, whileſt I was
there, held a Parliament about matter
of ſtate, in generall and in ſpeciall, about
the ſecuring, beautifiing, and aduancing
the weale-publike of their City
of Blocks-foord. Euery one gaue vp his
opinion, according to that which ſeemed
to him moſt commodious. One
would aduiſe them to cut a conuenient
hauen through the mountaines (though
it were ſome fiue hundred miles from
the ſea, a matter of ſmall charge you
know) for ſhippes to traffique to the
towne by: he wanted no ſtore of examples
from other cities, whoſe glory

ſtoode wholy vpon the ritches they reaped
by the ſea.
                  A ſecond preſently riſes, and clearing
his fore-head from furrowes, confutes
all that euer the former had affirmed,
ſhewing withall, how dangerous a thing
it was to repoſe any confidence in ſuch
an inconſtant and vnſatiate element: nor
wanted hee examples at full, of citties
that lay buried in the ſeas deuouring
wombe. Well, vp riſes a third: and hee
would haue the rareſt conduites made
that euer were deuiſed, and bring the
water vp in pipes from the valley to the
hills toppe; a thing as poſſible, as could
be thought vpon, ſeeing that euery man
ſeeth the water in fountaines to bubble
vp voluntarily, and ſtriue vpwards of
the owne accord, and wanting meanes
to containe it to ouerflow the whole
plaine about it: and againe, when the water
runnes downe the kennell, doe yee
plainely, that one part driues another
forward? as plaine as day. Well, for all
that, this will not fadge with the fancies
of the benſh. Speake another: one doth

ſo: and his ſpeech tends to the rayſing
of an high mountaine about the cittie,
for theſe ſubſequent vſes.
                  Firſt that the whole world might not
haue notice of the actions of the Blockſfordians,
eſpecially of the Grandunſonioes.
Second, that the cittie therby might
be more augmented and fortified. Third
that there might be better auoidance of
cold, by the warme ſeating of the Citty
within ſo high a mount: and for the
mount it ſelfe, thoſe that dwelt below
ſhould digge it out of the valley, and lay
it togither. And then ſhould there be abridge
built from that vnto the next
mount, by which the citty ſhould bee
furniſhed with neceſſaries. But then
ſteps vp another, and ſmiling, asked how
it were poſſible that a valley ſhould
bring forth a mountaine, but to allow a
poſſibility of that, to ſuffer a bridge to be
built were meere indiſcretion: for if a
carriage, or a traueller ſhould ſtumble
or looſe foote-hold thereon, there were
no way in the world for you but death,
yea and that (which is worſe) with the

breaking of a legge or an arme: no, as
for my ſmall experience in ſtate affaires
(quoth hee) I would rather aduiſe thus
(graue Grandunſonians) to enterpriſe
a matter which to effect is not laborious,
and yet being effected, ſhall prooue
moſt glorious: ſo that beeing propounded,
I know that the well-willers of the
ſtate cannot chooſe but approue it: and
thus it is.
                  Euery man according to his ability
and the ſize of his houſe, ſhall erect a
ſpire vpon the toppe thereof, and vpon
the toppe, of that, ſhall aduance a Cock
(vulgarlie tearmed a weather-cocke)
of braſſe, or ſiluer, with a combe of
gould, or Gold ſmiths worke: and this
ſhall bee mooueable, to follow and expreſſe
the changes of the winde: Now
in euery ſpire I would haue a clocke
to ſtrike hourelie: which beeing once
fully performed, O what pathetique ſpirit
can expreſſe the reduplicate delight
ſhall from hence redound both to the
eye and the eare: to ſee ſuch a bright
fulgor of lof
                        •
                     ie ſpires, and to heare

ſuch a ſweete clangor of harmonious
bells. He had not ſhut his mouth, before
the whole houſe opens, in acclamation
to his proiect, ſo grauely, and ſtateſman
like propounded: And ſo they roſe, to
ſee it performed according to the intent
of ſuch a ponderous aduiſe: So that hee
that ſhall in his trauell hereafter, arriue
at this Cittie, ſhall finde it in farre
more gorgeous eſtate then it was my
happe to behold it in, let him aſſure
him ſelfe of that, for I ſawe ſome
of the broaches rayſed ere I departed.
               
               
                  Of the Marquiſate of Spendall-ezza.
Sect. 5.
                  NEere vnto Blockſ-foord lieth the
Marquiſate of Spendallezza, a countrie
whilom moſt ritch, and of ancient
and honorable memory, but now tis
quite gone downe the winde: nor obſerued
I any thing in it worthy obſeruation

but a forreſt called
                        Actaeon was eaten vp by dogs, that is, he ſpent his eſtate vpon them▪
                      
                     Actaeons
                     Dogs, Dice, and Ha
                           •
                        kes, the three obiects of prodigali
                           •
                        y.
                     Dogkennell, an eight ſquare citty, called
Hey-dice, and an other little corporation
called Haukeſ-peartch. The inhabitants
are the only ſpenders vnder the moone:
they do nothing in the word, but inuent
how to ſpend with the beſt garbe:
Some vpon dogges, ſome vpon haukes,
or kites for a need: ſome vpon a paire of
Iuorye Cubes, or abunſh of ſpeckled paſtboards,
and thus flie their patrimonies:
and when all is gone but the cloathes,
farewell they alſo, the diſe or the brokers
are their ordinary cope-men; alas
poore Gentlemen, what's a man but
his pleaſures? But whether this Marquiſate
belong to Fooliana the Fond
or the Fatte, that I cannot reſolue yee
in, who ſoeuer ought it of yore, at
this day I am ſure it is not in the hands
of the olde maiſters; It may bee there
haue beene ſome Lawiers, or ſome Vſurers
in this Country in times paſt, but
now farewell they.
                  When theſe new inhabitants haue
caſt all their whole eſtate ouer-boord,

then they doe either retire vnto other
mens tables; or elſe are maintained at
the publike charge. And here is that
ancient modell of Cole-harbour, bearing
the name of The Brodigalls Promontorie,
and beeing as a Sanctuary vnto
banque-rupt detters: hether flie all they
for refuge that are caſt at lawe, or feele
themſelues inſufficient to ſatifie their
deluded Creditors: any of whome, if
they purſue their debters hetheb, and
force them from their protection whether
they wil or no, they are immediatelie
accuſed as guiltie of ſacriledge and
ſo are throwne head long from the
higher tower in all the territorie;
and when they riſe from their fall,
can no way complaine of any iniuſtice,
but haue vnder gone the ancient law of
the whole Marquiſate.
                  Thoſe of this countrie that haue any
ſonnes, aſſigne them their full patrimonie
ere nature allow them any bearde:
and in caſe they die before this time,
they leaue all their eſtate vnto their
wiues to diſpoſe as they liſt afterwards,

without any reſpect of progenie: But
if they haue the fortune to burie their
wiues, then doe they lauiſh out more
vpon their funeralls, then would ſerue
for a dowrie vnto the fowleſt of their
daughters.
               
               
                  Sect. 6.
                  BEtweene this Marquiſate and Fooliana
the fatte, lieth another nation
calledOr flatter itan
                           •
                        a▪
                      
                     Clawback-ourt, peopled with
the ſtrangeſt monſters that euer man
beheld. They beare euery one
                        
                           •
                        n one hood.
two faces, and ſpeake with two tongues:
carrying the ſhapes ofTo ſooth, and to backbite. Apes vpon
their formoſt partes, and all behinde of
Dogges: ſo that they ſeeme to bee
a confuſed compoſition of Man, Ape,
and Dogge. That there are ſuch
monſters, let reuerend Munſter ſerue
as a teſtimonie, who deſcribeth certaine
Indian people that are partly thus
formed.
                  This Nation, it ſeemes, is borne
to ſeruitude: the greateſt part of

them doe make themſelues voluntarie
ſlaues vnto the Magnificoes of Fooliana
the fatte, which borders vpon their
countrie. And albeit they bee ſo ſottiſh,
that of their owne heads they can
enterpriſe nothing praiſe-worthie: Yet
can they imitate, and counterfeite any
action they ſee done before them, the
world has not the like, for forging ſuch
exact reſemblances.
                  They neuer weare attire, neuer
ſpeake word, neuer doe deed, but they
ſee or heare the like before they goe about
it. Whileſt, I was there, they halted
all vpod one legge; and went ſpitting
and ſpawling all the daie longe,
becauſe that Signior Tickle-eare, their
gouernor, of late had hurt his foote,
and with all, was troubled with an olde
pockie Catarrhe. They are moſt of them
Barbers, Taylers, Pandars, & procurers:
There are alſo by report, ſome gallant
courtiers amongſt them: But how ſo euer,
your Spaniſh Mimike is a meere ninnihammer
vnto theſe Clawbakc-ourtiers,
take them as generally as you can.

Speake but, or looke but vpon one of
them; and yee ſhall preſently haue him
kiſſe his hand, cringe in the hamme, lick
his two yeards of duſt, and with a laborious
Congee, like an Eccho, bandy the laſt
word you ſpake, all the roome about,
and with an applauding fleere, returne
vppon you with all the gratious termes
his gorge can poſſibly vent; together
with an whole Heralds office of Titles,
and top-heauie Exellentiaes, and then
putting his lips together with another
Baſcio dalli mani, ſtand houering at your
next ſpeach, to heare how his laſt ſtood
to your liking. Then do but you approue
him, and talke on, and whatſoeuer you
ſay (bee it ſcarcely ſence) ſhall into his
tables, as a more then humaine conceit;
as a very oracle. Then will hee-ſtand
with his eye fixt on the skyes, and adore
you (as a drunkard doth Bacchus) vpon
all foure.
                  They acknowledge no God but the man
whom they make choiſe to ſerue, and
him they obſerue with more prayers,
ſacrifices and adorations then any Idol

would exact. Now all this they do with
one of their mouthes onely: marry there
is not a word comes out of this mouth,
but the other, (their dogges mouth)
doth forth-with ſecretly retract, and diſclaime.
And thus much for their conditions.
                  The firſt Cittie in this Region, is
calledIn Engliſh it is Praiſe
                           •
                        all. 
                     Tutto-lodanie of faire and
ſight affecting ſtructure: but ſo ſlightlye
built, that there is no hope it ſhould
continue: it is much enriched by the
trafficke which it hath by the meanes
of the riuer of Fiction, and againe,
verye much endamaged by the ſame
riuer, through often and ſeuerall inundations.
                  Neere vnto this towne ſtandeth a
village, called Tongue-walke, the inhabitants
whereof are neuer well but when
they are talking. This village ſtands at
the foote of a mountaine that riſes along
as farre as Tickling-ſtreete, another famous
borough, where the towneſ-men
keepe themſelues continually employed
in chaſing of laughters. Cloſe vnto

this, lyeth that pleaſant valley called
Soothing-dale, at the farther end whereof
there is a Mariſh, called Scoffe-ſtowe
Fenne, which reacheth downe along
as farre as Shame-ſtead, a towne of infamous
note: whether they vſe to
banniſh all their Wizards, and all
thoſe whome they callBaſhfull modeſtie is a foe to flattery. 
                     Baſhfull-apians.
                  
               
            
            
               Of Fooliana the fatte.
CHAP. 7.
               THIS Region, compared eyther
for wealth or pleaſure with all
the Regions of this Southerne continent,
exceeds them all: and were it
as wealthy as it maketh ſhew of, I
make a great queſtion whether the
whole Northren worlde could finde a
countrey to parallell it: but indeede
the people thereof doe generallye
faigne to haue what they haue not,
and to amplifie by their braues that
which they haue indeed.
               
                  
There is a double ledge of Mountaines
extended ſome ſixtie Germaine
miles in length on either ſide, betweene
which lieth a plaine, full as iong, and this
is Fooliana the fatte: through which, the
riuer of Sound, a goodly current, hath
his courſe, almoſt encircling the whole
plaine. The reader may ſoone conceiue
what a goodly ranke of Cities are ſeated
on the Mountaines ſides, hauing the
proſpect ouer ſuch a fertile plaine, ſo
delicately watred and diuided into ſuch
a many cantons, all fraught with fatte
paſtures, and ſpacious champians. The
neatneſſe of the Cities in this tracte,
excells their number; yet are they but of
a ſlender manner of building, & though
their outward formes promiſe all decorum,
yet when you are within you ſhall
not finde ouer-much good order.
               At the mouth of the paſſage through
the Rhodomantadian Mountaines, ſtandeth
the Citie Hydalgo, otherwiſe called
Like Madril in Spaine.
                   
                  Braggadrill: proudly built, but beggerly
ſtated: and neare vnto this, is Back-bitembourg,
a towne that may be mother

to the dirty ſtreetes of Paris. By this
towne is a Rock of incredible height,
(and of as incredible note) called Break-neck-cliffe:
not much different from the
Peakes crag in England. It is as broad at
the top as at the bottome: and yet ſo
ſteepe, that it beareth the former rather
of a towre built by mans hand, then any
meere worke of nature. And this Rocke
is as famous for a place of execution
here, as euer the Tarpeian cliffe was in
Rome.
               
               On the other ſide of this famous hill,
hath the Cittie of Bawdeſden hir ſeate:
this towne hath beene oftener on
fire then euer was olde Rome: partly
through the negligence of the Citizens,
and partly through the aptneſſe to take
fire, that is in the Bitumen, which they
vſe in their buildings in ſteed of Lime.
Adioyning vnto this is another Cittie
called Punkeſ-neſt, built all of Flint, and
the hardeſt Cement that can be deuiſed.
And then a little further in, towards the
frontires of Idle-bergh, lie thoſe large
mountaines, commonly called Hollyday-Hills,
                  
where the people keepe continuall
reuells, and ſitt in iudgement vpon ſuch
as obſerue any working-dayes: two citties
there are vpon theſe hills, Gameſware
and Merry-cum-twang: and on the
Eaſt ſide of theſe two, the riuer of Sound
falls into the riuer of Idle, making three
or foure Hands, Skip-free Iles the Inhabitants
called them where the peoples
continuall exerciſe is in dancing vnto
the ſound of muſicall inſtruments.
               
                  The qualitie and condition
of the people.
Sect. 2.
                  EVery particular man in this Countrie,
auouches himſelfe at leaſt a
Gentleman borne: and moſt of them
are able to ſhew a pedegree of ten thouſand
yeares long before euer the world
was created. You ſhall haue them ſhew
yee large galleries all drawne with their
lineall and colaterall deſcents, and yet
when all comes to all, their neighbours

are able to prooue, that they had Coblers,
carters, or coſter-mongers to their
Grand-fathers. Nor is there any of
their more ſelect Gentilitie, but hath
his countrie Farmes, three or foure,
leaſed out vnto his Viliacoes, his retainers,
and thoſe are commonly Clawback-courtiers.
                  
                  TheQuaſi ſenza lode, vnworthy of praiſe. 
                     Sennaladij, their beſt ſort of
Gentlemen, doe content them-ſelues
with the pooreſt fare that euer attended
a faſting day: yet ſome of them perhaps
at the yeares end, will make a feaſt,
which for exceſſe of preparation, and
multitude of gueſts, will giue an end to
the bidders whole reuenues: but all
the yeare after hee will ſo defraude
his barking ſtomacke, that many of
them (I aſſure you it is true,) doe deſtroye
themſelues through meere hunger.
Others of them lett the guttes
grone neuer ſo lowde, neuer reſpect
the belly, but clappe all they can
ſcrape vppon the backe: yet will they
neyther acknowledge nor confeſſe
their defect of belly-timber, but quite

contrary, whereſoeuer you meete them
about dinner time, you ſhall haue them
go bruſhing of their beards, and picking
of their teeth; as if they were newly
come from the death of an whole deluge
of ſeuerall diſhes. There is none of
them hath ſo much either money or
land, as his cloake and ſword would
purchaſe; nor any of them that keepes
not aboue an hundred
                        Mangeguadagnos: ſo the Italians cal their ſeruants▪
                      
                     Munch-gaines,
(for ſo they call their ſeruants) yet haue
they nothing in the world but they pay
intereſt for it (no man will lend them a
quatrine vpon their credites) in ſo much
that I haue knowne diuerſe of them hire
their apparrell at the Brokeria, onely for
foure and twenty houres. Nay I knew
one of them build his horſe a ſtable fitter
for a Kings horſe then his: adorning
it with farre-fetched Marble, nay and enchaſing
the walls and pillers with Iuory,
and he himſelfe meane while fatte warming
of his heeles in a poore little, ſtraw-thatched
cottage.
                  They giue themſeluesAs he did who demanding lodging at a meane Inne, and being asked what hee was: Our name quoth he is Hernando Gonzales Ri
                              •
                           adeneira de Toledo. By my troth ſir (quoth the Hoſteſſe) wee haue not beds enow for ſo many. tedious
long names, and delight vnmeaſurably

to haue their country and their alliance
mentioned in their ſtiles, adding ſuch
compoſitions, and reduplications vnto
their prolixe titles, that to recite them
with one breath is a thing directly impoſſible
Eſtridge fethers are deare with
them, as Ruſhian furres are with vs. Some
of them vſe to hang ſiluer bells at their
heeles, by the noyſe whereof they may
attract the peoples eyes vppon their
gracefull carriage as they paſſe the
ſtreetes.
                  Thoſe few of them that cannot deny
their births to be baſe, are neuertheleſſe
of as haughtie ſpirits as the reſt. I remember
I read this diſtich ouer one of
their dores.
                  
                     Miſero quello, chi di perſona vile,
                     Naſce di cor magnanimoe gentile!
                  
                  
                     O wretched he, that hauing had his birth
                     From a braue ſpirit, baſely affecteth earth!
                  
                  One thing I maruelled at aboue all
the reſt, as I lawfully might: There are
few of this nation that liue by meate, or

by drinke, but altogether vpon the fume
of a certaine herbe; which they take in
ſmoake at their mouths, and giue it out
at their noſes, reſembling the fumes of
ſo many Brewers chimneys. I know not
certainly whether they had this from
the Indians, or the Indians from them. I
                        •
                     
is reported, that one Rollo Warallador, an
vngodly fellow of this country (though
one of good place) was taught the inuention
of this wicked vapour by an
Indian deuill: yet ſome affirme that the
Indians of the Torrid Zone inuented the
ſame to make themſelues black within,
diſliking vtterly to haue their inner parts
of one colour, and their outward of another.
But this I am ſure of once, that
though it fill the noſtrils, it empties the
coffers, or that many good patrimonies
haue by this meanes gone in ſnuffe out of
their owners noſes: that ſmoakt ſo long
in fume, till all the ſatte was in the fire,
and all the fire out of the Kitchin.
                  In all the Cities, eſpecially in Baudeſden
and Punkeſ-nest, euery other houſe
keepes ſale Trugges or Ganymedes, all

which pay a yearly ſtipend for the licence
they haue to trade. It is very lawfull
to deale with theſe vpon any conditions
you can make with them; it is no
ſhame for a man to ſalute his Cockatrice,
(I and to do more too, to kiſſe her) in the
very market place, yea euen before his
wife; nay you ſhall haue ſome of them
will make their wiues obſerue their humors
with all ſeruiceable attendance.
               
               
                  The Paradiſe of Fooliana the Fatte.
Sect. 3.
                  THere is not in all Fooliana, (no nor I
doubt in the whole world) ſo rare
and ſtupendious a monument, as is the
Paradiſe of Fooliana the fatte: a worke
worthy all admiration, it is worthy both
the toile & the coſt of all trauellers, but
once to behold it. You ſhall a farre of,
behold a ſhining mountaine, all of pure
gold (for ſo it is, or ſo it ſeemes, and
thats as good) framed (as it is reported)
in old time by arte Chymicall: yet
if any one come to trie the goodneſſe of

the mettall by inſtrument, it falles all
into duſt; if by fire it aſcends all in
ſmoake. On the top of this mountaine
there ſtandeth a caſtle all of Chriſtall;
not wrought by any arte of humane
power, ſay the inhabitants: but the
Goddeſſe
                        Fortuna fauet fatuis, is not ſo old as true. 
                     Fortune, being (vpon ſome
diſtaſt giuen vnto the court of the gods)
baniſhed from heauen, ſet vp her reſt
here, and built this as a ſecond, and terreſtriall
heauen. And from hence ſhee
ſpreads her goodneſſe through the
world: here ſhee ſitts giuing all aboundance
that the moſt credulous ſeruant
ſhe hath, can poſſibly expect: nay be his
expectation conſtant, he cannot chooſe
but obtaine it. Hether doe men and women
flock, from all the nations of the
earth, but eſpecially from Fooliana the
Deuoute: there is not one (almoſt) high
or lowe, in the whole world, but hath
ſeene this mount and aſcended it. Men
talke of Our Lady of Loretto, Saint Iames
of Compoſtella, our Lady of Walſingham,
Hall, and Sichem, they are deſert and deſolate
places in reſpect of this: here the

pilgrims lye proſtrate in the valley, in
deuoute expectation of the Goddeſſes
call, as thick as euer haile-ſtones lay in
high wayes after a froſtie ſtorme: nor
may any man liuing approach the aſcent
of the hill, vntill ſuch time as the prieſts
of the caſtle do hang out the white banner,
& that is a ſigne that the Goddeſſe
is pleaſed they ſhall aſcend: and then
they crie all with one voice, making the
skies rebound againe,The Italians crie ſo, vnuailing of the picture of our Lady of Lore
                              •
                           to.
                      
                     Madona Scoperta,
and then run that run may, one ouer
another, euery one crying out of the
ſtraightneſſe of the paſſage vp. Nor will
the worſt man there giue place to the
beſt, ſo that ſome-times you ſhall haue
them ſcold one with another, like ſo many
inhabitants of Ram-Alley: and ſometimes
to it by th'eares, with dry blowes,
euery one in the company thruſting on
him that is before him, & flouting them
that are behind. Heere did I ſee certaine
of them that durſt not venter vpon the
crowd, growne euen hoarie with expectation,
and yet had not meanes to get vp
the hill. But what doe they that get vp?

faith, deſire to haue, called them together,
& hope holds them together, each
one praying that it would bee the Goddeſſes
pleaſure to grant him his deſires▪
                  
                  You ſhall haue one praying for the attainment
of his way-ward loue: another,
only that it would pleaſe Fortune to ſend
him a wife that were no ſhrew: a third
for honors, & a fourth for ritches, euery
man as hee likes, and there yee ſhall haue
twenty praying for vnckles deaths, & as
many for the burial of thus many church
men, that he may paſſe from reuerſion to
poſſeſſion of this or that fatte benefice.
There ſat one king-like fellow at the gate
& he (they ſaid) ſued for the next monarchy:
& by him ſat a crue of ill-faced wenches,
& their ſuite was for beauty: there
was an old wife alſo, with as many oake
trees in her mouth as teeth, & ſhe expected
to be reſtored to her youth againe, &
a many more ſutors (you muſt thinke)
then I could take note of. Now the ſigne
of admiſſion being giuen (as I ſaid) vp the
hill go all that can go, not on their feete
(for that were ſacriledge) but vpō hands
and knees, & with great reuerēce I warrant

ye. Being gotten to the midway, one
of the prieſt intertains them courteouſly
& inquires euery particular mans name
and country, which when he heareth, he
proclaimeth it with as lowd a voice as
euer hadA fellow in Homer 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         had a voice alowd as fiftie mens. 
                     Stentor, partly to giue notice
vnto his fellowes, and the Goddeſſe her
ſelfe, what gueſts were arriued, & partly
by this means inquiring ye deity of them,
to know ere they come any neerer, whether
they come with the faith and purity
which is required: for if you come guilty
of any heauy crimes, ſhee hangs out her
red banner, in ſigne that you muſt be remoued
into the cloiſters, where he muſt
be kept til he be able to ſalute her with a
purer ſoule and paſſe the reſidue of the
iourney with a lighter purſe. But if the
goddeſſe like you at firſt, the Prieſt giues
you a leaden token, & ſo lets you paſſe:
mary withall hee ſpeakes theſe 3. words
in your eare ere you paſſe; Beleeue, Expect
and Hope: and ſo God buoy. On go you as
cheerfull as a Pie, vntill you come at an
Iron threſhold, a little below the ſteps
that aſcend to the Caſtle gate: vpon
which Iron this diſtich is written:

                     
                        
                           Sannazer.Fortunam ſi auidè vorare pergas,
                        Illam vt male concoquas neceſſe est.
                     
                     
                        Who ſwalloweth Fortune ere he chew it,
                        Through ill diſgeſtion needs muſt rew it.
                     
                  
                  The Caſtle gates are kept by a rigorous
porter: yet money will make him do any
thing: the entrie is ſo narrow, that it
ſeemes to be rather an hole then a gate:
but after you are crept once in, then ſhal
you ſee an houſe more like an heauenly
habitation then an earthly. All pearle &
gold, whoſe luſtre dazels the eie to looke
vpon it, and whoſe external view promiſeth
no leſſe then the height of happineſſe,
I omit to ſpeake of the forme of the
temple, the prieſts habits, orders & offiees:
theſe, for breuities ſake, I wittingly
ouer-paſſe. At length when you haue
viewd all (for you muſt needs beſtow a
little time to gaze vpon this pile of admiration)
comes another of the Flamines to
you, and taking you by the hand (hauing
firſt blind-folded you with a linnē cloth)
he leads you through a hūdred turnings,
indeed whether hee liſts, but as fond mē
beleeue, into the temple of this good

Goddeſſe, whom mortall eyes muſt not
behold, and therefore are you muffled.
Well, now you muſt coutch, and kiſſe
the ſacred pauement: and lie ſo without
once moouing, vntill the Goddeſſe
call you by your name, and, then
aske boldly what you liſt: doe but effect
what ſhe commands without delay, or
diſtruſt, and were your requeſt neuer ſo
hard, it ſhould bee fulfilled. Well, but
what end of all this ceremonious obſeruation,
ſay you? By my troth a ridiculous
one, able to mooue the gentleſt
ſpleene aliue. They are all ſingularlie,
and ingeniouſly con-icatcht, men and
women, rarely fetcht ouer, and with
arts Quinteſſence: and yet for all that,
this art is ſo ſecret, that though no man
paſſe this triall, that is not made an Aſſe,
yet euery one had rather blame his
owne ſlothfulneſſe or incredulity, then
once glance at any imperfection in the
power of the Goddeſſe. Well, hauing
propounded your petition, (ſuppoſe it
bee honour) the Goddeſſe aſſents to
it, moſt gratiouſlie, commanding the

ſuppliant, firſt after ſome houres, to take
the holie potion, whereby his ſpirit may
bee the better adopted vnto the enſuing
felicity: and then, to lay him downe
againe vntill ſhee called him the ſecond
time: which if hee doe but duelie
obſerue, hee ſhall aſſuredly be crowned
with his full wiſhes, to continue
enſtalled in happineſſe for euer: and
to haue euer the ſame cauſe to bee
gratefull vnto the Goddeſſe for her heauenly
beneficence.
                  It paſſeth; the ſuppliant taketh the
cuppe and drinkes it off: prayſing to
his owne thoughts the drinkes delicious
taſte, beeing vtterlie ignorant
that it is onelie a potion made of poppie,
opium, lettuce, and other ſuch
procurers of ſleepe: but the effect is
the triall; hee has not beene an houre
after hee hath taken it, but downe lies
hee in a ſleepe, yee may turne the
houſe out at the windowe, (if yee can)
and neuer awake him: and then is hee
haled vppe and downe the pallace
like a dead carcaſſe by the buriers,

and when they haue laught at him till
they bee a wearie, they lay him in a
ritch bedde, in a Chamber like a Kings,
all ſeeled with Iuory, and arched
with golden pillers, all the Tables
ſpread with couerings, the Arras of
Campania, and the Tapiſtrie of Alexandria
are but ſacke-cloath to them.
                  And about the doore ſtandes a companie
of attendants, each in his gold-chaine
at leaſt, and all courtier-like accoutred,
expecting when thisThe Mi
                        
                           •
                        on of the Moone▪ he ſlept 40. years together ere euer hee awaked.
                     Endymion iunior will awake, (which
is commonlie ſome three daies after,)
who lifting vppe his head, beeholdes
all the roome with amazement,
(as hee well may) and ſeeing all this
faire companie of ſhining attendance,
is wholie transformed with
wonders: Whileſt they in the meanetime
approach all in order with a ceremonious
reuerence to ſalute the awaked
King: Health and happie daies to thy
Sacred Maieſtie, great King. King thinks
hee? maſſe this is braue. What apparell
will it pleaſe your Maieſtie to

weare to day? your ſute of Goldſ-miths
worke, your ſuite of tiſſue embrodered
with Rubies, your cloth of gold doublet
with the Carbuncle buttons, or your
Pearle poudred caſſock? I? tiſſues, Rubies,
Carbuncles, caſſockes? Heyda!
my man's an Endymion indeede now, and
will not change ſtates with the man in
the moone, he, for al his fulgid throne he
ſittes in. Well, ritch cloathes are
brought him indeede, euery man helps
this braue King, and as one ſaies.
                  Dant digitis gēmas, dāt longe monilia collo:
                  
                     His hāds with ſparkling gems they deck
                     And hang ritch chaines about his neck.
                  
                  Set a diademe vpon his head adorned
with Pearles of incredible greatneſſe
and luſtree. All this goes well ſtill,
thinkes hee to himſelfe:'Tis time poore king, for thou haſt eaten no meate this three daies. Get dinner
readie. So ſayd, ſo done: dinner was
prepared, and ſerued vp, all in ſtate, ſuch
raritie of ſeruices, ſuch braue attendants
ſuch mirth and ſuch melodie! Pho,

nineteene muſes cannot giue a man
words to deſcribe it. And thus they
ſpend the whole daie, as time, yee know,
will paſſe. Still my fine King thinkes
all his owne, ſtill. Well, night comes,
vp with ſupper, and vp ſupper comes,
with as ritch, nay ritcher purueyance &
attendance then waited on the dinner:
and for a concluſion to the feaſt, my
maieſticall King has the tother draught
giuen him of the holy potion, which
preſently locks vppe his ſences in ſleepe
as profound as the former: And then
my poore twelue-houres King, beeing as
Virgill ſaies
                  Iam ſimul expletus dapibus, vino
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſepultus,
                  Gorgd with good cheere and wrapt in ſleepy wine.
                  Is caried out at a poſterne, ſtript out
of his tiſſues, his Rubies, and al his Gold-ſmiths
worke, and re-inveſted in his old
cloathes, (made ſomewhat more ſluttiſh
then they were before) and ſo laid out in
the high way, for paſſengers to gaze

vpon: where when hee awakes, hee falls
into as great amazement as before; and
remembring how glorious a bliſſe hee
was enthroned in but yeſterdaie, and
finding himſelfe now vtterlie depriued
of all,Heu quò decidimus. hee falles a lamenting moſt extreamelie,
miſerablie deploring, and bitterlie
curſing either his owne ſloath,
that would not giue eare (as ſhee had
charged him) to the Goddeſſes ſecond
call: or his groſſe ingratitude, who being
placed in ſo high a felicity, neglected to
pay the good goddeſſe her due tribute of
thankefulneſſe. So away goes hee weeping
and wayling with this word continually
in his mouth, Fuimus, Troes! I was
whilome a braue man,! And exhorting
all men to take example by him, neuer
to bee negligent, neuer thankeleſſe, but
to proceede with heed, and confidence,
and obey what the goddeſſe enioyned,
and then they could not faile of felicity.
Such had I once (ſaith hee) but now, by
mine owne onelie follie, I haue loſt it
all, euery part and parcell of my former
greatneſſe. Now euerie one that

heareth him, thinkes this; I hope to
take better heede then ſo; and they
hood-winck themſelues ere euer they
come there.
               
            
            
               Of Fooliana the Deuout.
CHAP. 8.
               VPon the weſterne and part of the
two Foolianaes, the Fat, and the Fond,
lieth Fooliana the Deuout, a region fertile
enough of it ſelfe, but through the inhabitants
negligence, altogither vncultured.
For whereas it is diuided into
two Prouinces, Truſt-fablia, and Sectaryuoa,
(the former beeing farre the larger
of the two) yet is it ſo wholie giuen
ouer to a ſort of rotten Ceremonies,
that the Inhabitants thereof are all
of this opinion, that one cannot doe
God better ſeruice then in the vtter
neglect of themſelues. There are good
ſtore of pretty Hamblets in this prouince;
there is Fragment, ſurnamed the mouldy,
wonderſ-field, and within a little of them,

                  Crepe-ham high croſſe, Cringing-beck; and
kiſsing-all-vp.
               
               The borders of this nation are verie
deſerts to ſpeake of, and haue ſcarcelie
any inhabitants: ſome of the villages (for
ſome villages there are, but very few)
as Lenteſtow right-maw, Pilgrimes Inne,
and Scourge-nock, are left almoſt vtterly
deſolate, but that they are once a yeare
(at a ſet day) viſited by ſome Venetians;
otherwiſe their threſholds are worne
by none but their owne countrimen.
               And here I may not ommit one memorable
worke, erected vpon mount
Bagnacauallo; it is a goodly, well contriued
ſpittle, both for largeneſſe, and full
furniture: it beareth the name of the
Hoſpitall of incurable Foolianders, and was
built at the publike charge of the whole
countrie, and therevpon is maintained.
The Proctor of it, at my beeing there,
was oneThus was hee borne that wrote the Hoſpitall of incurable fool
                           •
                        s.
                   
                  Garzoni, an Italian, a man of
good prouidence and diſcretion, and
truelie hee hath deſpoſed the almeſmen
in paſſing good methode and in decent
order. Hether haue diuers colonies

beene ſent out of all parts of Fooliana.
               
               But for a truth the number of the
monaſteries in this country, doe very
nere exceed the number of the villages:
beſides which, there is nothing but ſcuruy
ſheddes, worſe then any Weſtphalian
Inne: nor is there any freeholder left in
all this countrie: the Cloiſters haue
got vp all the lands euery ſtraw-bredth,
to make the deities the better cheere.
Foure ſorts of buildings did I obſerue
in this ſoile: Temples, Monaſteries, Hoſpitalls
and Cottages: for all thoſe that
are not profeſſed cloyſterers, are either
ſlaues or beggers. They are all of one
religion, mary they cannot tell of what:
but profeſſe ignorance, and neglect inquiry,
it is inough for them to follow
their fore-fathers, and to hold the places
whilom belonging to Saints, that is all
they care for. In their pace they make
continuall croſſes; one thigh comming
thwart another at euery ſtep, and ſo
makes the forme of a croſſe at euery
foote of ground they paſſe: And ſo likewiſe
do they cary their armes, folded in

croſs-like manner, as if they were all in
loues Melancholie. They haue goodly
Temples, yet downe vpon their knees
will they go in the plaine fieldes, if they
ſpy but any antique face vpon a ſtone,
or an old logge, or ſo: and then their
beades (which they beare vpon ſtrings)
muſt needes rattle ſome two and fiftie
times ouer. There is more Gods belongs
to this country, then there is men.
Varroes nūber of the Romane gods was
but halfe an vnite in reſpect of thoſe.
They make them of ſtone, wood and
lome: and ſome of them augment their
deities number, with adoration of horſes,
hogges, and hounds. Euery daie
giues life vnto a new deity: and ſometimes
yee ſhall reckon two hundred,
made in one Temple vpon one day. And
here wee finde the olde Egiptian cuſtome
receiued, that men, whileſt they
liue, are naught ſet by, but dying, they
are entombed in honorable ſepulture.
800. pounds haue I ſeene beſtowed at
one funerall, and none of the greateſt
mans neither. In this land will I lay my

bones, and I doe here by will and teſtament,
charge mine heires to ſee me here
entombed: and pray that all thoſe that
doe either condemne or commend this
my deſcription, beyond the deſert, bee
ſent as mourners to accompany my
corps to the graue, as likewiſe all ſuch
that ſhall hereafter bee guilty of immitation
thereof. But let vs forward
with it.
               At thoſe obiects, beſides the tapers,
incenſes, bells, and bables that attend
the body, as beneficiall vnto the ſoule;
there are two ſelect perſons bound by
the law to attend the bodie all the way
with two blacke ſilke fannes, to driue away
the flies from it, be it in winter
when the flies are all dead, and the
carcaſſe not a fart the ſweeter, all's
one for that, law is law, and muſt bee allowed.
               Theſe Foolianders neuer touch any
thing, bee it Water, Oyle, ſalt,
Waxe, or Iron, vnleſſe it bee firſt exorciſed,
and the diuell driuen out of euery
corner of it.
               
                  
They hallow guilt roſes, with great follemnity,
as they doe alſo in baptizing of
their bells, and enſignes. But here is the
rareſt miracle that euer nature ſaw or
man heard of. In Wonderſ-field there is
not a ſtone, but can heare, weepe, laugh,
mooue, cure diſeaſes, ſweate bloud, and
do al that euer was done by the Semones,
the Daemones, or al the black guard whatſoeuer.
               
                  Sectarioua, the ſecond Prouince of
Fooliana the Deuout.
Sect. 2.
                  THe other part of Fooliana the Deuout,
Sectarioua, is a county of much
variety, but little delight: Euery village,
euery houſe has his peculiar faſhion,
quite different from the reſt. Nor did I
euer ſee, in all my trauells ſuch a multitude
of vnruined monuments, as I ſaw
here. Here was Saturnietta, & the ſeauen
Piramides (ſomewhat ruined) which the
citizens of this ſtate builtThis was the Saturnians opin
                           •
                        on. in memory
of the 7. Angells that made the world againſt
Gods wil: then was thereThe Baſilidians held that there were 265. heauens, according to the number of the letters contained in the word 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      
                     Abraxia,
                     
the Baſilidians ſeate; wherein there
were but iuſt 365. houſes, the towneſmen
being forbidden by an ancient law,
either to increaſe their number, or diminiſh
it. Nere to this, ſtandsThey were called Gnoſtikes, that is, muddy, for the falthineſſe of the miſteries, and ſo were the Carpocratians called: Iren. l. 1. c. 24. 
                     Gnoſtico,
wherein there are 30. old weather worne
ſtatues, ſtanding al hand in hand: whereof
there are eight larger then the reſt, all
marked with Hebrew characters. Not
far from thence is a deſert ſomewhat
wooddy wherin the
                        Iren. in ep. ad Euſ
                              •
                           b. Theſe held th
                           •
                        t they might deny, their faith in perſecution. Hieron.
                      
                     Elceſaites or Eb
                           •
                        onites
had their manſions a long time: and
here did I ſee ſome of the ruined alters
whereon they had beene forced to offer
ſacrifice vnto Idols. On the left hand
were the tombes of theThey had a nevv maner of redeeming their dead with oyle, balſame, water. 
                     Heracleo nitikes,
al moyſtned with oyle and balſame.
And on the right hand was theThey held that Chriſt was that ſerpent that deceiued. Euah and kept a ſnake vvhich came forth at Prieſts incantations, licken of the offring & then returned to his hold. 
                     Oxhites
valley, where the Sacred Serpent had
his caue, before which there ſtood an
Altar vpon the which their charmes
forced him now and then to ſhew himſelfe.
Hard by were the caues of the
Caianiſts, (and that is hard by hell they
ſay) and here they kept Caines Batte, and
Iudas his halter, as holie and reuerend

reliques. Vpon the banke of the riuer
Higri, you ſhall finde theTheſe would drinke no wine, but held it to bee brought forth by Satan and the earth Auguſt de Hereſ.
                      Seuerians
diſh hung vp by a chaine at a piller,
the diſh out of which thoſe obſtinate
men did whilom drinke their water.
                  By this riuer alſo are theThey held marriage to bee as bad as fornication, & therefore vſed little beds and leſſe tables for they eate no fleſh. Aug. ibid.
                      Tacians,
little cabbins, and leſſer tables, and here
and there by theThey pricked little infants vvith kniues and of the bloud and meale, they made themſelues communion cakes. Aug. ib.
                      Montaniſts fatall
cakes, all ſcattred about: Here alſo are
to bee ſeene theThey held it good ſeruice vnto God to geld both themſelues and ſtrangers valeſians pumy
ſtones, theThey affirmed that all plants had ſence, and therefore they would neuer cut vp any thornes or briers, &c. Manichees thorny gardens,
theTheſe did very continually, it was incredible (ſaith Auguſt.) to heare them, they were alſo called Euchites.
                      Pſallians oratories, theThoſe held that the deuill ereated the fleſh: and therefore they did ſo hate it, that many of them killed themſelues. Patricians gallowes, theWho called themſelues new veſſells filled with new wine, and bare a barrell about, in their Bacchanalles. Aſcites vaſſells,
theSo called of 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         and 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        : they ſtopt their mouthes & noles with their fingers, and ſo profeſſed ſilence. Aug. calleth them Dac
                              •
                           ylorenchites.
                      Patrolorinchites ſtatues of
Silence, theThey offred water in the ſacrament, inſteed of wine. Aquarians cuppes, and
all the monuments of antique hereſies.
                  But of all thoſe glorious buildings of
antiquity,This fellow held that all hereſies were true doctrine Philaſter.
                      Rhetorius his pallace
doth iuſtly deſerue the prick and praiſe:

it beareth the faſhion of all the other,
and yet ſeemes neuertheleſſe to haue
a perticular one of the owne.
                  There are ſtanding yet ſome of the
They neuer vſed their wiues carnally, and yet would not liue without them, ſo that they made w
                           ••
                        ing choiſe of their neighbours children to inherite their eſtates. Aug. ibi.
                      Abelians walls, thoſe that continuallie
adopted other mens Children,
and vſed to glorie of the pedegrees and
ſtatues of ſuch as were none of their
owne fathers.
                  Here is one new cittie, built by acouple
of damned vagabonds,The two founders of Anabaptiſme, or the Family of loue.
                      
                     Henrie
Nicholas, and Dauid George: and here
alſo haue certaineCertaine Engliſh Browniſts, exiled into Virginia.
                      Virginian exiles
laid a plot for to erect themſelues a bodie
politique. O all you earthly Potentates,
that know the contagious nature
of hereſie, and loue to haue your
ſtates ſecured from ſo dangerous an infection,
baniſh thoſe damnable perturbers
of holie peace, vnto this country,
and let them take vppe their ſtations
here where they can doe no great miſchiefe.
               
            
            
               
               The ſtate politique of Fooliana,
in generall.
CHAP. 9.
               THe cities of this whole land are either
vnder an Ariſtocraticall gouernment,
or a Democraticall. The
people chooſe as many Burguemaiſters
as they thinke good of: and theſe muſt
rule, but neither for their yeare, nor
their liues, but euen while the people
pleaſe. If any man of them giue any
proofe of ſomewhat more ſound iudgement
then the reſt, hee is preſently put
out of office, and baniſhed by Oſtraciſme
                     •
                  .
But all theſe Prouinces do acknowledge
one Grand ſuperior, & doe fealty
to one chiefe Prince, whoſe name
when I was in thoſe parts, was Ill Buffonio
Ottimo Maſsimo. His palace is in
Fooliana the Fatte, neere vnto the
Deuout, and beares theThe chamber where the pope is elected. name of
Papagalli. Hee is as it were a compound
of an Emperour and a Prieſt,

wearing a crowne vpon a miter, or a miter
in a crowne. There is euer borne before
him a key and a ſword, the ancient
emblemes of Ritches & Power. His Key
ſheweth that all the Foolianders coffers
are at his command: his ſword, that hee
may at his owne pleaſure both take
from others, and defend his owne. All
that come into his preſence muſt kiſſe
his foote, by an ancient cuſtome, begun
at firſt by certaine Kings (long agoe)
that were troubled with ſores and apoſtemes
on their hands. Hee is not borne
but choſen to this dignity, yet not before
hee bee very olde, leaſt the people
ſhould bee a weary of him (as they are
wondrous prone to innouation) ere he
were a weary of life. Before Saint Sapa's
chappell are two ſeates of Porphiry,
wherein hee that is to bee elected muſt
paſſe a triall of his Rems and his Res, ere
he bee inſtalled. Hee ſeldome rides but
vpon mens ſhoulders, to ſhew that men
in reſpect of him are but as beaſts in reſpect
of men. He ſittes alway, and goeth
abroad alwayes vnder a canopy: tuſh,

theſe are things that others may do alſo
as well as he: let vs here ſome of his ſingularities,
beyond all others you ſhall.
He neuer askes peny tribute of any ſubiect
he hath, but what they giue willingly,
he takes thankfully and ſpends freely.
He decrees nothing againſt the conſent
of the meaneſt counſellor in his ſtate. He
makes no lawes, nor keepes any: nor
doth he promulgate any decree of continuance,
but once within two yeares it
is quite out of vſe. He vſeth his ſeruants,
(yea euen his ſlaues) with much familiaritie,
and when hee liſt can lift them vp
aboue the beſt man in his court. Hee allowes
his Paraſites to doe euen what
themſelues thinke good, to breake lawes,
to counterfeit coines, or to diſperſe money
ſtamped with their owne names and
faces. I might haue learnt much more
matter in this court worthy obſeruation,
but that I do not loue of all things in
the world, to tarry in court longer then
needs muſt: No, I was neuer good courtier,
nor (I hope) euer ſhall be.
            
            Finis lib. 3.
         
         
            
            The fourth Booke.
            The deſcription of Theeue-ingen.
            
               CHAP. 1. Of the ſituation thereof.
               
                  
                     THeeuingen
                  A word compounded of Theue, in Engliſh, and Ingenium in Latine. is bounded
on the Weſt with
the ſtraite of Magellanus,
and on the Eaſt,
with Fooliana the deuout
& part of Tenter-belly.
It is a ſoile ſo vtterly
voide of fertility (excepting one little
country that Pluto might rather ſeeme
to haue ſtolne Ceres daughter frō hence
then from Sicily. Nor ſhepheard, nor
husbandman ſhall yee finde here, would
yee ſeeke your heart out: yet is it not
ſtrange that this barren country ſhould
neuer-the-leſſe haue ſuch aboundance
of all neceſſaries, maye and ſuperfluities
alſo, that it may challenge all
the world in a prize of wealth, and
(as farre as their naturall fierceneſſe

permitteth) of delicacy too? Take it
from me (quoth Hieremy Ratcliffe) they
may; there is no rariety, nor excellent
thing of worth in all the world, but they
will haue it, by hooke or by crooke, and
if they once get it, yee ſhall ſooner get
a fart from a dead man, then fetch it
back out of their clouches. The Eaſterne
part is enritched by the ſpoiles of the
two Fooliana's, the Fatte, and the Deuout:
the Weſterne, by the treaſures of India,
together with the Spaniards, Caricks and
As the Spaniard called one of their great Caricks, which ſi
                        •
                      
                     Francis Drake tooke. Her name (quoth he) was Caca fuego ſhite-fire before, but now ſhe may be called Caca plata, that is, ſhite-ſiluer. 
                  Cacaplataes, for they are the notableſt
Pyrates of the whole terreſtriall Globe.
Aſſambeg of Alexandria, Barbaroſſa,
Captaine Warde, and Yagup Hemskerk;
tuſh theſe were all meere Adalantadoes
of Herring-boates, in reſpect of the Piraticall
ſpirits this climate affords: I ſay
it and I will ſtand vnto it.
               The whole countrie is deuided into
two Signiories:As there are two ſpecies of this trade, the euery and couſinage 
                  Robberſ-waldt and
Lieger demaine: the firſt of which butts
vpon Fooliana and an angle of Tenterbelly:
the latter lyeth more Weſt, and
(againſt all cuſtome of the other Theeuingers,

the wandring Robber ſwalders)
keepes it ſelfe in the owne bounds: but
both of them are barbarous and vtterly
inhoſpitable.
            
            
               The conditions of the Robberſ-walders.
CHAP. 2.
               
                  RObberſwaldt is diuided from the two
Foolianaes, by the Fennes, vſually called
Filtching-fennes, wherein there are
more Ilands, or full as many, as is in the
riuer Rawley of Guiana, made by the
turnings of the water. The whole region
is ſo woody and mountainous, that
it ſeemes rather a deſart then a place inhabited:
and (as Strabo ſaith of a cittie
in the world) is to be held fitter for rebellion
then habitation. TheirOf this language there is an excellent exact diſcouerie made in Thomas Deckers Bellman, but in his Lanthorne and Candle-light, he hath outſtript all the world for variety of knowledge in Canting. language
is very crabbed, I could not poſſibly
learne it; onely I obſerued ſome
Welſh words, taught them as it ſeemes
by ſome ancient trauellers of our Weſterne
Brittons. This Signiorie is indifferent
well peopled, but vnder no forme

of rule: each man holds himſelfe borne
onely for himſelfe, and ſo liueth obeying
and reſpecting himſelfe onely. What he
can bereaue another of (by any violence
whatſoeuer) is forth-with his owne, as
good and lawfull prize: and the more
powerfull he growes, the more he is feared,
and is attended by the more vnderſharkers
that are his followers: they liue
all in certaine families, all which giue due
obedience to the father of the houſhold
and euery one forbeares his own bloud,
and robs where he can beſides, freely &
without controll Both the Fooliana's had
by theſe ſharkers bin long ſince eaten vp,
but that the inhabitants are faine to pay
yearely a great ſum of money, for their
protection all the yeare after. This ranſome
(for a kind of ranſome it is) is paid
by the principals of Fooliana, vnto the
chiefe houſholders of Robberſwaldt.
               
               In bodily ſhape they are like vnto vs,
ſauing that all but the Ilanders, haue
clawes vpo their hands inſteed of nailes:
and this is not onely naturall vnto all the
Robberſwalders, but euen to the Lieger dumaniſts
                  
alſo. Vpon the mountaines of
this ſoile there breedeth a kinde of people
called the Sbanditi, and theſe are eſpeciall
keepers of Booty-forrest (a frith
ſo called) which is of that breadth, that
that ſame High Dutch Hercynian Sherewood,
put Schwarizwaldt, Odenwaldt, Steigerwaldt, Weſterwaldt,
Behemerwaldt, waldt quoth you? nay
put all the waldts, welts and gards in
Europe to it: I tell yee, let one word
ſuffice, they all make but a dayes iourney
for an Iriſh Lowſe, (bee ſhee neuer
ſo ſpeedie) if you meaſure it
with this.
               No, I will bee as good as my word,
and iuſtifie, that if Hercynia keepe ten
thouſand theeues (as lightlie it doth
alwayes,) Booty-forrest ſhall keepe a
thouſand thouſand: Baw waw! Hercynia?
why 'tis a blanket for a Catte,
a petty Cock-pitte, nay a very Tobaccoboxe
in reſpect of Booty-forrest.
               
               In this country, you ſhall not find any
man of ſtate but he keeps a fort: yes verily,
all garriſon ſoldiars: neither are their

fortreſſes any way beautifull, but they
are moſt iudiciouſly contriued, both for
defence and purueyance: and here, they
that liue within keepe all that they purloyne
without (and that is no ſmall
prize) maugre the beard of haughtie
Zulzemin. No, they are no Shitilecocks!
what they haue theile hold, they are in
place, & what's a mans place if hee make
no vſe of it? Now in the meane while
the poore commonalty vntruſſe their
ſtates and their Port-manuels vnder
trees, and lay their noddles cloſe to the
ſtumpe of ſome ancient Oke; Sic fuit ab
initio (quoth the Gentleman to the
Chandlers ſonne) ſo did your fore-fathers
(my maiſters) be you neuer ſo topheauie
now, and ſo do theſe honeſt lads,
theſe true Tartarians, that neuer keepe
one manſion eight and forty houres.
But alas! would this were all: but I muſt
needes goe on. Theſe plaine ſeeming
Villiacoes delight in nothing but to lye in
waite to make prize of poore paſſengers,
and when they catch them, they
ſtrippe them ſtarke naked: they will not

leaue them a tatter to ſerue for a curtaine
to the worlds propagatour; yet will
they not murther, as the damned, ſouleleſſe,
fiend-bred, hell-borne Italian
theeues do, & thoſe durty, gut-ſwolne,
toad-ſprung Germaines, (they haue no
cauſe indeed, for their fact is not lyable
to the lawe) but him that they vnhuske,
they doe preſently binde, and carry in
ſtate vnto their Dukes court, vnto
whom hee muſt ſweare perpetuall obedience
and loyaltie: which if hee breake
either in running his countrie, or in omitting
to practiſe Pourloynerie once or
twiſe in a moneth, hee is forthwith condemned
to commence atTiborne was built for him, as ſome ſay. 
                  Doctor Stories
cappe: truſted he ſhall be no more,
but once truſt vp for all: this law maketh
them maruailous mighty: and againe,
the Legerdumaniſts of late enacted
this decree, That no yonger brother
ſhall haue any ſhare in the fathers land, and
this law hath added a great multitude of
voluntaries vnto Robberſ-waldt, as cannot
but appeare to the politique, and him
that can ponder it. The deuout Foolianders
                  
(as I ſaid before) loue croſſes: well they
cannot loue them ſo much as theſe hate
them. So that though their tribute aſſure
them quiet at home, yet if they bee
ouer-taken in Robberſwaldt, farewell Fooliander,
vp they goe as round as a Iuglers
boxe: and the onely cauſe is, they
vſe to mock the Robberſwalders, by making
Iybbets at them with their fingers.
               The maine houſholders are continually
at diſſention and ciuill warres amongſt
themſelues, about iniurious
booties, forced from one another: and
by my faith ſir, the whole world fares
the better by it: for ſhould theſe rogiſh
improouers once lay their heads together
againſt our world, we might put vp
our pipes, the caſe is be-ſhitt, and go caſt
our capps at the Moone, for any ſtate
that we ſhould holde long: O ſir, vnderſtand
me, the caſe is plaine, we were ſure
of ruine I grant ye that: and ſo were all
that could not ſtand in defence againſt
them: but the wiſer ſort of them-ſelues
preuent that, by nouſling priuate diſſentions
at home.
               
                  
It is a great commendation of towardneſſe
in their children (asDe bello Galiico. lib. 6. 
                  Caeſar ſaid of
the Germaines) to bee cunning filtchers,
in their young yeares: for this arte they
teach them euen from their infancies, in
precepts which they call Hermeticall: ye
ſhall haue the little theeuelings, euen
while they ſuck their mothers breſts, to
ſteale needles & pence from out of their
purſes: but if they either ouer-ſhoote
themſelues, & be taken in the maner, by
being either too ſlowe handed, or too
boiſterous, vp goes their bums incontinent:
Now as they grow to yeares, ſo
muſt they augment their practiſe, by
ſtealing of Geeſe, Ducks, or any ſuch like
prouant: nor doth any day paſſe them
wherein they do not increaſe their ſtock
by one lift or other. If their plot chance
to haue any dangerous induction about
it, then do they content themſelues with
As the Welch man ſtole Ruſhes, onely to keep his hand in vre. ſtealing a clod from your neighbors
land, or a ſtake from his hedge, leaſt their
hands ſhould grow out of vſe: this is the
ordinary practiſe of y• borderers of Liegerdumaine:
betweene it & Robberſwaldt
                  
lieth a large heath called (e) Lyerſ-buy
plaine, of which you ſhall heare more
here-after, when we haue paſſed the maritimall
coaſts of Robberſwalat.
               
            
            
               The Pyrates, and ſea-borderers
of Robberſ-waldt.
CHAP. 3.
               THeſe Pirates diſperſe themſelues all
along the ſhores of Magellanus his
ſtraite, on the bankes of Theeuingen, and
in the Iles of Filtching-fennes. Now they
know that no ſhip that paſſeth the ſtraite
can poſſibly returne back, the current is
ſo ſwift, and therefore they ſtoppe the
paſſage with chaines and ſhallops, and
ſo make prize of all that ſhould paſſe:
whereby they that goe this voyage, doe
ſeldome or neuer returne, more by reaſon
of the multitude of theſe Pyrates,
then ye ſtrength of the oppoſed ſtreame.
Europe affoords not any ſea-man that
knowes his bayes, creekes, tides, ſhelfes,
rockes and channells better then theſe

doe generally: beſides that they ſwim
as nimbly and as perfectly as the fiſhes
themſelues doe. Their chiefe hauen
is called
                     Not Dun kirke. 
                  Kirk-dun, a towne of no
great ſtrength, nor compaſſe: but fraught
with as hardie Pirates as Chriſtendome
affordes, and with as great ſtore of ſtolne
ritches. It is ſituate in that angle of Robberſwaldt
that lyeth iuſt vpon the head
of Filtching-fennes, ouer-againſt a part
of Tenter-belly. The ſhores here-abouts,
as it is reported, are all ledged with
Rocks of the Loade-ſtone, which drawe
the ſhips vnto theſe coaſts, that are an
incredible diſtance off, and heere they
hold them. But the Kirk-duners that
ſayle out into the maine, and fetch in
the merchants, they gette the caſh. And
ſtrange it is to ſee how many purchaſes
their bolde valour hath borne from
ſtrengths ſome-times trebbling theirs:
ſome aſcribe this vnto the Magicall
Enſignes they haue from Fooliana, let
the reader chooſe whether hee will beleeue
them or no. The Citties armes, is
the vulture, that feedes as ſhee flyes:

the word, Fruor nec quieſco: Ritch and
yet reſtleſſe: Mantled, Geules; doubled,
ermines.
               A little within the mouth of the riuer
Filtching, is there another towne, called
Port van Berghen, the Queene and Lady
of all thoſe Iles and waters: it taketh
tribute of all veſſells that paſſe that
way whatſoeuer, they cannot paſſe ere
they paye: and beſides, it layeth out
great hookes with loade-ſtones vpon
them, where-with it angleth for ſhipps,
iuſt as wee doe for Pikes, Troutes, and
other fiſhes: and where it once ſeazeth,
there keepeth it ſure hold. In theſe fens,
and in this broade riuer, filled all with
Iles, youNo more then the Egiptian Pyrates had in Heliodorus. lib. 1. ſhall not finde one cottage,
nor one boate: partly in that the people
doe chooſe rather to make themſelues
and their families neſts in Reeds (which
growe heere in a farre larger ſize then
thoſe of India,) and partly becauſe they
are commixt with the Foolianders (lying
one ſo neere another) whereof there is
none but had rather ſwim then ſayle:
ſo that they are ſo perfect in that arte,

that like to the Crocodiles, they liue as
much in the water as in the land, and
mooue as ſwiftly as the ſwifted whirry.
And of theſe doe the Nauigators ſtand
more in feare, then of the other Pyrates,
by much: for theſe come ſuddenly vpon
them, and many of them clap to them
to the ſhip at once, ſtay her as faſt as if a
Remora ſtuck to her keele: and then they
tumble her with the bottome vpwards
and ſinke her, or traile her to a rock, and
there wrack her.
            
            
               How the Author got into this country:
Of the Harpies.
CHAP. 4.
               BVt the reader may well maruell how
I came to learne thus much: and
make a queſtion whether any man (that
were wiſe) would expoſe himſelfe to
ſuch a barbarous nations curteſie: well
ſir I preuented all that. Vnderſtand, that
the Foolianders (the deuout I meane) and
theſe people hold a Iubylee both together,
euery fiftie yeare: during the

which yeare, they are at peace with all
the world, & all men are free from feare
of the rankeſt theefe that breathes. At
theſe times doe men come hether from
all parts of this continent: yet at their
comming they do giue ſuch gifts to the
inhabitants, that this one yeares peace is
more profitable vnto them, then foure
yeares filching. Now it was my chance
to light here vpon this very yeare: and
ſo I and my fellow trauellers had the better
meanes to take an exact view of the
country. Onely we were in ſome feare of
the Harpies, as we trauelled: our gold got
no peace at their hands. They are (by my
troth I know not what; either fowles or
diuels) & haue kept here (by report) euer
ſince (Zethes & Calais chaſed them out of
Europe: they build their neſts with ſtrong
beames, laying them a thwart ouer the
forked armes of huge growne trees: they
are faced like owles, backt & bodied like
Eſtridges, fethered like Porcupines,
beakt and pounced like Eagles. Truely
they made me remember the birds that
(asAriſtot lib. de mirabi. lib. one writeth) do keepe in the Diomedaean
                  
Iles, which would ſawne vpon
vpon the Greekes, and flie at the faces of
all men beſides: Iuſt ſo did the Harpyes
vſe vs that were ſtangers; they would
not touch an inhabitant, but were as familiar
with them as tame Pidgeons; but
when any of vs came neere them, they
would flie vpon vs like fiends: nor can
any man paſſe Booty Foreſt, but they teare
him all to peeces, vnleſſe hee haue aSo doe the Turkes cal the from Cayro to Ormus, and the other po
                        •
                     ts of their traffique.
                  Carauan, of Robberſwalders for his conuoie.
            
            
               Of Lyerſ-bury plaine. The natures of the Legerdumaynians.
Of Free-purlogne, and
Baggſ-death, two Citties.
CHAP. 5.
               NOw I come againe to Lyerſ-burie
plaine, which lieth vpon the Eaſterne
verges of Robberſwaldt and Legerdumayne:
beeingAs the way by the croſſe was in Camden. I am free Marchant as paſſengers may ken, to Scots, to Brittaines, and to Engliſhmen.
                   a free march vnto
them both, there is a riuer runs thorow
the midſt of it, calledFor a lier muſt haue a good memory. 
                  memento, which
parts the whole plaine into two: and on
this riuer, are diuers of the Liegerdumaynians
                  
townes of garriſons ſeated. I am
far miſtaken if I ſaw not her ſome olde
monuments of Pliny, and Herodotus, in
this very dale. Mercurius Gallobelgicus,
has built himſelfe a delicate houſe in
the country: and there is a certaineIf he doe meane Baroniu
                           •
                        
                      hee is not farre amiſſe, many ſuppoſe.
                  Cardinall (an Hiſtorian) that hath layd
the foundations of a mighty and ſpacious
caſtle in theſe quarters. For euer
ſince Spaine got the conqueſt of thoſe
Indies that ioyne vpon this land, the
Liegerdumanians haue giuen leaue to the
Ieſuites (thoſe buſy-bauds, that muſt
ſcald their lips in the whole worlds pottage)
to viſite, and to inhabite this land,
which the Robberſwalders irruptions
had otherwiſe vtterly diſpeopled. Here
are many Aſtrology ſchooles, whoſe
profeſſors are more in fauour with the
Liegerdumanians, then any other artiſts
whatſoeuer, excepting poets & lawiers.
In this very place, did I (better confeſſe
here then in a worſe place) ſet vp a
ſchoole my ſelfe, and read the lecture of
ſpying maruells in the heauens vrinall
as methodically as any Star-gazer a
                     •
                   thē
                  
all: I had my Ptolomy, my Guido Bonatus,
my Bencorat, my Zahel, my Meſſahalach,
my Albohali, my Hali Aben Razehell, al at
an inch: and by their preſcriptions
wroteRight, for this is but a diſcouery of Mundus altered et idem.
                   an infallible prognoſtication of
theſe preſent times. Theſe Liegerdumaynians
are far more ſociable (at leaſt more
circumſpect & ſecret in their villanies)
then the Robberſwalders; for that which
theſe doe in publike, the Leigerdumaynians
doe very cloſely: liuing vnder a law,
& a Prince alſo, called (as I heard) by the
name of Tiberiodi Goldē-gripi: who keepeth
ſtate in Free-purloine, a delicate citty
in the very inmoſt edge of Lyerſ-burie
plaine: they neuer ſtir abroad on the day
time, but effect all their buſineſſe in the
night: they hate the ſunne and loue the
moone, both with ye extreameſt of affection.
The trees of this ſoile are naturally
ſo viſcous, y• no bird can light in them
but ſhe is preſently taken. The greateſt
town of trafike in al this tract, is Baggeſ-death
otherwiſe calledOf Bo
                           •
                        ſa vvhich is in Spaniſh, a purſe; and Seco, in Latine to cut: H
                           •
                        er
                           •
                        
                        nimus B
                           ••
                        ſecus, that ſame rare raskall that wrote the liues of Caluine and Beza, was the founder of this city. 
                  Bolſeco, wherein
there are two ſtreetes, Tongue-ſtreet, and
Pawnſ-brooke, which two in my iudgment

exceed all the ſtreetes of any one citty
in the world, for largeneſſe, for buildings.
Tongueſtreete is the Rendeuous of
all the lawiers, and Cauſe-mongers:
Pawnes-brooke, of the vſurers, brokers,
and taylers.
               And ſurely there is no nation vnder
heauen ſo ſtored with lawiers as this is:
who (asIn Paenulo. 
                  Plautus ſaith of one) if they
wante meanes of contention, play the
ſeed-men, and ſow them themſelues.
Our Weſtminſter, lay all the Innes of
Court, and Chancery to it, is but a very
Katherines hall, to the vtter Temple of
this ſtreete: and yet, though their number
do daily increaſe, it is held notwithſtanding
by the beſt politicians of the
land, that they cannot continue. For
when they haue lickt vp all the whole
country (as they haue almoſt done already)
they muſt needs lacke clyents, and ſo
for want of emploiment goe to law one
with another, & by that meanes diſperſe
their euill gotten goods amongſt the
cōmunalty againe, to leaue their poſterity
the means of more gainefull trading.

The lawiers men are all ſuted inAs the vniuerſity ſhew makers do vſually ſute their paraſites. party
coloured liueries; to ſignifie that their
maiſters are ready to take fees on either
ſide. Now as for their emploiment, the
vſurers doe make them the moſt of it,
togither with the violent riuer Fraude,
which running amongſt theOtherwiſe called th
                        •
                      
                     Strophades, of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , to wreſt or turne, thoſe Quirkneyes are ſomewhat like our orkeneyes, for ſituation, but not not for condition. 
                  Quirkney
Iles, eateth one peece away here, and
caſteth it vp, there; and afterward waſheth
it from thence, and laies it in a third
place; changing his courſe now and
then, and taking away one mans whole
inheritance, to giue it vnto another, this
it is that makes worke for the lawiers.
               The Inhabitants are moſt of them (as
the High-land men of the Alpes are)
troubled with Chowles vnder their
chins, called the
                     Demoſthenes his diſeaſe. It raignes here in England, at ſome ſeaſons of the yeare, very powerfully, God knowes, and to the wrack of many an vpright cauſe. Meliora Deus.
                   
                  Mony-chokes; a malady
ſo ordinary amongſt them that they neither
care for curing it nor couering it.
But here is a ſtrange worke of nature:
their skinnes doe naturally attract gold
and ſiluer, with as powrefull a ſtrength,
as the loadeſtone draweth ſteele, and
holds it as faſt: a thing that was neuer
ſeene elſewhere, and therefore the

worthier of record. Pawneſ-brooke is peopled
with all ſorts of artificers: Yet they
open no ſhops: but euery one attends
the paſſengers at his owne dore with
what lack yee Gentlemen, & then if he get a
chapman, hee leads him in, and ſhewes
him his wares in priuate.Clauius Chryſopaeiae. lib. 1. &c. One will
ſhew yee a chaine cruſted offer with
thin plates of gold; and ſweare, that
India nor Arabia did euer afford purer
mettall. Another cheares yee with a
counterfeite Musk-cod: a third with
pearles, ſo rarelie adulterate both for
The fiue true trialls of the goodneſſe of pearles. Plin.
                   weight, faſhion, cleareneſſe, ſmoothneſſe
and biggeneſſe, that you cannot
diſcerne them from true ones: and
then hee will ſhew yee the ſhells wherein
they grew. And here yee ſhall haue
your Lapidaries, with gemmes of all
ſortes, able to delude any eye in the
world: the Cyprian Dyamond, the Corynthian
Hepheſtiles, the Sicilian Agat,
the Aegiptian Galactites, the Arabian
Asbeſt, the Macedonian Paeanites, the
Aſian Alabandine, the Indian Berill, the
Engliſh Ieat, the Perſian Eagle-ſtone, the

African Chalcedon, the Scithian Smaragde,
the Germaine Corneil, the Aethiopian
Chryſolite, the Lybian Carbuncle;
here they are all; al ſingularly forged.
Apothecaries there are alſo here in great
abundance, and theſe do nothing but ſophiſticate
receites with their Succedanea,
& their quid pro quo: It would aske a great
volum to make a perticular diſcouery of
their deceites. But one thing I am amazed
at, & grieue at their ſucceſſe herein,
they are neuer takē in their falſifications,
be they neuer ſo groſſe: nor do they feare
any trial of their forgeries, but only that
of the fire. When they are tript, they are
puniſhed with al ſeuerity: but they haue
this preuention for that: they can change
their ſhapes, voices, trades & habits, vpō
an inſtant, ſo cunningly, that he doth but
waſh an Ethiop that ſeeketh for him to
day that couzend him yeſterday. There
is a famous ſchoole in the ſuburbes,
where art Spagirike (pardon me you Alchymiſts,
or blame your ſelues, that haue
giuen falſhood ſo good a name) is read
vnto the youth of the city.
               
                  
And here they haue a booke which they
hold as holy as the Turkes do their Alcaron,
it is called, The Hiſtory of Mercury,
(a booke vnknowne to vs) wherein is
related, how he in his infancy ſtole Neptunes
mace, Mars his ſword, Phaebus his
bow and ſhafts; Vulcans tongues, and
Venus her girdle: and how hee proloind
Ioues thunder, being as then ſo young as
it ſeemedLucian. hee had learnt the art of
filtching in his mothers belly. It conteyned
furthermore, all the documents
of deceite and couſenage whatſoeuer.
Teaching the ſtudent of it how to picke
lockes, how to draw latches, how to
treade without noiſe, how to angle in a
lockt cheſt with a twined thred: how to
him the pence and neuer touch the
purſe: how to forſweare an ill deede
without bluſhing & a thouſand ſuch ſecrets
that I might haue learned but that
I cared not for their art Caballiſt. But of
all of them, the Inkeepers are the knaues
Rampant: ſo faithleſſe, that the traueller
dares neither truſt his purſe vnder his
pillow, nor in any Iron casket whatſoeuer,

but muſt bee faine (asIoſep. de Bello Iudaico. the
Iewes did, beeing beſieged) to engorge
his gold for all the night, and ſeeke it
in his cloſe-ſtoole the next morning, it
would bee gone elſe euery Quart d'eſcu.
The villages are inhabited with none
butThe two Emblemes of the euerie. 
                  Millers and Taylers, and vnleſſe
you happe here and there to finde ſome
ſtragling Gypſies.
               
            
            
               Of Lurtch-wit, a County in Legerdumaine.
CHAP. 6.
               
                  LVrtch-witte a large County, lieth
on the weſt of this Leigerdumaine,
wherein is the cittie Rigattiera, new repaired:
nere vnto which is mountScapula ſtole his Greek Lexicon, from Steuens, and yet durſt avow this. Hoc ego contendo Lexiconeſſe vovum. 
                  Scapula,
a very high hill. A Poet that is a
Critique may here finde many ancient
monuments. One ſtone I ſaw here
whereon were engrauen certain Greeke
verſes,Iuſtin. Marter in Protreptico ad Gentes, and Canter. var. Lect. P. 1. c. 3. ſtolne by Homere from Orpheus
and Muſaeus. From Orpheus,
theſe.Hom. Iliad. p.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                  
And from Muſaeus this.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               I found alſo many of Virgils vpon another
ſtone, which the inhabitants ſaid
he had hought of by ye knees out of Homer
and Heſiod. Here were alſo ſome of
Petrarchs, nimd from another
                     D
                           •
                        nte, or meſſier C
                           •
                        no, or Sen
                           •
                        ccio, or ſome of thoſe times. 
                  Tuſcane
Poet: and many other ſuch like
monuments. On the South part, lieth
It is inhabited with none but Purſuiuants, and Benefice-bar
                     
                        •
                     erers. 
                  Rapineux, a plaine all full of rubbiſh
and ruines, which ſhew that there hath
beene many cities there: but they were
all pulled down long ago, to build thoſe
two magnificent piles, Penny-patron, and
Chaffer-kirke: ſo that you ſhall ſee in this
country, many old Churches turned into
ſtables, ſtreetes into paſtures, and
ſteeples into priuies. Beſides this, the
riuer Fraude doth continually teare away
one peece or other from this part
of the country, and laieth it either on the
marſhes of Lurtch-wit, orOtherwiſe called, Neuer-enough.
                   
                  Stille-more.
               
            
            
               
               Of Still-more. CHAP. 7.
               THis Prouince is in the hands of a
monſtrous kinde of men, ſuch as you
ſee pictured in Munſter and Maundeuill,
with heads like hogges. They go alwaies
vpon their hands and knees, leaſt they
ſhould otherwiſe miſſe any thing as
they paſſe along the ſtreetes, that were
worth the taking vp. Their voice is a
kinde of grunting, nor haue they other
ſpeach. None may dwell amongſt them,
but
                     Couetice is called the old mans euill. old folkes. Their youth they doe
ſpend in Booty-forrest (if they be valiant)
or elſe in Bagſ-death Schooles: the inhabitants
are all husbandmen, marchants,
and mettall-mongers. They do eat earth
(asGeſner. de Quadruped. the Wolfe doth when hee is to
go to fight) almoſt continually: yet ſome
there are that eate nothing at all; but
liue vpon the ſight onely of gold and ſiluer.
They neuer ſleepe but with their
eyes open; herein onelyIdem ibid. reſembling
the Lyon.
               They ſerue a God whom they call
Quadagno, with al ſuperſtitious reuerēce:

they neuer goe to their reſt but when
they haue ſeene him: nor doe they eate
but in his preſence.
               Touching the citties of this Prouince,
there is Swine-borow, a filthy towne, a
very ſtincking heape: but then is there
Gatherington
                  Ritcher then Amſterdam for all that it is called the Low-countries ſtore-houſe. 
                  Hoord-ſterdam, and Lockadolid,
all handſomly built things, marry
I could not come to view them within:
by reaſon that euery particular citizen
in all theſe places hath a priuate key for
the gates, to lock at his going in & out,
ſo that by this meanes they preuent all
ſtrangers acceſſe. The reſidue of this nation
liue more like ſwine then men, in
the Ilands of Hoggſ-bourg and the Scrapiglias.
               
               Theſe men, townes, and manners, did I behold,
admire, and laugh at: and after 30.
yeares trauell, growing weary of wandring,
I returned into my natiue country.
               FINIS.
               
                  THE CAMBRIDGE
PILGRIME.
               
               
            
         
      
   