
      
         
            
            
            The diſplaying of the Proteſtantes, & ſondry their practiſes, with a deſcription of diuers their abuſes of late frequented. Newly imprinted agayne, and augmented, with a table in the ende, of all ſuche matter as is ſpecially contained within this volume.
            Made by Myles Huggarde ſeruant to the Quenes maieſtie.
            
               Anno. 1556.
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
         
            
            
               GO on good booke, God graunt that th
                     ••
                  .
               Suche frutefull fauour fynde,
               From readers eies, and hearers hartes,
               To banyſhe errors blynde.
            
            
               And as thy trothe, by trade and time,
               Is tried endles trewe,
               So truſt, thy playn apparant profe,
               Shall endles troth renewe.
            
            
               Though wreſting wittes or taunting tonges,
               Wyll ſeke the to deface,
               To fawting foles, or ſpitefull ſprites,
               Gyue neither eare nor place.
            
            
               For as offence to none is ment,
               So if offence do groo,
               The faute is theirs, the fruite is thyne,
               Sythe troth doth force it ſo.
            
            
               The maker myndes to mende eche mys,
               That talke and tyme hath bred,
               Of hereſies, and errors great,
               That fanſies late hath fed.
            
            
               Whiche ſo with witte and wyll haue wrought,
               As wronge hath wreſted right,
               From frutefull faieth, to fruteles wordes,
               And quenched vertue quyght.
            
            
               Belefe is brought to talke of tongue,
               Religion rackt amis,
               Open praier, lyplabour cald,
               Faſting folyſhe fondnes.
            
            
               
               Prelacy is popiſhe pompe,
               Vertuous vowes are vaine,
               Ceremonies curious toyes,
               Prieſthod popery plaine.
            
            
               Thus vice of vertue beareth brute,
               True faieth is fled awey,
               Preſuming pryde poſſeſſeth place,
               And fanſy conſcience key.
            
            
               No man beleued in his ſkill,
               Eche wight ſo wiſe doth ſeame,
               As bothe vnſkild, and eake vnlearnde,
               All learning yet will deame.
            
            
               O endles error of ſelfloue,
               Of ignoraunce the roote,
               Confounder of all faieth and grace,
               And bale in ſtede of boote.
            
            
               O wilfull wretched wyll,
               That workeſt endles woo,
               O arrogance and hereſy,
               That wreſteſt ſcripture ſoo,
            
            
               O hedles heapes of feruent ſprites,
               Why heat you ſo in hart?
               By ending flamme, to endles fyer,
               Both ſoules and bodies part.
            
            
               What ouerwening ſpirite,
               Doth puffe you in ſuche pryde,
               To thinke your ſelues more godly wyſe,
               Then all the worlde beſyde?
            
            
               
               What titles and what termes you vſe,
               It maketh moſte men ſmyle,
               Howe droncken in the lorde you are,
               How cloſely you begyle.
            
            
               You ſyſters and you brethren both▪
               
               Thus eche to others ſaieth,
               The lorde be prayſde, when fylthy luſt,
               Ye vſe with feling faieth▪
               
            
            
               And what is founde in all your deades,
               But fruites of lyberty
               Wynde, and wordes, wilfull workes,
               A maſe of myſery.
            
            
               Though in this booke, ſharpe ſenſe and wordes,
               May ſeme to ſome appeare,
               Remember that, longe feſtred ſores,
               Sharpe corſes doo requere▪
               
            
            
               And you that reade, nowe reade to learne,
               Come not with myndes prepard,
               To fynde out fautes, or fanſy fede▪
               
               Let all delites be bard.
            
            
               Thus wyſhing well, for whiche I wryte,
               This booke then written thus,
               For good mens gayne, for ill mens grief,
               An
                     •
                   truth for to dyſ
                     •
                  us▪
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ¶ To the moſte excellent and moſte vertuous ladye, and our woſte gracious ſoueraigne, Mary by the grace of God Quene of England, Spaigne, both Sicilies, Fraūce, Hieruſalem, and Irelande, Defendour of the faithe, Archeducheſſe of Auſtria, Ducheſſe of Millaine, Burgundie and Braband, Counteſſe of Haſpurge Flaunders and Tyrole. Your Maieſties moſte faiethfull, louinge and obedient ſeruaūt Myles Huggarde, wiſſheth all grace, long peace, quiet raygne from God the father, the ſonne, and the holy Ghoſte.
            
            
               
                  HAuing called too my remembrance my moſt drede ſoueraign the manyfolde miſeries, which by the iuſte plague of God dothe

nowe raigne amonge vs, thoccaſ
                  •
               
               ons whereof thoughe euerye man may trulye thinke his owne ſinnes to deſerue (as they doo in dede) yet other ſpecial cauſes there be, which prouoketh Goddes vengeaunce to light vpon vs: as cheifly infidelitie, wherby God is moſt hainouſly diſhonored, for the whiche wee are moſt iuſtlye puniſhed: and alſo our rebellious murmuring againſt our regalerulers, appointed of God to raigne ouer vs, to whome we owe our due allegiaūce. The puniſhmē
               tes of which offēces (beſide al other vices whiche dothe abondauntlye flowe amonge vs at this daye) God hathe moſt greuouſlye executed in the olde time, to the terroure of all traitours and riotous rebelles. As namely for rebellion, and m
                  •
               rmuring againſt the magiſtrates, Chor
                  •
               
               
Dathan, and Abyron, with manye hundrethes mo, may be examples. Whoſe terrible puniſhemntes the worlde dothe nowe litle regarde, nether fearing God nor man. And alſo where Chriſt curſed two great and notable cities for infidelitee, whiche was Chorazin, and Bethſaida giuinge them ouer to their own vanities for their faiethles behauoure: This curſe alſoo is cleane forgot amōge vs, which appeareth by the infidelitee nowe raininge. But god hath not forgot to plague vs for it, yet mercifullye, and not to our deſertes▪ This I ſaie, moſt noble Queene, hath moued me with the aſſiſtence of my frēde to make this litle worke (moore profitable in matter, then pleaſaunte in ſtile, for lacke of eloquence) this moued me, I ſaie, as I can to diſplaie and

opē the horrible inormities of the proteſtantes. Whoſe murmuringe againſt their magiſtrates may well match the rebelious Iſraelites, & in their infidelitee the curſed cities of Iurye condemned by the mouth of Chriſt. Whiche ennormities to remoue, ſo much as lieth in me by the helpe of Goddes grace, though not in thoſe whiche are peruerſe in opinion, yet I truſt thoſe that be wauering ſhal heare iuſte cauſe to diſcredit them, and to abhorre their deteſtable factions, and alſo conſtant catholikes better confirmed in faieth and good liuinge. Whiche thing to that ende being finiſhed, my dutie being conſidered in this behalfe, I am thus bold to trouble your highneſſe with this li
                  •
               le volume, which beyng before this tyme imprinted, althouh not in ſuche perfection as

the ſame is at this preſent, hauyng called ſith the firſt edicion, the ayde of my frende, and therfore thought it more mete the dedication vnto your maieſtie, moſte humbly beſechyng the ſame to pardon this my rude enterpriſe, praying our LORDE GOD in whoſe handes are the heartes of all kynges, longe to preſerue the kinges maieſtie. And graunt vnto his highnes a ſafe retourne to bothe your noble heartes deſires, and comforte of both your maieſties realmes, and alſo preſerue your grace in long proſperitie to the diſcomfiture of all youre highnes enemies Amen.
            
               Your hyghnes faiethfull and obedient ſeruaunt.
Myles Huggarde.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The prologue to the reader.
            
               IT is commōly ſeen that they which with preceptes and rules doo directe others, and ſeme therein to excell, becauſe thei ſuppoſe thei can not be corrected, do eyther much good, ouer whome they haue the gouernement, or els to ye ſame thei cōferre great damage, they themſelues not eſcapinge without infamy. In lyke maner, our late elders and miniſters (for ſo they termed themſelues) if with the holſome erudition of Goddes vndouted truthe, and with the admouiciōs and perſwaſions of the goſpel, they had applied the ſame to the correction of lyfe, and amendement of the conuerſation of them, ouer whome they toke vpon thē the charge, no doubte they had doone muche good too the common welthe, and to the reformacion of mans corrupt nature. But vſing themſelues cleane contrary, that is to ſaie, neyther vſinge gods truth as it ought to be, but

rather abuſyng the ſame, neither in their attemptes eſtabliſhed an vniforme religion, nor yet perſwaded correction of lyfe. They haue brought this publike ſtate of Englande into great detriment and myſery, as lamentable experience to our great ſmarte declareth. And becauſe (moſte frendly reader,) thou maieſt perceiue partely, with what vile doctrine a great parte of this realme hath been allured, and with what peſtilent perſwaſions men haue bene ledde, and partely with what deteſtable vices, and horrible abuſes the ſcholemaiſters thēſelues haue bene infected: This preſente volume, entituled The diſplaying of the proteſtantes, is compiled, not for any malice or enuie mēt to any of y• parties, but for good will to the Reader, & for a naturall pietie to this our countrey, the naturall nourice and mother of vs all. Whiche proteſtantes may a
                  •
               tely be cō
               paredPlato. lib. 2. De Re Pub. to Plato his Gyges, ye tale of whom Tidly reci
                  •
               eth in his third boke of his offices. At the falling downe from aboue of certen ſtormes of wether, the earthe opened in diuers places, by reaſon of the

drought before. Gyges being a Kynges: Shepeherde, entred in to the earthe at a great hoole, and founde a braſen horſe (as the fables declare) in whoſe ſydes wer dores, which being opened, he eſpied the corſe of a dead man of a wonderfull hugenes, and a golde ringe vpon his finger, which as ſone as he pulled of, he put it vpon his own. The nature of the ring was this: that when he had turned the head towardes the palme of his hande, he was inuiſible, and ſene of nobody, & yet ſawe euery thynge: and turnyng the rynge from him agayne, he was ſene of euery body. And ſo vſing this aduauntage of the rynge, he laye with the quene wife to Candaules kyng of Lydia. So theHerodotus in Cli
                     •
                  . proteſtātes, whē it pleaſed god to plague this our countrey for the ſynne of the people, with the vnquiet ſtormes of hereſie, got them out of the company of other ſhepehardes, & diſperſed themſelfes into the earth, and at length entred into braſen horſes, the houſes of the cheif gouernours then, abuſyng the ſame with falſe interpretacion of Gods worde, makyng thē beleue by their craftie ſuggeſtions

that all thinges which had cōtinued in the churche of God to that tyme, was of no veritie, but deuiſed by man, calling the ſame toyes and ceremonies of Rome: who hauing a zeale to Gods truth, and credityng the merye conceiptes of theſe yonglinges, truſting their talk had been the vndoubted veritie, pelded to their practiſes. Then theſe ſhepeherdes perceiuing ye cheif magiſtrates prone to ſondrie alteracions & nouelties, beganne by litle and litle alſo to corrupt the conſciences of the vulgare people, infecting the ſame with the poyſon of heretical doctrin, that at length they became altogethers dead corpſes of wōderfull hugenes. Then framed they rynges to ſeme inuiſible to the worlde: then played they Gyges part, then ruled they the rooſte, then began they to ſwarme in routes, then cluſtered they like humble bees to deuoure the honye combes from the hiues of the poore bees, then like cōmon ſouldiors after the battell began they to fall to ſpoyle, then defaced thei Churches, then made they hauoke of the ornamentes of the ſame.
            And in this ſorte with hereſie and ſpoile

feding the common peoples ſimplicitee with a counterfait zeale, they murdred mens conſciences, & diſtroied the realme and the common welth thereof. After whiche their practiſes yet gaue they not ouer like fainte hearted ſouldiors, but with ſtiffe ſtanding ſtomakes continued to thende. And as Gyges by vertue of his ringe cōmitted adulterie with Candaules wyfe who was then kinge of Lydia, and within ſhorte time after by her vngracious counſaile diſpatched him of his life, euen ſoo theſe adulterate proteſtantes thought it not ſufficient to effeminat the mindes of the ſimple with their falſe doctrine, and to contaminate the ſame with the venime of their viperous tongues, but alſoo therewith haue ſo ſlaine the conſciences of many, that like deſperate men they make haſte to their owne deſtruction. Whoo beinge puffed vp with preſumption, ſeeke to clime vppe to the chariote of the ſonne.
            But as Phaeton was ſerued for goyng about to aſpire to his fathers ſecretes, & with a flaſhe of lightening was ſet al on fyer: So are theſe preſumptuous and ignoraūt

people plagued with the lyke, as a due rewarde of preſumption. This it is to followe the hyſſinges of the viperouſe broode, who neuer departe their haunt, til they haue infected whole coū
               treis. For this cauſe (welbeloued reader) this preſent treatiſe is publyſhed, to ſet before mennes eyes the edible practiſes of theſe proteſtantes, who in their owne conceiptes preſume, they haue the vndoubted truth. Whome if you marke intus et in cute, you ſhall well vnderſtande the contrary. But peraduenture ſome man will muſe of this woorde Proteſtante, becauſe it is no vſuall terme. But becauſe it is a worde greatly pleaſyng thē
               ſelues, a woorde inuented after they & hartes deſyre, a worde deuyſed of themſelues, a woorde wherein they greatly triumphe, & ſuch a worde which ſerueth moſte aptlye for the purpoſe: therefore it is here moſt frequented. And it is the participle of the verbe Proteſtor, which is to declare, what ſhould be eſchewed. A very apt worde, and mete for ſuche, who in very dede were al togethers Proteſtantes, That is to ſaye diſſwaders of holſome

lawes whiche touched the reformacion of mannes nature, and reformers of ſuche good orders as were conſtituted for the bridlinge thereof. Therfore to conclude this proeine, I moſte hartely beſeche the to reache hether thy diligent and indifferēt eares, and iudge well of myne entente, and do not imploye thy iudgement, lyke vnto hym who alredy is maried to his owne fancie: Letting the to wyt, that of mans malicious iudgement I force not, for I knowe the paſſions of maliciouſe ſtomakes. In this doyng I do not doubte▪ but thou for thy parte, ſhalt haue a iuſt cauſe to praye vnto God for vnitie (the ſure bande of all common welthes) and to graunte vnto all men grace, to withſtande hereſies aſſaultes. And I finally for my parte, ſhall haue the like to thynke my paynes well implayed. And thus I commytte the to God. (⸫)
            
               
                  Menſe Iuni
                        •
                     , 1556.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The diſplaying of the proteſtantes.
            
               
                  THE remembrance of the preſent ſtate of this oure myſerable tyme, and the reuolution of the happy tyme paſt dothe inculcate a merueilous ſorowe and greife to him, whiche diligently dothe compare them both together. For as Herodiane
               Libro prim
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                ſayth: It is the common parte of a mā, to be wayle and lament the caſes humaine, eſpecially ſuche as are in preſent experience. For conſidering the pitifull plight of theſe our wretched dayes, wherevnto not onely the ſtaye of oure cōmon wealthe politike, but alſo the chiefeſt ſtate of the eccleſiaſticall

and heauenly publique welth (religion) is fallen, beſides the decaye of vertue & breache of charitie: It muſt nedes cauſe anye true chriſtian to poure out a foū
               taine of teares to bewayle the calamitie thereof. Whoſe ruyne is exceded ſo farre, that it withdraweth mannes expectaciō to loke for amendement, vnles God of his great mercy ſupernaturally do worke the reſtitucion, aſwell of the common wealth politike, as alſo of the true and catholike fayth, charitie, and good liuyng. Agamemnon might now double his exclamaciō in theſe dayes, as Seneca reporteth, which is: GoodSeneca in Agamemnone. Act. 2. life, lawe, good ordre, godlines, & fayth are nowe decayed. Therfore calling to my remembraūce this our carefull caſe, I muſed

with my ſelfe what might be the cauſe thereof, and ſodaynly occurred to my remembraunce the comfortable promyſes of God the father, made to the obſeruers of his lawes and commaundementes. And likewyſe I conſidered hys intollerable threateninges to y• breakers of the ſame. Then comparing the wretchednes of our lyues to the ſinceritie of his holy preceptes, I fynde a marueylous difference, Good lifeThe 
                     •••
                   cauſes of our miſeri
                     •
                  
                was neuer in ſuch cōtempte, malice at no tyme bare ſuche rule, the godly neuer more diſpyſed, & finally God neuer more diſhonoured, nor his catholike fayth at any tyme had in ſo lytle regarde, eſpecially of ſuch as moſte arrogantly chalenge to thēſelfes the name of true chriſtians, who

in very deede are of all chriſtianitie moſte barren, To whome the wordes of Chriſt may be wel applyed, where he ſayeth: If IIoan. 9. et. 15. had not come vnto thē, they ſhuld haue had no ſynne in them, but nowe their ſynne doth remayne. Whiche woordes are verely verified in thoſe falſe chriſtians, which not onely in faith do erre, but alſo moſte obſtinatly ſeme to defende the ſame. In whome errour is turned to hereſye, and of weake and fraile mē are become obſtinate heretikes. It is by natureObſtinacie of opinions is the cauſe of errour. geuen to menne in ſomme thynges to erre, but to perſiſte therein, it is againſte nature.Officiorum. lib primo. For (ſayth Tully) we be al drawē and ledde to aſpire vnto knowledge, wherin to paſſe other we thinke it a goodly matter: but to

ſlyde, to erre, to be ignorant, to be deceiued, wee counte it euil & diſhoneſt. Therfore ſayth he, one thyng is to bee auoyded therein, which is, that we take not thynges wee knowe not, as thoughe wee knewe them, and raſhely aſſent to them. Wherfore deliberation and aduiſement is to bee required in ſuche cauſes. Nowe then, it is the office and duetie of mā to apply his will to the grace of God, by whō truth is reueled in tyme, wherevnto he ought to conſent: but to reſiſt, his ſynneInfidelitie doth remaine, which is the ſinne of Infidelitie, a ſynne doubtles whiche moſt diſpleaſeth God, as appeareth by his plagues executed by his wrath vpon all ſortes of infideles. But nowe to drawe neare vnto the purpoſe, whiche

chiefly is to diſplaye the factious opinions of ſuche, which not only do erre, but alſo cōtinue in errour, and ſeke with to the and nayle to defendethe ſame. For whoſe infidelitie God at this daye doeth ſo ſore plague the worlde, chiefly this realme, whiche for vertue & good liuing ſake hath bene worthely nominated Decus mundi, y• floure of the worlde.
            Nowe foraſmuche as I know that thei which cōmonly do erre, beyng reproued therefore, wyll immediately make as thoughe they were ignorant what hereſie is, & ſometyme wyll demaunde what hereſye is, or who is an heretyke: To whome if anſwere beThe definicion of hereſie. made according to the diffinition of lerned men: It is any falſe or wrong opinion, whiche any man

choſeth to him ſelfe to defende againſt the catholike fayth of the vniuerſall church. Truth in dede ſay they. But what meaneth theThe catholike churche & what it is catholike church? Then anſwere is made. It is that congregacion whiche wholy dothe agre in one vnitie of fayth and miniſtracion of ſacramentes. Whiche anſwer when they likwiſe affirme: Then procede they to know whether it be knowen or vnknowen, and ſo furth. Doubtleſſe, the catholikeHowe to knowe the catholike churche. church is ſo knowen to y• worlde, that neither heretike nor other miſcreant can pleate ignoraunce, to learne that truth whiche leadeth to ſaluation. For the Churche is like vnto a caſtle ſtā
               ding vpō an hyll, whiche cannotMatth. v. be hyd: Whiche hyll is cut out of the harde rocke, and exalted ſo

high, that is repleniſheth y• yerth as the prophete Daniel ſayth. ItDaniel. ii. Pſal. xviii. is reſēbled alſo by the pſalmiſt to a tabernacle placed in the ſonne: ſo ſhyning throughout the world that it can by no cloude or tēpeſt be obſcured. It is alſo as Paule
                  
                     •
                  . Tim. iii. ſayth, the foundation and pyller of truth, and can not be deceyued thoughe her aduerſaries allege the contrary. Full well doth the late moſte famous mā 
               LodouicusLib. i. de veritate fidei. Viues ſay. I doo and wyll ſtande (ſayth he) to the true iudgement of the churche, although I ſawe to the contrary a moſte manifeſt reaſon. I may be deceyued as I am diuers times: but the church in thoſe thynges whiche tende to religion can not bee deceyued.
            Therfore the churche beyng ſoo manifeſtly knowen as it cannot

be hidden, ſo repleniſhed and garniſhed with truth, as it is the very foundation and piller of truth, with what face or countenaunce can the aduerſaries therof ſtande in contencion therewith? Unleſſe they be infected wt 
               Circes cuppes,Homeri odyſs: libro decimo. or els by her enchantmētes tranſformed into the ſhape of ſwyne. But nowe theſe ſwiniſhe aduerſaries will obiecte, ſaiyng: SyrThe heretikes obiections. thoſe which you name heretikes, we will proue to bee the true congregaciō. And this is their profe. We allege, preache, vtter▪ or talke of nothing but ſcripture, whiche can not deceiue vs, whereby we are the true churche, and not you which cal your ſelfes catholikes. Whiche reaſon ſemeth to them ſo infallible that it cannot be auoyded, But foraſmuch as the knowledge

of all truth, & ouerthrow
                  •
                of hereſie, dependeth vpon the thaucthoritie of the church, both for the knowledge of the ſcriptures, and alſo for the expoſition of the ſame, I purpoſe breifly to ſay ſomewhat therin. The headThe anſwere of the catholikes. of the churche is Chriſt, who by the Apoſtles was preached to all nations, of whō alſo his doctrine was receiued, at leaſt of ſo many as were conuerted to the fayth. The conuerters of whom were the Apoſtles, which in the beginnyng were the myſticall bodye of Chriſt their head, who then beyng the Churche, exalted theirPſal. xviii. voyces in ſuche ſorte, as it penetrated the whole yearth, & their wordes extended to the endes of the worlde. The ſucceſſion of whiche Apoſtles, haue continued

from tyme to tyme, in vnitie of the ſame fayth: Whiche fayth is left vnto the Churche as permanent for euer, therby to ſtrēgthen the weake, and to confounde the proude, to eſtabliſhe the electe, & to ouerthrowe all miſbeleuers & ſectes hereticall: whiche ſectes not onely abuſe the open places of that liuely worde, but alſo do falſly expounde the darke & miſtical places therof, as S. Peterii. Peter. iii. wytneſſeth of ſ. Paules Epiſtles. But if theſe▪ good felowes wyll nedes be of Chriſtes churche, as arrogantly thei preſume by their owne cōfeſſion: They muſt haue one vnitie of doctrine as y• churche hath, whiche ſurely thei haue not. The puniſhementes are not ſo diuers in hell (as Vergill
               Aeneido. 6. deſcribeth,) as are the ſondry opinions

of theſe Proteſtantes▪
                The ſerpent Hydra with whome Hercules fought, hadde not ſo manyeVirgi an
                     •
                  id. 8. heades, as eche of theſe ſerpentes had deuiſed opinions: Nor yet Ixion begat ſo many Cētauros, asLucianus in deorū dialog. theſe monſters deuiſed hereſies: inſomuche that vpon one poynt, whiche is the chiefeſt comfort left here vpō earth to fede our ſoules vpon, there are Myriades opinionum▪
                innumerable opinions, and one ſo contrary to another, that they agre like germaines lippes. The monſtruoſitie of which opinions are ſuch, that to remembre them it yeldeth a marueilous terror to the hearte of any good chriſtian, that in heart he myght haue wyſhed the like that Caius Pontius
               Cicero: officiorum. lib. 2. the Samnite did wiſh againſt that wicked vice of brybery in Rome.

Would God (ꝙ he) fortune had reſerued me to thoſe dayes, and hadde been borne then, when the Romaines beganne ones to take brybes, I would not haue ſuffered them any longer to rule.
            If in the beginning of Luthers doctrine ſome worthy ſouldiour of Chriſt & his churche had gone aboute to haue ſtayed the ſame, the worlde at this day had neuer felte the calamitie therof. But as that wycked monſtre monſtruouſly began, ſo God in the ſelfe ſame time to proue him a mōſtre and the like of his heere to be altogether monſtruous, he ſhewed an euident example.
            There was in the countrie ofThis monſter was a iuſt token manifeſted by God, to geue mē aduertiſement to take hede ofſuch falſe prophetes, whiche vnder the godly habites of religious men, ſhould ſeke the ſubuerſion of his churche. 
               Saxonye a woman, whiche out of her body brought furth a mōſtre hauing .iiii. fete like vnto an oxe,

his mouth, noſe, eyes, & eares ſhaped like a calfe, a lompe of fleſhe vpon his heade like a Preiſtes croune, & behynd vpon his backe the forme of a Monkes coule, as one Iames Rueffe a Chirurgion of Tigurine in a booke entitled De conceptu et generatione hominis, expreſſing there the verye fygure it ſelfe, more at large declareth.
            Whiche mōſtruous byrth doubtles portended, that as in it ſelfe it was of fourme diuers, ſo lykewyſe the ſame Luther ſhould be the father of many byrthes that ſhould bee ingendred in his vnhappy poſteritie.
            
               Paulus Iouius lykewyſe deſcribeth
                  
                     •
                  ib. 13. hiſtor. ſui temporis. the maligne inclinations of the heauens at ſuche tyme as Luthers hereſie beganne to kyndle, that the whole worlde, aſwell

Hethen as Chriſten beganne to put vpon them newe factions of religion. But what do I ſtande vpon theſe ſectes, ſythe they are manifeſt to the blynde & knowen to the deaff? Yet becauſe mōſtruoſitie of byrthes ſeme wonderfull to the worlde, I wyll open the ſeuerall 
                  •
               ygures and ſhapes of ſome. I wyll not reherſe the horryble ſectes in the primatiue Churche engendred by Luthers graundfather Simon Magus, Cherinthus, Ebion, Baſilides, Arrius, with a thouſand moe, but I will touche a fewe in our time: for the whole I cānot, and if I could, I would not, & if I would I may not, for protracting of tyme and hynderyng of my purpoſe.
            Luthher a Freer in WyttenbergeA reberſall of ſundry
                     •
                   ſectes deuiſed by dyuers heretikes. vnder the dominion of Frederike

duke of Saxonye, had an opinion, that in the ſacrament of the Altar was the naturall body of Chriſte really with the ſubſtaunce of bread▪
            
            
               Carolſtadius another religious Heretike, ſeyng Luther to preuaile ſo with his newe forged opinion, & perceiuyng the eſtimation therof embraſed of all men, began too fall out with Luther, ſaiyng: that when Chriſt ſayde Hoc eſt corpus meum, He ment then of his viſible body, and not of his body in the ſacrament, of whiche opinion were many fauorers.
            
               Zwynglius of a toune called Sirich in Swycherland, was contented with noone of the other twayne, but inuented vpon the aforeſayde wordes a newe interpretacion: whiche was, that they

were not to be vnderſtāded lyterally, but by a figure: as, This is my body, is as muche to ſaye, as this ſignifieth my body. Of this matter he wroote dyuerſe gloriouſe epiſtles to certen of his frēdes, gloriouſly reioyſing that he had founde the long vnknowē truthe of ſo hyghe a miſterie.
            
               Oecolampadius thē a religious man of ſainct Brigittes ordre, in the prouince of Bauarie, who with one Huttē a Goſpelknight, ran away with a nonne of that place to Baſill, and there freſhly vttered the wares of Zvvyngliꝰ marte, and proued a ioly fellow.
            Then begā the Anabaptiſtes, the Thaborites, the Huſſites, & ſuche other rutterkyns, that in Germanye muche vnquietnes reigned betwene the laietie and

clergie, and yet daily doth reigne (God knoweth) throughout the countrey, that by reporte of them that come from thence you ſhall haue the Lutherane, the Zwynglian, the Anabaptiſte, the Iewe yea & the Papiſte (as they terme it) dwell together in one towne: whoſe chiefe captaines are Caluine, Peter Martyr, Bullingere Muſculus, and ſuche lyke.
            Hoper in his booke of thoffice of Chriſte, and Cranmere in his treatiſe of the Sacrament of the alter, our late cōtremen, ſay that as well themſelfes as the Germaynes, erred greatly in takyng Luthers parte.
            Another ſecte there is whiche denye all the forſayd opinions, & affirme that when Chriſte ſayde, this is my body: He ment onelye

that the bread was his bodye. That is to ſaye, by creation I made it, and ſo it is my body.
            Alſo about .xx. yeres paſt, thereAs this good miniſter loued good ale, ſo he had .iii. ale knights to ſtande in defence of his opinion, called Good al
                     •
                  , Newe ale 
                     •
                   Raſtale. was a prieſt whiche conſecrated the bloodde of Chriſte at Maſſe of ale & not with wyne, as chriſte ordeyned it, affirmyng that he myght laufully do ſo, and ſtoode muche in the defence thereof, but abiuring his folly, he bare a fagot at Paules croſſe.
            Again there was a Tyler dwel lyng in S. Sepulchres paryſhe in Londō, that helde opiniō how Chriſt was only incarnate & ſuffred death for all thoſe that died before his incarnation, & not for them whiche died ſynce, whiche opinion he lykewyſe abiuryng, bare a fagot.
            There were moreouer in this

realme certayne Anabaptiſtes, whiche among other hereſies denied the baptiſme of Infantes: ſaying, that as many as wer baptiſed beyng children, ought to be rebaptiſed, when they come too age, whereof ſome were burnt in Smythfielde.
            There was a prieſt called Aſhton, that denied the holy ghoſte to be God, who had he not recanted, had bene burnte alſo.
            Furthermore, there was one Puttoe a Tanner, which denied one of the articles of the Crede, whiche was that Chriſte deſcended not into hel, ſaying, he could not rede it in the worde written & therfore not worthy to be credited. But abiuring theſame opinion he caried a fagot.
            A Bricklaer taking vpon him

the office of preachyng, affirmed he myght laufully do it, though he were not called there vnto by the church. For Spiritus Vbi Vult ſpirat.
            
            Ioane of kent a great pratler of diuinite, & brocher of our late doctrine▪, helde an opinion that Chriſte toke no fleſhe of the bleſſed virgin Mary, and was worthely burned in Smythfielde.
            A ducheman alſo that denyed Chriſte to be God, & equall with his father, & that he was not of the ſubſtance of his father, was lykewyſe conſumed in Smythfielde.
            Alſo about .xii. monethes paſt before the reuerēde father the biſhop of Londō, there were arrayned in the conſiſtorie at Paules for their opiniōs againſt the Sacrament of the altar .iiii. Suſſex

men, the one of th
                  •
                was a duche man & dwelled beſydes Lewes, who being demaunded amonge others, what baptiſme was, the one aunſwered, it was a Sacrament, then he was demaunded whether a man myght be a chriſtian without it: yea doutles qv he. For it is but an externe ſigne and worketh litle grace. For ſaid he, lyke as a man doeth waſhe his handes in a baſen of water, ſignifying that the handes are cleane, ſo the chylde is waſſhed at baptiſme to accomplyſhe the exterior figure. Then was obiectedIohn .iii. vnto him the ſaying of chriſt: vnles a mā be borne agayn with water & the holy ghoſte he could not be ſaued. Tuſhe ſayth he, the water profiteth nothyng, it is the holy ghoſte that woorketh.

Who with the reſt moſte worthely were condempned and burned in Suſſex.
            Fynally there be many other opinions, not worthy the reherſall, deuyſed by the proteſtantes, and for the mayntenance therof, how many do we ſe for lacke of grace, wylfully without anye feare of God or man, precipitate themſelfes into the temporall fyer, without any reſpecte or due conſideracion of the life to come, And God w
                  •
               te ſome of them demaunded queſtions of their beliefe, they cannot tel what to ſay. Suche is the iniquitie of oute tyme. It is before declared, the ſondry opiniōs of many, who altogether boaſte themſelues too be of the true Churche. Whoſe opinions partely I haue noted,

to ſet before mennes eies the ex
                  •
                crable factions of their malignaunt churche, to thintent they may conſider, that the catholique churche is of one faith, of one ſpirite, & of one iudgemēt, not lacerated, deuided or torne but whole and intier. From the whiche who ſoeuer departeth, procureth vnto himſelfe dampnacion. For without the churche is no ſaluacion. Nowe touchyng the vnitie and concorde of the churche, it contynueth in the very ſame ſtate, as it dyd in the primatiue churche, as we rede howe the Apoſtles were all of one cōſent and one mynde. Which vnitie as they thē did imbrace, placing the ſame as a ſure tokē or badge to know y• church,Vnitie the badge or co
                  
                     ••
                  izance of Chriſtes churche. ſo loke what churche, let it haue neuer ſo glorious titles, beyng

without that, it is euident that it is no churche: but rather a denne of theues. Chriſt leuing y• world and aſcēding vp to his father, be ſides his ſeuerall admoniciōs to his Apoſtles, during the tyme ofMarc. ix. Lu. x. xxiiii. Iohn. 14. 
                     •
                  1. his cōuerſacion vpon earth preached peace, ſaying: haue peace among you. &c. Paule in all his epiſtles perſwadeth vnitie. Which may perſwade any good harte to acknowlege the catholike church to be that churche, where all men may learne the truthe of the goſpel, religiō, fayth, Sacramētes, & al other kindes of rites or ceremonies. Whiche churche cōtempneth all ſortes of Heretikes and other miſcreantes, and ſtandeth vnremouable, notwithſtanding theyr wycked dartes fethered with miſchiefe dayly throwen againſt

her. But it behoueth ſaith
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. xii ſ. Paule that there ſhuld be hereſies amōges you, to trye & make manifeſt thoſe that be conſtante. Therfore no maruayll thoughei. Tim. iiii. now thei beare ſuch ſwinge. For in the latter daies (ſaith he) there ſhalbe perilous tymes, wherein ſome ſhal departe from the faith, and ſhall geue hede to ſpirites of error, and deuelyſhe doctrine of them which ſpeake falſe through hypocriſie, hauynge their conſciences marked with an hote yron, forbidding menne to marry, and commaunding to abſteyne from meates whiche God hathe created to bee receiued with thankes geuyng. &c. But the Proteſtantes tournynge thys place from theimſelfes, they woulde proue the Papiſticall Churche (for

ſo thei terme it) to be thoſe heretikes whiche ſainte Paule here gyueth warning of. Doe not theThe words of the proteſtantes. papiſtes (ſaye they) euen as ſaint Paule ſaieth, forbid matrimony which, he ſaith is holy in al mene And yet they prohibite prieſtes, nūnes, & other religious to marry, prouing themſelfes therby, to be thoſe of whom Paule did propherye. And doo they not lykewyſe forbid meates to be eaten, whiche God hath created too be receyued with thākeſgeuyng? &c. In this ſorte theſe credible gentelmenIn all thinges the proteſtātes ſekemeanes to diſcredit the church. handled this place, to diſcredite the catholyke church, and to allure all men with their pleaſante outcries to caſt of libertie, to offende God, to offēde the magiſtrates, to breake all lawes, to vndoe commen welthes, to make

dearthe and ſcarcitie, finallye▪ to doe what they lyſte: But what ment they hereby? Euen to handle the matter as the Sirenes dydOdyſs. 12. whereof Homere ſpeaketh: whoſe voyces were ſo pleaſant, that with their ſonges they allured all paſſengers, whiche ſayled by the ſeas where they haunted, to approche vnto theim, and beyng within their thraldome, their cuſtome was to drowne both them and their ſhyppes. Euen ſo oure late pleaſant Sirenes, in all pulpetesLibertie a pleaſāt harmony to thē that are cō
                  tēted to embrace it, as the proteſtantes are. vſed ſuch pleaſant ſonges, and alluremētes, entēding therby not onely to noſell the bodye with al kyndes of bellychere, but alſo to make them to forget both God and man, & ſo procure Hell mouth to opē, & ſwallow vp both bodie and ſoule. Nowe I would

gladly learne of theim whether the heretikes of whome ſ. PauleThis place of ſ. Paule was wonte to be paynted vpō the walles of churches to begyle the ſimple. But when thou readeſt this place, waye it wel in the minde & thē giue ſēt
                     •
                  ce. prophecied, did vtterly forbidde marriage to all men & women or not. If they anſwere yea, as thei cannot choſe, then they cannot proue that the catholyke churche forbideth marriage to al mē. For who is it, prieſt, religious man or womā, but that once in their life tyme they were at libertie either to marrie or lyue chaſt? So that the choice of either ſtate is free to doe as the grace of GOD ſhall worke in them. Nowe agayne ifMariage is not diſcommendid of ye church, but it is magnefied for out of the .vii. Iewels thereof. they affirme the papiſtes to forbid marriage to ſome, as to prietes, nonnes, and other votaries therin ſhewing themſelfes to be thoſe wherof ſainte Paule affirmeth: truthe it is, the Churche forbiddeth all ſuch to marrie, not

diſcommending matrimon̄ie tóo ſuche as maye laufullye take it. But, foraſmuche as they haue bounde themſelfes by vowe and promeſſe to the contrarie, therfore becauſe they mighte not incurre into the lapſe of dāpnation, as Paule reporteth, it is the charitee of the churche to forbid thē
               
                  
                     •
                  . Tim. v. Nu. 6. &. 30. Eccle. v. Iohn. ii. marrye, as S. Paules rule preſcribeth, who knew howe ſtraitly the ſcripture chargeth ſuche as haue made vowes to kepe them. And for that cauſe, he ſaieth: the wydowe hath dampnation if ſhe marrye after ſhe is receiued into the Churche to bee founde of the goodes therof: bycauſe ſhe vnloſeth chaſtite, and therfore he calleth it her fyrſt faieth, in reſpecte of the ſeconde made too man by marriage. Whereby it is playne

that S. Paule cannot meane by his prophecie, that the churche is hereticall in forbiddyng the profeſſed, and vowed to marrye, as they teache. For then they muſte nedes proue Paule to bee an heretike. O cancred ſtomakes, feſtred througheoute with malice. But wyll you ſee theyr ſhyftes? Paule ſaith receiue no widowes into the churche vnder .lx. yeare olde. &c. and after he ſayeth, the yonger widowes refuſe &c. Here ſaye they, takynge anye into the church vnder .lx. yere old Paules precepte is broken. Wherby they that are taken in, are at liberty to marrye. This is Poinettes doctrinePoinettes doctrine. in his booke of the defence of prieſtes marriage. But what manne is he thoughe he be halfe madde, but he may perceiue their

follye. Herein I will aſke whether the olde wydowe hauynge the age that S. Paule nameth, if ſhe marrye, doeth incurre the daunger of dampnacion? Wherevnto if they aunſwere yea: thenNo doctrin can be ill if it ſerue for the practiſe of the hotte proteſtāces who rather then they would lyue chaſte wold ſay the
                     •
                  cold not choſe but burne. howe chaunceth it, that ſome of them, notwithſtāding their vowes, beyng of that age, yea and aboue to, not fearing dāpnation dyd marrye? But what ſhal men iudge of them? If raſhe iudgemēt myght conioyne with raſhe doctrine, truly a man myght ſpeake raſhely. But let God iudge. For wher as ſaint Paule doeth vehemently exhorte all wydowes to the vowe of chaſtite, & excepteth no age touching that profeſſion, but onely in reſpecte of ſuche as ſhould be found by the goodes of the churche: nowe cometh in ruffling

Poynet with his double mariage two wyues at a clappe, and maketh S. Paule to correcti. Cor. vii. that whiche fyrſt ſo earneſtly he taught, and will haue wydowes to vowe chaſtitie no more, except they were at the leaſt xl. yeres of age. But if a queſtion may beA queſtion. aſked: I pray you ſir, of what age was Timothe, when S. Paule exhorted him to lyue chaſte?
            Was he xl? Was Paule xl. yeres when he ſayd: I wyll haue all mē to be as I am my ſelf? Were they alſo lx. yeres old a pece that ſaint Paule ſpake vnto? Well to confounde Poynet, here a worde or twayne of Chryſoſtome vpō that place. Saint Paule (ſayth he)A place of Chriſoſtom to proue that yong wydowes did vowe. forbyddeth ſuche wydowes, and driueth them from that purpoſe, not becauſe he would that there ſhould

               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               In graūting wherof they proue themſelfes lyers. For the catholike churche (whiche they call papiſtical) doth neither forbyd fleſhThe church forbiddeth no meates as the folly of the proteſtantes doth imagine. nor fyſhe to be eaten at ſuche tymes as by the ſame is preſcribed. But for the vnderſtāding of this place of S. Paule, touching certain which ſhould come & forbyd marriage, & meates to be eaten: it is to wete, there were in the primatiue churche falſe prophetes,Act. iiii. whiche affirmed, that the olde lawe was as neceſſarely to be obſeruedSundrye ſectes of heretikes that verefied S. Paules prophecie, 
                     •
                  ere 
                     •
                  oſen ger
                  
                     •
                  aines to the proteſtantes. as the new: as Ebion, Cherinthus, and the Nazares, who folowyng the vſes of the Grekes, abſtained frō meates which were ſuffocate: of whom ſ. Paule ſpeaketh, ſaiyng: There were ſome which beleued that certein meates naturally were vnclene, ſuch

was Tacianus, Euſtacheus, & Priſcillianus. There were alſo a ſect called Manichaei, who not onely refuſed Fleſhe, but alſo Egges, mylke & cheſe, and the like. Another ſect alſo called Scueriani, vtterly forbad wyne as vnlawfull. Another ſecte alſo called Cathari,
               
                  
                     •
                  uido de h
                     •
                   reſibus. affirmed that to eate Fleſhe, Egges & Mylke, althoughe it were great neceſſitie, was a deadly ſynne. And theſe and ſuche like were they of whom Paule ſpeaketh. For the churche forbiddeth none of theſe to be eaten, but at certain tymes, which is both praiſed in ſcripture, aſwell to pleaſe God, as alſo to profite & enriche the common welth. To abſtaine
                  
                     〈…〉
                  e profitable abſtinence is. from meates, cōmonly called faſting, is a thing much acceptable to God, and in ſcripture eſtſo
                  •
               es

perſwaded. The children of Iſrael were cōmaunded by God, as it appeareth in Leuiticus, to abſtaineLeui▪ lx. frō meates: is not the manNumeri. vi. and woman when they go about to do ſacrifice, cōmaunded to abſtaine frō wynes? Chriſt himſelfeMatth. xv. biddeth vs to watche & pray, becauſe we knowe not the houre.
            Put vpō you (ſayth Paul) our ſauiourRoma. xiii. Chriſt: & haue no deſire to the fulfilling of the deſires of the fleſh. And thei which be of ChriſtGala. v. let them crucifie their owne fleſh by abſtinence. The fathers of the olde lawe in all thinges they wēt about, vſed the armour of abſtinence, eſpeciallye to ouerthrowe Goddes enemies. The people of Iſrael beyng cōmaunded of Samuel
                  
                     •
                  . Reg. vii. to faſt, ouercame their enemies. Iudas Machabeus beyngMacha, iii.
               
about to fight with Gorgias, as ſone as he had faſted he obtained the victorie. Daniel faſtyng threDaniel 
                     •
                  . wekes receiued a viſion from the Lord. Achab by faſting, wearingiii. Reg. xi
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                of ſackeclothe, & lamentacion obtained forgeuenes of his ſynnes. Iudith by that armour vanquiſhedIudith .ix. Heſter▪ 
                  
                     ••
                  i
                     •
                  . Holofernes. And Heſter after thre dayes faſt cōuerted Aſſuerus furor into temperaunce. Many other of the good fathers exerciſed that weapon to confound their enemies. But our countremen, ſuche cheifly as had y• goſpel moſte in their mouthes, ſo ouerſawe the Goſpell, that all theſe good places with innumerable mo were quite ouerſeen. I praye God to put ſuche grace into their myndes, that hereafter they may no more ouerſee y• cōfortable places

of ſcripture written for our erudition & comfort, but with diligence peruſe them, & with more diligence put them in practiſe.
            Doubtles nature is ſatiſfied wt a ſmale porcion, if man will captiuate his owne ſenſualitie, and bridle his affections. True are y• wordes of Seneca. Nature is contentEpiſt. 18. with a litle, whoſe cōtentacion if thou do oppreſſe with ſuperfluitie▪ it will cōuert into thinges noyſome. Folowe not Sardanapalus Wt his belly chere, nor yet Epicurus, whoo counted the bleſſednes of this life to conſiſt in pleaſures of the body, but rather let vs folow the exāple of a ſort of people called Eſſaei, who liued with ſuche abſtinence,Ioſephus 
                     ••
                  lli Iud
                     ••
                  ci. lib. 2. cap. 7. that their life was prolonged into yeres infinite: or els the good lyues of the godly fathers, Antonius, Paulus, & ſucheT
                     ••
                  perti
                     ••
                   hiſtoria.
               
like, who continually liued in deſert with rotes and other thynne fare. Let vs learne of the Perſians how to abſtaine: Who whenCicero. Tuſculan. queſt. lib. 
                     •
                  
                they went about to attempt any enterpriſe, beſides bread did eateAbſtinence of the Perſians. nothing els but Naſturtium, which is an herbe called Creſſes, ſuppoſing that thereby their ſpirites were made more quicke & liuely. It were to be wiſhed that all mē entending either to praye vnto god for any temporal cōmoditie, or els for any heauenly treaſure, or to do any good worke, would folowe the Churches example therin, that is, before to begynne with faſting, and to eate Naſturtium, that is to ſay, to exhilarate their ſpirites by faſt, to performe their intent. Then might they accompliſhe Tobyas ſaying, that
                  
                     •
                  obi. iiii.
               
prayer ioyned with faſtyng and almesdedes, is profitable. Thus abſtinence and faſtyng is vniuer ſally commended, aſwell by prophane men, as by diuine. Therfore in this thyng the Churche cannot be thoſe heretikes, wherof Paule propheſieth. For it prohibiteth not meates vtterly, but it geueth a certain preſcription & ordre, foreſeyng mans frailtie, which were it not brought in ſeruitude by ſuche meanes, it would not voluntarely for the moſt part indue any godly inclinacion. ForThe churche in all thinges kepeth an ordre. ordre, aſ well in thinges natural, as ſupernatural, hath euer had ſuche preeminence, that thereby the incomprehenſible maieſtie of GOD, as it were by a bryght leme of a torche or candle, is declared to the blinde inhabitantes

of the worlde. In framyng of all thinges ſayth (Tully) in apt andOfficiorum. Libro. i. conuenient places, ordre is to be required. So that the churche by the adminiſtration of the holye ghoſte, from tyme to tyme to preuent mannes imbecillitie, hathe choſen out certaine tymes for ordre ſake, to putte man in remembraunce of his duetie towardes God: which tymes are of al good chriſtians to be duely folowed.
            For it is well knowen as TertullianIn definitionibus eccleſiaſt. d
                     •
                  gmatum. Cap. 66. ſayth, that it is good to take meates with thankes geuyng, & to eate that whiche God hath cō
               maūded, but to abſtain frō ſome, it is not euil doone, not for that they be nought, but for that they be not neceſſarye. And to moderate the vſe of them for neceſſitie and tyme ſake, it is the propertie

of chriſtians. We knowe what the ſcripture ſpeaketh touchyngGene. ix. i. Timo. iiii. Roma. xiiii. Ma
                     •
                  c xv. Gene. iii. the eatyng of all thynges, & that all meates are to bee eaten with thankes geuyng. But yet it doth not ſo commende the eatyng, to condempne the forbearyng and abſtinence from the ſame. Sure, it was a pleaſant matter to come to a ſermon to here faſtyng reproued,Pleaſaunt ſermons. affirmyng that all kindes of meates, might lawfully be takē at all tymes, & to faſt from ſinne it was ſufficient. And in thoſe dayes to heare a ſermon intreatyng of ſuche lyke matters, the fame anone was bruted, Oh this man hath made a goodly peece a worke, this man is verely a prophete, with the lyke. But what might be ſayd to thoſe ioly work men? euē the lyke that Papinianus
               Eraſ. Apotheg. libro. 8.
               
anſwered to the Emperour Baſſianus. For the Emperour bearing a notable diſpleaſure againſt his brother, inſomuche that he went about to rydde him of his lyfe, & becauſe murder in the citie of Rome was an odible offence, he entreated the ſayd Papinianus, a mā of great auctoritie amonges the Romaynes, that he would by ſome meanes defende his cauſe of murder. O Baſſiane, quod he, murder is ſoner committed, then the quarrel thereof can be defended. Euen ſo theſe champions of hereſie, could rather breake their faſt with fleſhe vpō Godfryday, then defend the quarell why thei ought ſo to do vpon Maundythurſday. Thei could better geue a libertie to maintaine vice, then make reſtraynt to ſuppreſſe the

ſame. But Ariſtotle might hauePlutarch in Sylla. geuen them the lyke anſwere for their liberal talke, as he gaue Caliſthenes his ſcoller, for reprouing of Alexander with this verſe of Homere.
            
            
               Thy talke my ſonne beyng vttered ſo fondly,
               VVyll breede thee confuſion by deth vtterly.
            
            What hath folowed this their liberall and vayne perſwaſion, this realme moſt pitiouſly dothe at this day fele. For thoſe cōmodities which for the ſuſtentacion of all men, ſometymes were here moſte abundant: nowe are moſte ſkarſe and vneaſie to be gotten. But I pray God that that be the leaſt plague. It yeldeth almoſte as great a terror to remēbre the calamitie of this realme, growen

by thin ferteignement of a cōmon woman called Hereſie, as the reherſal of the Troianes deſtructiō dyd to Aeneas, who was frendlyAeneid. Virgi welcomed to Carthage by Dydo quene therof, that euery chriſtian may ſay with Aeneas,
            
            Horreſco referens, geliduſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                per ima cu
                  •
                currit Oſſa tremor.
            
               To reherſe the ſame, uerye feare doth make me quake.
               It thrilleth through my bones, that my fleſh therwith doth ſhake.
            
            But nowe to returne to faſtyng: The ꝓteſtātes affirme, that it is a holſome thing. But what kynd of faſtyng is it that they meane? to faſt from ſynne ſay they, and not frō meates. For that whiche goeth into the mouthe, defyleth not the man, but that which goeth out. And the kingdom of heauen

is not meate & drinke. Theſe and ſuche lyke they eſteme to bee ſuche bulworkes againſt the bodily faſte, that no man can ouerthrowe them. But herein a man may well perceiue howe lyke thē ſelues they be, and howe rightly they accord with thoſe, of whom Paul geueth admonitiō, ſaiyng: Let noo man deceyue you withEphe. v. vayne perſwaſions. It would be demaunded where they fynde expreſſed in ſcripture, that God cō
               maundeth only faſting frō ſinne, and not from meates. And as herein they can make no anſwer, ſo lykewyſe they muſte affirme that the next remedye to auoydeRemedies to auoyde ſynne. ſinne, is to do good workes, that is to ſay, to faſt, to pray, to geue almeſſe, to folowe Goddes preceptes, to loue one another, to

ſubdue the appetites, and to crucifie our carnaltie, and this is to faſt from ſynne. In what ſorte did Iohn the Baptiſte faſt from ſynne? In geuing himſelf to bellichere? No doubtles, his conuerſacionMath. iii. was in abſtinence, faſting prayer, harde apparayle, lyuyng in deſerte places, and ſuche lyke. The diſciples of Iohn BaptiſteMath. ix. came to Chriſt, ſaying: VVhy do we and the Phariſees faſte, and thou and thy diſciples faſte not? Note here that if the woorde Faſte, ſhould be vnderſtand as the proteſtantes would haue it, whiche is onely of abſtainyng frō ſynne: thē their ſaying muſt haue been: why do we & the Phariſees abſtayne from ſynne, and thou and thy diſciples do not abſtayne frō ſinne? Who is ſo blind that ſeeth

not the blaſphemous inconuenience which doth folow of this worde faſt, if it ſhould be taken for abſtayning from ſinne onely? What anſwer made chriſt to this▪ did he ſaye that their faſte was a ſuperſticion? his anſwere was. Can the bridegromes childrē morne whyle the brydegrom is with thē? But when the brydegrom is taken from them, then ſhall they faſte.
            
            What more playner wordes can be ſpoken of Chriſte to perſwade abſtinence then theſe are? Yet in another place Chriſte in a ſerinō whiche he made to his diſciples, declareth the ſtraightnes of his lawe, in reſpect of the olde, to extinguiſhe the ſuperſticion of the phariſees, ſaying: VVhen ye faſt,
               Math. vi. 
               be ye not like vnto hypocrites. &c. By the whiche worde faſt, I am

ſure he ment the bodely faſte, or els he woulde not haue deſcribed their maner of faſtyng in ſuche ſorte: Wherein he went about to correcte the ſuperſticion of the phariſees, aſwell in this correction of the bodye, as in the other two principall vertues, prayer & almes. For their delyght was principally to be ſene of men ypocritically. And here is to be noted that prayer and almes dedes, be two particuler vertues to be vſed of all men, according to their ſeueral giftes. Prayer is comonPrayer and almeſdedes to al men, to pray when thei wil▪ almes to them that haue wherewith all, whiche bothe with faſtyng, beyng vſed accordyng too Goddes holy worde, & to the cenſure of the churche (no doubt) are moſte profitable and vndoubted

meanes to aſpire to ſaluation.
            Thus touching the forſaid place of ſaint Paule, concerning thoſe which ſhuld prohibite marriage, and abſtaining from meates, any man may moſte clerely iudge, by whome thoſe wordes were ſpoken. Not by the churche, as the heretikes maliciouſly minde: but by thoſe before remembred. The firſt part of whiche prophecie is verefied of theſe miſcreantes in our tyme, and the latter parte in the olde heretikes, whiche ſtarted vp, not longe after the death of Paule. Wherby it may appeare whether part doth perſwade the eſchewing of ſynne: The churcheThe catholike church. perſwadeth auſterite of lyfe. catholike, or the churche malignante. The one exhorteth al men to beare Chriſtes croſſe, in harde life, trouble, and affliction: the other

perſwadeth to imbrace libertie, bellichere, and all pleaſure.
            The one giueth rules & orders, to frame mannes frayle nature: The other gyueth rules to aduā
               ce mannes nature. The one ſubiugateth thaffections: the other vnbridleth the appetites. The one telleth, as it were with the forefynger, the waie to ſaluaciō: The other diſcloſeth with the whole hande, the hie way to dāpnacion. The one gyueth rudimentes to withſtande the deuils ſuggeſtions: The other frameth rules to followe his colluſions. Therfore let euery man giue diligent hede, how he folowe raſhe doctrine, leſt repentaunce folow. Better it is to ſerue GOD then Mammon, to followe the holſome counſell of our ſpiritual mother,

then the wicked perſwaſiō of our worldly mother, the parent of ſynne, & the nourice of iniquite. And lyke as the heretikes aforeſayde in the primatiue churche, did both denye marriage and faſlyng from meates, as thinges vncleane: So do the proteſtātes and heretikes of our tyme in falling frō the faith, abuſe thē both. So yt all mē may (if they weyghe the matter with indifferent iudgement) ſee who be the falſe prophetes, and wolues in ſhepes apparell, whereof Chriſte geueth premonicion to beware of.Math. vii. The ſhepiſh apparell of the proteſtātes
            
            Thapparaile whiche our proteſtantes do weare, is the cloake of holy ſcripture, lined with lyes & falſe interpretacion of the ſame euer crying: The woorde of the Lorde, Goddes booke, and ſuche

other vayne outcryes, nothing degenerating from the heretikes of auncient tyme: for they vſed not onely the garmentes of holy ſcriptures, but alſo the cloake of diſſimulacion, pretending to the worlde holynes of lyfe, whereby many were deceyued. The heretikes in our daies eſteme the faſt in ſuche ſorte, as they can doe none other, but eate faſte, drynke faſt, prate faſt, and lie faſt: A ſollempne faſt ſurely, and mete for ſuche faſters. And here they demaunde, where do the Papiſtes ſaye they, fynde the faſte of the ſuperſticious Lent, or any other day, preſcribed in the ſcriptures. Chriſt faſted .xl. daies, being preſerued by his godhed, but can we do ſo being his weake members▪ Thus they triumphe in wonderfull

manner, diſſwading the voluptuous carcas, from all paynful exerciſe. Al thinges ordeyned to any godly entēt, were by theſe Momi derided. A pitifull caſe & a godly warnyng to teache men to beware of ſuche belly goddes, voide of vertue, and barren of alThe proteſtantes conſciences. good workes. But if the conſciē
               ces of theſe falſe Apoſtataes, wer not marked with an hotte yron, kyndled in the deuels fiery furneſſe of horrible hereſie, blowen with the bellowes of boaſtynge, pryde, and bragging knowledge, reſuſyng thauncient expoſicions of the fathers: If their conſciences were not thus marked with that yron, which obſtinacie hath ſo ſore preſſed, that the print wyl not out, they could not choſe, but recogniſe their abhominable errors:
            
               But yet to remoue one ſtumblyngA ſtūbling ſtocke very muche vſed in ye mouth of Goſpellers. ſtocke, whiche the grande captaines of this hoſte armed againſt the church haue. touchyng this point of faſting, whiche is a place of Eſaie the prophet, wher he ſhoweth how the people cried vpon God, ſaying. VVherefore faſt we, & thou ſeeſt it not, we put our liues in ſtraightnes, and thou regardeſt it not? Beholde when you faſte, your luſte remayneth ſtill, for you do no les violence to your debters. Loe you faſt to ſtrife & debate and ſmyte with the fiſt of wickednes. Now ye ſhal not faſt thus that you make your voice to be herde aboue. Thinke you this faſt pleaſeth me, that a man ſhould chaſtice him ſelfe for a daie, to wrethe his hedde about like a hooke, or to lye vpon
               
               the earth in an hearen cloth▪ Shall that be called faſting or a daye that pleaſeth our lorde? Doeth not this faſting rather pleaſe me, that thou loſe him oute of bondage that is in thy daunger, that thou breake the othe of wicked bargaines, that thou let the oppreſſed go free, and take from them all maner of burthens, to deale thy bread to the hungrie, to bringe the poore wandringe home into thy houſe, when thou ſeeſt the naked to couer him, and hide not thy face from thy neighbour, and deſpiſe not thine own fleſſhe? Then ſhall thy lyghte breake forth in the morning. &c.
            
            This place of Eſay they marueilouſly reioyce in, vſing it as a ſure ſhelde to defende their doctrine. But herein they playe their old partes, in alleging one truth

to confounde another. This isThe proteſtātes with one trueth do ſeme to confounde another. the trueſt faſt, ergo the other faſt is not profitable: the argumente is as like, as one beyng demaunded whiche is the waye to London, he aunſwered, a poke full of plommes. The prophete Eſaye alledgeth this as the mooſte certen and trueſt faſte. And Chriſte cōmendeth the other as a meane to atteine vnto the ſame: whiche faſte if a man do neglecte, the other is not profitable, as is aforeſaid. And thus this blocke with the due conſideracion of a good chriſtian, maye be ſone remoued. But as this too ſome is an occaſion of ſtumbling, ſo was Chriſt in dyuers his ſayinges too the ſturdie Iewes, that wold not be leue in him. And as chriſt in dede miniſtred no occaſion to them, no

more doth y• prophet Eſay to the ſtumblers of our tyme, whiche ſtumble at vice, and leape ouer al good workes. Therfore it is too be wiſhed that men woulde take hede of them, and beware howe to taſte of their pernicious doctrine, as is ſaid in the beginning, whiche is the onely cauſe of oure miſerie: for our fayeth is ſo extenuated by their euyll doctrine, rooted ſo in the heades of many, that GOD hath iuſte cauſe too plage vs al in general. For withoutHeb. x
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                faith it is impoſſible to pleaſe God. Then where infidelitee is, God is not pleaſed. But hereto the proteſtantes will replye and ſaye, they be no infideles, but doe beleue in the ſame euerlaſtynge Trinitee, wherin we beleue, as it doth appere in diuers their libels,

wherein they extoll fayeth. Whiche is true: but in their definition of fayeth they made ſuche a mingle māgle of the .iii. theologicall vertues: Faieth, Hope, and Charitee, that onely fayeth lyke a cōqueror had diſcharged hope, and charitee, out of office. In the
                  
                     •••
                  ot in his booke called the Gouernor. whiche their doctrine of onelye fayeth, they fared muche lyke to an Orator whiche was brought in before an Emperour, to makeA pretie example. an oration. Whiche Orator when he was placed before the Emperour, begynning his Oration, he ſo much liked himſelfe for his eloquence, that he had forgotten where he was: yet as he thought. he ſhuld haue bene greatly prayſed. His frende aſked Themperour howe he liked him. Forſoth (quod he) as I doe my Cooke at

home. For when he came to me firſte, he coulde make me a good meſſe of potage, but he hathe ſought ſo manye newe fangled waies, that he cannot now make me a good ſa
                  •
               orie meſſe. Euen ſo our curious doctors were ſo fine in ſettyng forthe of fayeth, that they had forgotten their olde catholike fayeth, by them profeſſed at baptiſme: and in the ende they had forgottē themſelfes to: much lyke the vain glorious orator in his oration, & the Coke ruffian in makinge his potage: the one vnſenſible. & the other vnſauerie.
            This faith onely hath wrought ſo hotlye, that rather then they would forſake their droſſie diuinitie, whiche they haue gathered by their curioſitie, they thoughte with fagotes to ende their lyues

miſerably. And in this kynde of death they ſo arrogātly reioyce, that they be ſo bolde to compare themſelfes with the Martyrs of chriſtes church. But foraſmuche as this is a cauſe whiche of ſome men is thought marueilous: that men ſhould die in the quarel of religion, and therefore the quarell good, It ſhall be worth the traueill to ſay ſomwhat therein: rather for the ignorance of the vnſkilful, then for the matter itſelf.
            As in the bodye of a commonA diſcoure touchynge the burning of heretikes and of the fonde imaginatiōs of many cōcernynge the ſame. welth politike, if anye malefactor, theſe, or murderer, be founde giltie in the cryme or offēce wherin he is accuſed, forthwith the lawe doth proſecute by the verdicte of the .xii. men, and ſentence of death is pronoūced for his deſerte, as a man not worthye too

lyue being an enemie to y• weale publike: Euen ſo in the church of Chriſte, whiche is the ſpirituall kingdome, ſuche malefactours, and miſcreantes as do trāſgreſſe the faith, & other holſome conſtitucions enacted, firſt by the prouidence of the holye Ghoſte, and afterwarde diligently put in execution by the holy Patriarches, Byſſhops, and other gouernors of the ſame, are iuſtly by the cenſure of the ſame cōmitted to the politike magiſtrates to be puniſhed, either by death, or els by ſome other meanes laufull for the ſame, as enemies to God, hatersThe Hethē coulde not abide the deſpiſers of their religion. of his true religion, and cō
               temners of all good ordres.
            The Heathen being noſeled in their ſuperſticions, & vaine veneration of their fained goddes, yet

bare ſuche reuerence to their religion, that in no wyſe thei could abide the deſpiſers therof. The Atheniens, for that Alcibiades, aIuſtinus libr
                     •
                   quinto. ſtoute capteine in their warres, was ſuppoſed to haue neglected the ſacrifices of Ceres, was in his abſence by death cōdempned. The iuſt Socrates, lykewyſe was condēpned for the like, inſomuch that Xenophon, writing of him,De factis & dictis Socratis marueiled muche therof, conſidering he bare himſelfe ſo vpright. If the Heathen had ſuche a regarde to their fayned religions, what woulde they haue doone, if they had knowen the true and liuing god, our creator? And what oughte we chriſtians to doe touching the contemners of our true religion? Chriſte himſelfe commaundeth, that if any man doth

not geue attendance to the churches admonition, he willeth him to be taken for an Heathen and publicane. Therfore if that man be worthy to be taken for a Publicane, or Heathē perſone, which wyll not here the churche: Then the heretike whiche not onely is incorrigible, but alſo a contemptuous perſone againſt God and his churche, is worthye the name of an Heathen man, according to Chriſtes owne ſentence: and not worthy to lyue, or be conuerſant amonges chriſtians. If not worthy too lyue, then he is worthye death.
            In the olde lawe we reade in Deuteronomie this ſentence.Deu. xiiii. That man which is proude, and will not obey the prieſtes cōmandement, which that time doth miniſter

to thy lorde thy God, & the iudgement of the iudge, let hym die: wherin thou ſhalt take away an euell out of Iſraell. Alſo inDeu. xviii▪
                another place it is wrytten. The Prophete whiche beyng inflate with arrogance, wyll ſpeake thoſe thinges in my name, which I haue not commaūded him, let him be put to death. Foraſmuche then as al proude mē cōtemning the churches anthoritie, and the prieſt, are by the manifeſt ſcriptures worthy to be ſlayne: then it is not contrary to Gods woorde (as the brethren affirme) to puniſhe anye man for his opinions. S. Paule admoniſheth vs, yea &ii. Theſ iii Roma. 
                     •
                  vii entreateth vs too take heede of thē which ſowe ſedicion amōges the people, & to eſchewe their cō
               panie: for ſuch as they be, do not

ſerue their lord Chriſt, but their owne belly, ſeducing the mindes of the innocent with ſwete talke and faire perſwaſiōs. Suche areThe maner of our heretikes. our martyrs in theſe dayes, who in their lyfe tyme go aboute nothinge els but to ſowe ſedicion, either conſpiracie againſte their prince, and magiſtrates, or els to peruerte the innocent with their vaine perſwaſiōs & foliſhe talke. I would to God, ſaieth Paule,Gala. iiii. ii. Cor. x. Gala. v. that thei which trouble you wer cutte of from the congregacion. The whiche wordes of ſ. Paule ſemeth to bee an infallible rule touching the puniſhment of heretikes. But our men not regarding the diſcommodities whiche myght enſue by meanes of their falſe perſwaſions: crye out with one voyce, ſaying.
            
               
VVhat crueltie is this, to put toThe fonde woordes of the ſimple & rude people exclamed to the heretikes paſſing to death. death the brethren in chriſt? where do we reade in ſcriptures that chriſt or his Apoſtles ſought the death of any man? Therefore (ſaie they) it is mere tyrannie thus to perſecute the litle flocke, the choſen and elect veſſels of God, crying by the waie as they paſſe to deaah: Be cōſtant dere brethren, be conſtante in the faith, ſticke to it, it is not this temporall paine which you ought to regarde, your brekefaſt is ſharpe, your ſupper ſhalbe merye. Therefore the lorde ſtrengthen you.
            With theſe & ſuche like vayne woordes, they brynge the poore men in ſuche foles paradiſe, that thei with ſuche vaine arrogance, and ſmall Charitee, ſticke not to aduenture themſelfes into the fiery flambes. O ye foliſhe and

blynde Galathiens, who hath ſo bewytched you too thynke, that that man whiche ſticketh to hys opinion to death, and ſealeth the ſame with his bloude, as you terme it, therefore his opinion is good? But to anſwere your fōde obiection touching Chriſte & his Apoſtles, whether they ſoughte the death of anye man or not: ye ſhalbe anſwered by ſ. Auguſtine.Auguſtinus ſuper Ioannem▪
                For the Donatiſtes, in his tyme iuſtlye condempned for their hereſies, alleged the very lyke obiection, whom he anſwered thus. What Emperour thē did beleue in Chriſte? The cauſe why the Apoſtles required not the death of heretikes, was for that the ſworde of Heathen Prynces dyd not ſerue the Goſpel. But aſſoue as Conſtantine the fyrſt chriſtian

Emperour was baptized, the catholykes then cried out agaynſte heretikes. For if Emperours do puniſhe theft, murder, rape, adulterie, and periurie, why ſhuld thei not as well punyſhe hereſie and ſacrilege? Thus ſaint Auguſtine allegeth the cauſe, whye hereſye was not punyſhed in the primatiue churche. For if the Princes then had yelded to the Goſpell, & not followed their ſuperſticious Idolatrye, doubtles the quarell of Goddes enemies had been reuenged aſwell as nowe. And yet wee reade that one thynge was obſerued then aſwell as nowe: whiche was that all vayne and curious bokes, wherof we want no ſtoore at thys preſente, were burned openlye before al menne, and the ſumme which the bokes

die amount vnto, was fyue hundreth thouſande pence, as apperethAct. xix. in the Actes of thapoſtles. But here to note whether it be the cauſe, or els the death that maketh a martyr: we will alledge the ſaying of the late PropheteWhether it be the cauſe or the death that maketh a martyr. ofte by the proteſtantes cōpared to the old Prophetes, called Latymer, in his booke of ſermons,Latimers cōb
                     •
                  t with ſyr Thomas Seamers ſpirit made before the late kynges maieſtie Edwarde the ſixte, where ſhamefully raylyng vpon a dead man ſyr Thomas Seamer lorde Admyrall, diſgracyng him with all vile wordes and hiſtories of his lyfe paſte, that poſſiblye hee could deuiſe: he ſemed euen openly before the kyng to make a cō
               batte with his ſpirit. For as Plinye ſayeth, they that ſpeake euel of dead menne, ſeme to contende

and fyghte with their ſpirites. So this Prophete then to proue that his ſtoute diyng made not his quarell good, had the wordes enſuing.
            O ſay thei the mā died very boldly,In his .iiii. ſermon. he would not haue done ſo, had he not been in a iuſte quarell. This is no good argumente my frendes, a man ſemeth not to feare death, therfore his cauſe is good. This is a deceiuable argument: he wente to death boldely, ergo he ſtandeth in a iuſte quarel. The Anabaptiſtes that were burnt here in Englande, in diuer
                  •
                townes, as I haue hearde of credible men (I ſawe thē not my ſelfe) wēt to their death, euen intrepride, as ye will ſaye, without any feare in the world, cherefully, wel let them go. There were in the olde doctors tymes, another kynde of poyſoned

heretikes, that were called Donatiſtes. And theſe heretikes went to their executiō as though they ſhold haue gone to ſome 
                  •
               oly recreation, or banquet, to ſome belly chere, or to a plaie, And will you argue then, he goeth to his death boldly, or cherefully, ergo he dieth in a iuſt cauſe? Nay that ſequele foloweth no more thē this. A mā ſemes to be afrayd of death, ergo he dieth euill. And yet our ſauiour Chriſte was afrayde of death himſelf. Thē he afterwards warneth his audience not to iudge thoſe which are in authorite, but to praie for them. It becommeth not (ſaith he) to iudge great magiſtrates nor condempne their doynges. Vnles their dedes be openly and apparantly wicked. Charitie requireth the ſame, for charitie iudgeth no mā but well of euery body. &c.
            
               
Thus Latymer proueth that ſtoute diyng is no ſure token of a good quarell, and proueth it a falſe ſurmyſe, if anye doo beleue the cauſe of death to be true, becauſe of ſturdines in the tyme of the ſame. Alſo to proue that it is not the death that maketh a martir, but the cauſe. The cronicles make mencion of one Iohn Oldecaſtell
               Polidorus Libro. 2 2. a knyght, a valiaunt man, although he were wicked, who with one Roger Acton (togethersOlde caſtel (in a booke that Bale maketh of his death) is cano
                     ••
                  zed for a martir with him fauouriug Wickleffes opiniōs) cōſpired againſt the kynges maieſtie, then Henry the fyft, onely to ſette forwardes their conceiued opinions, & with a deſperate company aſſembled, thynkyng to obtayne the cytie of London, from the kyng. But beyng preuented, he was takē and

put into the towre of London. The ſayd Acton alſo, who within a whyle after, was worthely put to death, but Olde caſtell eſcaped pryſon, not withſtandyng within a ſhorte ſpace, he was taken agayne, & then hanged, drawen and quartered. But he wēt to his death ſo ſtoutly, as though he had nothyng deſerued to dye. But if hereſie, and treaſon, be no iuſt cauſes, then he dyed wrongfully, as in the cronycles more at large appereth. If the ſtoutnes of death be a iuſt cauſe to proue a martyr, then many whiche haue denyed Chriſte to be equall withA Flēming of the hereſie of ye Arriās, burnt in Smythfielde. the father, which was the Arrians opynion, were martyrs. Then Ioane Butcher is a martir. Thē the Flemyng whiche was burnt in Smythfielde, in the tyme of

kyng Edward is a martyr, who lyued in ſuch continencie and holynes of lyfe, that before his goyng to meate, he woulde fall proſtrate vpon the grounde, & geue thankes to God the father: hys dyete was ſo moderate, that in two dayes ſpace he vſed but one meale, & at the tyme of his death he was ſo frollicke, that he fared muche lyke our martyrs, in embracyngToys vſed of our martyrs. the redes, kyſſyng the poaſte, ſyngyng, and ſuche other toyes. In lyke ſorte the groſſeIoane Butcher, otherwyſe called Ioane of Kent. martyr, Ioane Butcher handled the matter. And where as one Skorie then preached before the people, in tyme of her death, ſhe reuyled and ſpytted at hym, makyng the ſygne of the gallowes towardes him, boldly affirming that all they that were not of her

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
opinion ſhuld be dampned. Yea & ſhe was ſo bold to ſay, that a. M. in Londō were of her ſect. Such & the like was y• charitie of Anne Aſkewe, ſo ofte by Bale lykened to Blandina that true martyr of Chriſtes churche, in his furious boke which he wrote of her death a noble pece of worke, & mete for ſuch a champion to be thauthor. The ſayde Anne Aſkewe, wasAnne Aſkewe. of ſuche charitie, that when pardon was offered, ſhe defied them all, reuyling the offerers therof, with ſuche opprobrious names, that are not worthy reherſall, makyng the lyke ſygnes too the preacher at her death, as her pue fellowe & ſyſtcr in Chriſt, Ioane Butcher dyd, at Skorie aforeſayde. Theſe arrogant and preſumptuous martirs, in the time

of their deathes, doo lytle eſteme the woordes of ſayncte Paule, ſayinge: If I had the ſpirite of prophecie, and knew al miſteries and all maner of cunnyng: Alſo if I had all fayth, in ſo muche as I could trāſlate, and cary awaye moūtaynes, yet were I nothyng if I lacked charitie. Moreouer, if I dyd diſtribute all my goodes in fedyng the poore people, and although I gaue my body to bee burned, hauing no charitie, it nothynge auayleth me. Thus yf they eſtemed the Godly exhortaciōs of holy ſcriptures, they wold not ſo vncharitably vſe thēſelfes eſpeciallye at the extremitie of death. But the deuel, whoſe martyrs they bee, dothe alwayes inſtructe his darlinges, to followe hys ragyng ſteppes. True are

the wordes of the wyſeman, ſaying. A ſturdy harte ſhall ſuſteine damage, and he that loueth peril therin ſhal periſh. Therfore ſturdynes, and ſelfe loue, is the onely cauſe of the martirdomes of our martyrs wherof do ſpryng innumerable faultes (as Cicero ſaith)Officiorum. Libro primo. When men puffed vp with ſtoutenes of opinion, be ſhamefully inuolued in foliſh error. Doutles a great faulte it is, and cōtrary to ciuile life, ſo to be addicted to ſelf loue and arrogācie: as to thinke our ſelues to bee ſo learned, that no perſwaſiō or terror can beate the mynde from that folly. A pitifull caſe it is to ſee, not only the learned, which for wāte of graceBlynde Bayarde. do fall, but alſo blynde bayarde, who although he be vtterly blind and dull, yet his corage is ſuche,

that he careth not to leape ouer hedge and dytche, I meane the ſymple & ignoraunt, whiche only for wante of knowledge do erre, and yet haue ſuch audacitie, that they care not to ſpend their liues in their folly. And for that theſe blynde bayardes doo ſo ſtycke in their opinions to death: it is wō
               dered at of many, not of learned or godly men, but of brayneſicke foles, which like fethers wyll be caried about with euery blaſt of newe doctrine. At the deathes of whiche you ſhall ſee more people in Smythfeilde flockyng together on heapes in one daye, then you ſhall ſee at a good ſermon or exhortacion made by ſome learned man in a whole weke. Their glorie is ſuche vpon theſe glorious martyrs. And why is this?

becauſe their myndes are geuen wholy to vayne thynges, muche lyke the Atheniens. For when Demoſthenes
               Laertins in 
                     •
                  us vita. was tellyng them a ſolēpne tale of an aſſes ſhadowe, and vpon the ſoubden brake of, leauing the tale halfe tolde, they inſtantly intreated him to make an ende. O ye foles, quod Demoſthenes, ye loue to heare ſuche trifling tales, but if I went about to declare vnto you any ſerious matter, you would ſkarſe geue me the hearyng. Thus fare oure countremē, if there be any vayne ſyghtes to be ſeen, or any foliſhe matters to be heard, lorde howe they runne, and ſweate in their buſines. But if there be a ſermō at Paules croſſe, after they haue 
                  •
               aried there a while, to here ſome newes, and the preacher at the

prayers, lorde howe they vaniſhe away in cluſters, repairing into Paules, and either by & ſell ſome bargaine in the body of the churche, or els telle ſome tale of an Aſſes ſhadowes. But to the purpoſe, if oure men wyll needes be martyrs, as they pretende to be, where is their modeſtie, their pacience,Special
                     •
                   poynces to be required in a martyr. their tharitie, their loue, that is required in a martyr? I am ſure, they dare be bolde to cō
               pare them ſelues to the martyrs of the primatiue Churche. To whom they be nothing lyke. For the ſure token then of a martyr,Euſebius lib. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪ Cap. 
                     •
                  . was to haue a ſure profeſſion of Gods truth, whiche token they can not chalenge. For in it ſelfe their profeſſion is deuided, vnles they would make Gods truthe (whiche is one) to be diuers.

If they wyll chalenge their modeſtie, they be farre deceiued, thei vſe no ſuche glorious titles. For if any man hadde named them martyrs in their cōmunications or letters, they would reproue him therefore, ſaying: that that title was worthy for Chriſt only, who alone was the faithful witnes of his truth. If they will chalenge to themſelues charitie, pacience, and ſuche lyke: they be as wyde. For Paule, Stephen, and the reſt, vſed no taūting wordes or reprochefull checkes againſte the Byſhoppes and magiſtrates in their time, but with mylde coū
               tenaunce, they anſwered their obiections. But our martyrs wil not ſticke to call them ſlaughtermen, butchers, blodſuckers, and ſuche lyke blaſphemous names,

more lyke helhoundes then holy ones: ſuch is their paciēce. Paule beyng brought before AnaniasAct. xxiii. the hye preiſt, and beyng beaten of the ſtanders by, ſaying: Doeſt thou ſtrike me thou paynted wall, doeſt thou ſitte vpon me here in iudgement, according to the lawe, and doeſt then commaunde that I ſhould be ſtriken, contrarie to the lawe? Then the ſtanders by tolde him that it was the hye preiſt. I knewe not (ꝙ he) that it was theExod xxi
                     •
                  . Philip. iii. Matth. xxii Paule waſory for hi
                     •
                   taunt, but the proteſtā
                  tes reioyſe in theire. hye preiſt, for it is written. Thou ſhalt not reuile the head of the people. Paule herein was ſory that he had reuiled the magiſtrate. But our martyrs forgetting S. Paules rule, ceaſe not frō tyme to tyme, contumeliouſly to rayle vpon the byſhop, & other learned and godly menne, with the moſt

vyleſt termes they can deuiſe, & yet ſheweno cauſe of ſorowe, but like Oreſtes, Tantalꝰ, Theſeus, and Proſerpina, and ſuche other infernal furies, they exclame in a tragical maner vpon God and his churche, the heauens, the yerth, and all that is. But yet one thing there is, wherein they greatelyThe conſtācie wher in our martyrs triūph triumphe, that is, the conſtancie of theſe men (oh their conſtancie is wonderful) which is no cauſe, as partly is touched before, to proue them martyrs. For if their conſtancie were vſed in a good cauſe, then were it worthy fame. What follye is ſo great, ſayeth Tully, or ſo vnworthy a wyſemansDe natura deo 
                     •
                  um. lib. i. conſtancie, as is falſe opinion? The conſtancie wherof our men ſo bragge of, is not for any opinion that is good or commendable,

it is but onely for worldly prayſe or diſprayſe, the zeale of whether beyng taken awaye, it would cōuert into inconſtancie. The cauſe, as is aforeſayd, doth make a martyr, and not the valiant death. A notable hiſtorie occurreth nowe to my remembraunce of a true martyr, and it is reherſed in a booke made by that moſte excellent & well learned gentleman, called ſir Thomas Elyot knyght. Valeriane beyngThe gouernor ye third boke. A true martyr. Emperour of Rome, & perfecuting the churche, in Egypte was a chriſten man preſented vnto him, whom he beholding to be yong and luſtye, thynking therfore to remoue him frō the faith, rather by venereall mocions, thā by ſharpnes of tormentes, cauſed him to be layde in a bedde within

a faire gardin, hauing about him all floures of ſwete odour, & moſt delectable ſauours & perfumes. And than cauſed a fayre tender yonge woman to be layde by him al naked, who ceaſed not ſwetely and louyngly to embrace & kyſſe him, ſhewing to him all pleaſant deuiſes, to the intent to prouoke him to fornication. There lacked litle that the yong man was not vanquiſhed, and that the fleſhe yelded not to the ſeruice of Venꝰ. Whiche thing the yong man perceiuing, whiche was armed with grace, & ſeing none other refuge, with his tethe did gnawe of his own tōgue: wherwith he ſuffred ſuche incredible paine, that therwith the brēning of voluptuous appetites was vtterly extincte. In this notable acte, I wote not

whiche is to be cōmended, eitherA merueilous reſiſtāce of the ſpirite againſt the fleſhe, and a good leſſon for our maried votaries. his inuincible corage in reſiſting ſo muche againſt nature, or his wyſedome in ſubduyng the leſſe paine with the more, & byting off that wherby he might be cōſtrained to blaſpheme god, or renoūce his religion. Sure I am that he therfore receiued immortall life, and perpetual glory. This yong man was a true martyr, this mā folowed his maiſter Chriſt in bearyng his croſſe to crucifie the affections. This mā ſhewed a notable example of cōſtancie, in not denying his creator, the author & founder of his fayth.
            
               Ignatius, of whom we reade inIgnatius. 
               Euſebius, was a conſtant and vndoubted martyr, whoo cared for no puniſhment, perſecution or other torment. So was alſo Policarpus
               
and Iuſtinus martir. TheſePolicarpus. Iuſtinus. and ſuche like are true martyrs, whiche againſt the infideles, and Gods enemies yelded their bodies to the ſeruice of death: not caring either for wordes, fame, or praiſe of men. Theſe men wer with tormentes inſpeakable conſtrayned to denye the name of Chriſt: Theſe men were allured by faire promiſes to forſweare their maiſter. But oure men are with tormentes & terror of death compelled to embrace Chriſtes fayth, and to relinquiſhe their Iewiſhe opinions. Thauncient martyrs were tormented to the intent they might fall to Idolatrie. Oure men are intreated by all faire meanes poſſible to worſhip the liuyug God. O what madnes is this, to ſeme to dye

for the name of Chriſt, when the ſentence geuers do exhorte them to embrace Chriſt? Who can call this perſecution? If the Turke be perſecuted, when he is by a chriſtiā gently perſwaded to be baptized, and to put vpō him Chriſt, and to forſake Mahomet, then maye the heretike ſaye that he isIn what cauſes men ought cheifly to ſpende their lyues. iuſtly perſecuted. But if oure menne doo loue wylfull death, and bee wery of their life in this worlde: I would haue them either arme them ſelues in battell to fight againſt the great Turke or other enemies of the fayth, or els to offre them ſelues in Turkey to bee burnte, or otherwyſe perſecuted, and not in chriſtendome, where Chriſt is ſufficiētly knowen to all men: if they wyll nedes dye, to be renowmed after

their death, let them do as manyA notable death to die for the cauſes of the kyng and Quenes maieſties. notable menne among the Romaynes, & other haue done, fight for their common welthes ſake, and for the cauſe of their princes. Brutus the fyrſt conſull of Rome, with ſuche a zeale ſought to defende the libertie of his countre, that hee encountred ſo fiercely with Aruns, ſonne to Tarquinius the proude, whiche was baniſhed for the rape of Lucrece, that in the cloaſe with their launces they both periſhed.
            
               Mutius Sceuola, a worthy gentleman emonges the Romaines, to deliuer his countrie from the ſiege of Porſenna king of Hetrurie boldly entred into his cāpe, thinking to kyll the kyng: but when he came into the pauilion where the ſouldiours were wont to be

pa
                  •
               ed, he diſcouered his dagger & ſtroke at the kynges ſecretarie, ſuppoſing it had been the kyng, becauſe their apparail was much like. But being taken & demaunded what he was, & why he toke vpō him ſuch an enterpriſe: with a ſterne countenance anſwered: I am a citizen of Rome, quod he, my name is Mutius, and I beyng an enemie would faine haue kylled myne enemy, & my ſtomake is no leſſe to dye for the cauſe, then it was ready to do the ſlaughter. For it is the parte of a Romaine both to do, & to ſuffre valiantly: with other y• like wordes. Wherwith the king beyng moued, ſaid vnto him, that vnleſſe he would diſcloſe vnto him what treaſon was imagined againſt his perſon, he ſhould with fyre bee tormented

to death. Then behold
                  •
                O kyng (quod he) what a ſmale matter the fyre is to them which ſeke to be renowmed with glory: and immediatly thruſt his hand into the fyre and burnte it quite of. By whiche facte his countre was deliuered from the extremitie of that ſiege.
            Moreouer, Codrus kyng of Athenes,Inſlinus. lib .ii. at ſuche tyme as the citie was in great diſtreſſe, by reaſon of the ſiege layde to the ſame, repared to Appollo, by Oracle to know what ſhould become of the citie. The anſwere was, that vnleſſe he himſelfe ſhuld be ſlain, the citie ſhould be wonne. Codrus therfore bearing a natural pietie to his countree: rather contented to geue his owne life, then the citie ſhuld be geuen into the hādes

of his enemies: put on a beggers apparel, and conueyed himſelfe into the campe of his enemies, and there gaue an occaſion to one of the ſouldiors to ſtrike him and ſo was ſlaine with a byll.
            Wherby the ſiege not longe after brake vp. Theſe examples are ſufficient to ſpurre theſe wylfull men forwardes, rather to geue their liues for the defence of the cōmon welth & Princes, againſt the enemies, then with ſuche obſtinacie to conſume it in the fyre, and no cauſe why. They might in ſpendynge their lyues in the cauſe of their Princes, or els in defence of Gods religion, deſerue bothe rewarde at the handes of God, and alſo immortall fame in merityng well of their cōmon wealth. This is the death wherin

a man ought to triumphe: In this death a man heapeth vp in heauen treaſures inſpeakable, & in erth fame immortal: a worthy death, and worthy a chriſten mā. For this cauſe it is that the feaſt of S. Stephens martyrdome is yerely celebrated: For this cauſe it is that the bleſſed feaſtes of the Apoſtles haue their yerely recourſe. For this cauſe it is that the memories of Martyrs be regiſtred in the Churche of God.
            For this cauſe it is that the annual celebracions of all the ſaintes of Chriſt, are hadde in yerely remembrance. Then all men which entende to embrace the benefites of Chriſt, and ſeke meanes therby to attaine to ſaluation, let thē rather by this kynde of deathe, that is to ſay, either to fight and

ſuffer death for the defen
                  •
                of the name of Chriſt, or els in the quarell of his Princes, and other magiſtrates. But it is thoughte of many of theſe prot
                  •
               ſtantes, that no man ought to ſuffer death for his cōſcience. And they lerned the ſame of Luther, who in dede is of that opinion. In Turkey (ſaye they) a man may liue with his cō
               ſcience, why then ſhould a chriſtē man amonges chriſtians, be punyſhed for his conſcience? Then may I aſke them the like queſtiō if a Turke or heretike maye vſe his conſcience: Why did they puniſhe Ioane Butcher & the Flemming, whiche were of the ſecte of the Arrians? For their conſcience led them ſo to beleue. Why maye not the Turkes vſe Mahome
                     •
                  es lawe amonges vs? Why did Peter

in 
                  ••
               e Actes of the ApoſtlesActes. v. deſtroye Ananias and Saphyra, for makyng a ley? For their conſcience conceiled the portiō which they kepte b
                  ••
               ke. If it be not laufull for a man to dye for his conſcience, than they did ill too punyſhe hereſye by death, in the like tyme of procedinges, wherevnto I am ſure they wyll not graunt. For in any wyſe they muſt be no lyers: although it be proued manifeſtlye to their faces. TuſheMath. 
                     •
                  v. ſaye they: ſuffre the Cockell too growe with the good corne tyll the harueſt come. Then the lorde of the harueſt ſhall deuide thē, & ſhall put the good corne in to his barne, and caſt the cockle into the fyre. But this parable (GOD wote) maketh nomore for their purpoſe than it doth againſt the

hangyng of theues and other offenders. For if the offenders and breakers of the lawe, I meane ſuch as cōcerne treaſon, murdre, or fellony ſhould liue, how ſhould a kyng or ruler gouerne his common wealth, wherin the honor & maiſtie of a kyng conſiſteth. And like as if ſuch malefactors ſhuld 
                  •
               ee ſuffred to continue in a common wealth withoute anye reſtrainte of puniſhement, the ſame comon wealth, with the gouernor thereof, were lyke to fall too ruine: Euen ſo in the ſtate of the churche: if hereſie ſhould be mainteined, & the fautours thereof eſcake vnpunyſhed, it woulde not onely brynge the iuſte plague of God vpon the ſufferers, but alſo it woulde vtterly conſume all faieth & good orders, & ſo bringe

the ſoule of man to euerlaſtynge confuſion. And that a kyng may punyſhe ſuche malefactours by death, aſwell ſuch as offende the churche, as ſuche as noye the cō
               mon welth, it doth appere by S. Paules wordes to Timothe. Vve know (ſaith he) the lawe is good, if
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 
                        •
                     . a man vſe it laufully, knowing this howe that the lawe is not giuen vnto a rightuous man, but to the vnrightuous and diſobedient, to wicked men, and ſynners, to vnreuerēt and prophane, with ſuche other: And then concludeth, that if ther be any other thinge contrary too holſome doctrine of the Goſpell, the glorie of the bleſſed GOD, which goſpel is committed vnto me. Now note here that he ſaith the law is not geuen vnto rightuous men, whoſe wicked dedes reherſing

to the Romaines aſwell, as he doth in this place, he ſayth is worthye of death. May not a kyng iuſtly put them to death by the lawe, whiche lawe he ſaith is good, if a man vſeth it laufullye Then to execute it vpon the vnrightuous, which committed any falte againſt the Goſpell, whiche reproueth true religiō: is a thing moſte laufull, whiche fautes are adiudged by the churche worthy excommunication, that is to ſay: to cut them of whiche are obſtinate, as ſ. Paule wyſheth Titus.
               Tit. iii. Nowe if the lawe be good to cut them of, as rottē branches, which either be authors of ſectes, or offenders otherwiſe, the lawe iudging them worthy death: then it is a thing perſwaded by ſcriptur to burne ſuche braunches, which

are dampned by their owne iudgemēt, & no iniurie done to thone or thothe
                  •
               , but charitie in cuttig them of: that thei ſhould ſinne no more in y• like faultes to encreſſe their own dāpnation. VVe woldContra Creſcomum gram. libro. 4. cap. 4. not (ſaith ſaynt Auguſtine) haue them cut of (meaning heretikes) from the other ioyntes and mēbers of the body, but foraſmuche as the wounde by cutting away the dead fleſh, may ſoner be healed, then if it were ſuffered to remaine ſtil. Therfore a more holſom remedy is foùd with a ſhort paine to eaſe the grief, then to ſuffer it to feſter and rankc
                     •
                  e the other membres. So it appereth that it is a moſt peſtilent error to thinke that noone for any opinion, or conſcience oughte too be put to death. But peraduenture they wyll alledge agayne: ſaying: why doth God ſay, which

is the lorde of the harueſt, ſuffre the cockle, and the good corne to growe together till the harueſ
                  •
               , leſte you pull vp the good corne therwith▪ Doutles euen for this cauſe. We ſe by experience, when ſeedes good and bad are throwē vpon the earth together.: whyle they be yonge, it is daungerous to plucke vp the one, leſte the other be plucked vp alſo. But i
                  •
                they be ſuffered to growe till the good corne haue a ſtronge roote, then the cockle growing vp therwith, may be eaſely diſcerned, &The cau
                     ••
                   why heretikes wernot punyſhed in the 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ti
                     •
                  e 
                     •
                  hu
                     〈…〉
                  
                without daunger of hurtyng the good corne, the cockle may be roted out. Euen ſo in the infancie of the churche, at ſuche tyme as the fayth was not throughly roted in the hartes of men, muche lenite and genlenes was vſed, in ouercommynge the ſtubburnes

of heretikes, leaſt the weake chriſtians not fully inſtructed in the fayth, might haue fallē therby. So that there was no ſharpnesAt what tyme the ſword begā to ſerue the Goſpell. ſhewed vpō any, till the time of Maximus thēperour, by whoſe authorite, heretikes began to bee odible, and were cut of by the tē
               porall ſwoorde. After whome Theodoſius, Valentinianus, Martianus, the like Emperours raigned in whoſe times alſo, lawes were made for the punyſhyng of heretikes, and ſuch as were authors of euill doctrine, & the cauſe was for that the fayeth of Ieſus began firmely to take holde, aſwell in Emperoures, Kynges, and Princes, as alſo in others. And the churche (as it is nowe) ſoo growen that it hathe ſoo ſtronge roote, that hell gates ſhall not preuayle againſte it: that is too

ſaye: neyther the perſecution of tyrantes, nor the peruerſite of heretikes, can ouerthrowe it: the churche, I ſaye, nowe beyng in this ſtate, & that heretikes maye eaſly be diſcerned, as cockle is in harueſt (which is then weded for ouergrowing the good corne) doth by by excommunication cut them of, as ſcripture commaundeth. For euery peruerſe doctrine is, as ſaint Hierome ſaith, Leauē.
                  
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   a
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . And leanen oughte to bee taken from the doughe. A ſparckle as ſoone as is doth appeare, ought to be quenched: rotten fleſh ought to be cut awaye: a ſkabby ſhepe, ought too be repealed from the flocke, leaſt the houſe, the doughthe body, & the flocke be throughly corrupted, do burne, do putrifie and marre.
            
               
               Arrius in Alexandria, was but one ſparcle: but becauſe it was not immediatly put out, y• flame therof deſtroyed the hole worlde. What mercy is this to fauour, 
                  ••
                to bryng all other in peril of their liues? Meaning heretikes, who if they myght bee ſuffered too reigne, would bryng all thynges to ruine, as is aforeſayd. Of thatEpiſtola ad Galath. cap. 1. mynde is Chriſoſtome, that eloquent Atlas, one of the pillers of goddes veritie, ſaying. Haue you not hearde (ſaieth he,) that he whiche in the olde teſtament, gathered ſtyckes vpō the Sabboth daye, for that he offended that one commaundement, was deſtroyed with extreame death? Haue you not heard alſo, that Ozi, whiche did but ſtaye vp the Arke from falling, was immediatly

ſtroken ſtarke dead, becauſe he toke vpon hym an vnfit miniſterie? Therefore dothe the violacion of the Saboth, and the touchyng of the Arke, ſo muche offende God, that the offendours could obtayne no pardon? What Pardon and excuſe ſhall he haue then, that doth corrupte holſome doctrine, and in place thereof ſoweth wycked opinions? Thus Chryſoſtome and the other Doctours of Chriſtes churche, iudge them, whiche by their euell ſuggeſtions corrupte the ſymple membres of the churche, worthy temporall deathe, and punyſhement. Then that opinion whiche the Proteſtantes conceyue of their owne brayne, vpon the aforeſayde parable of the goſpell, and alſo that no man oughte too

ſuffer death for his conſcience, is quite fruſtrate, & of none effecte.
            And becauſe our heretikes wilThe bones of our martirs, of ſome preſerued for reliques nedes haue their men to be taken for martyrs, ſome of them counterfayting the trade of the auncient ſtate of the true churche, gather together the burnt bones of theſe ſtynking martyrs, entendyng thereby (by lyke) to ſhryne the ſame, or to preſerue them for relykes, that at ſuche a tyme as whē an heretike is burnt, ye ſhal ſee a route encloſing the fyer, for that purpoſe. And when the fyer is done, they lye wallowyng like pygges in a ſtie to ſcrape in that hereticall dongehill for the ſayde bones. Yea and as it is reported, ſome goſſyps and fellowe diſciples of theſe wicked apoſtles, vſe the ſame nexte to their hartes in

the mornyng, beyng grated in a cuppe of Ale, too preſerue them from the chyncoughe, and ſuche other maladies incident to ſuche hoote burning ſtomakes.
            A prety medicine & apte for ſuch braineſicke pacientes. Thei may be well compared to Artemiſia, of whome we rede in Aulus Gellius,
               De 
                     •
                  octibus atti
                     •
                  is lib. x. cap. xviii. which was wife to Mauſolꝰ king of Caria, who when her huſbande was dead ſhe was of ſuch an affectiō (being beyond al meaſure rapt wt his loue) that after the funeralles was done, ſhe gathered together all the bones and aſhes of her huſbande, and minglinge the ſame with perfumes and other ſwete odours, ſhe dranke them vp, declaring by ſuche outwarde tokens her immeſurable affection. Many of our goſſeps

taken with the ſame ſpirite in loue (not with their: owne huſbandes, whoſe lyke examples I neuer herd of) but with their mery martyrs, that for their ſakes they care not to quaffe vppe the poudet of their durtye bones too declare their burning affections. A pityfull caſe and wyth teares too be lamented, that the innumerable relyques of ChriſtesTrue reliques contempned. true martirs were ſo wyckedlye neglected, as they haue bene in the late malicious tyme. But thei were thē rediculous to theſe ſortes of menne, who cryed oute with al wehemence: to what purpoſe are the reſeruacion of the dead bones, and ſo contempning the reliques of thapoſtles, Iohn Baptiſt, and ſuch other holy and bleſſed ſainctes, are not nowe aſhamed

to reſerue to theim ſelues the vyle bones of theſe blaſphemous martyrs, who neyther in puritie of lyfe, or conſtancie in death were worthye the names of Chriſtians. Thus theſe proteſtantes contrarie to their owne doctrine, ſtriue with their owne ſhadowes. They in their bookes and talke contempne reliques, & yet vſynge the ſame after thyr owne fancies, they are contented to allowe thē. Who cannot playe Democritus part continually too laughe at their folly? or who can forbeare to ſaye: Ocaecas hominum mē
                  tes, o pectora caeca? For what is blyndnes, if this be none? Moreouer when Rogers their pſeudmartyr (protomartyr I woulde ſaye)Rogers burnt in Smithfield & the fond: imaginations of diuers in the tyme of his death. was burnt in Smythfield, were there not diuers marchaunt men

and others, which ſeing certayne pigions flying ouer the fire that haunted to a houſe harde adioyninge, beyng amaſed with the ſmoke forſooke their neſtes, and flew ouer the fixe, were not aſhamed boldely to affirme that the ſame was the holy ghoſte in the lykenes of a doue. This thynge is ſufficiently knowen by experience to them which were there preſent. Then by the lyke argument they might haue ſayde the crowes which the ſame time houered ouer the fyre, were deuels. But what blaſphemy is this, ſuch opinionatiue fooles to beleue or credite ſuche fanſies? The Heathen poetes neuer deuyſed more toyes vpon Iupiter, Iuno, Diana, Actaeon, Io, or ſuche other counterfaites, then the madbraynes

of the proteſtantes haue inuented tales vpon theſe Ethnikes. Whoſe lying lippes are ſo ſugred with falſe reportes, that y• brethe therof is marueylous delectable to a great many of the ſame generation: yea it is ſuppoſed that a great numbre be founde as hyrelinges to maintayne that arte, which amonges the ſimple wander as pylgrymes too publyſhe their hidde miſteries: much lyke Sinon, who with his diſguiſed habite,Virgil aenei
                     •
                   S
                     ••
                  ur
                     •
                  do. and proporcion of body, togethers with his vnhappy oracion, begyled the poore Troianes. But al wyſe men whiche can beware of other mennes harmes, no doubte wyll take heede of the loytering adders, which hide thē
               ſeluesLoyteryng Adders. in the graſſe. And as for other, whiche paſſe for no admonicion,

I feare me (without God of his mercy ſpare them) will verefie the prouerbe: Sero ſ
                     ••
                  iu
                     •
                  t 
                     •
                  br 
                     ••
                   
                  
                     •
                  es, and ſo will repent with hadde I wiſt, as the vnhappy Troianes did. But yet theſe ouerthwart neighbours, thynkyng too caſte another bone for the catholikes to gnawe vpon, hyt them home as they thynke with this obiection. Oh ſay thei, what a beggerlyAnother obiection of ye proteſtātes. religiō is theirs, which hath no man valiauntly to ſticke to the death in the defence therof? For a good ſhepehearde wyll geue his owne lyfe for his ſhepe. Therefore it appereth, our religion is founde, whiche hath had ſoo manye ſhepeheardes, that hath beſtowed their lyues in the defence of the verite, But here they begynne too tryumphe like vnto a peſtilēt heretike in the primatiue

churche, called Montanus
               Euſ
                     ••
                  ius 
                     ••
                  . 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                who affirmed that he was the holy ghoſte. And when he and his adherentes were conuicted of hereſie, thei boaſted (as our men do nowe) that they had many men, whiche ſpent their liues in theyr opiniō, and that that was an infallible argument, that they had the ſpirite of God. Unto whome it was aunſwered: that that caſe was not alwayes true. For certen other heretikes there were, which boaſted of their falſe martyrs, as the Marcionites, which denied Chriſte, and other a great numbre. And becauſe they ſaye that in this Realme there were none, which were cōtent to geue their liues for the defēce of their faith: the matter is ſo apparantly knowē to be falſe, as the yong

infante can by report of his own parentes ſaye the contrary. But what ſhall I nede to reherſe the moſte godly, and no leſſe learned, whiche haue bene contented too haue not only ben depryued their nobilite and great poſſeſſiōs, but alſo to yelde their neckes too the ſtroke of the axe and ſworde, for the defence of the libertie of chriſtes churche. Whoſe fames are ſo regiſtred in the volume of immortalite, that no cōtinuance of time nor inconſtancie of fortune, can wipe them out of memory. What ſhall I nede to remembre Albanꝰ
               
                  
                     •
                  edaeccleſiaſt. hiſtoriae gentis Anglorīs lib. 1. Capit. ſepr
                     •
                  mo. the fyrſt martyr in this realme, which with moſte vile tormentes was perſecuted of Diocleſian thē
               peroure, in the yeare of our lorde. 286. for the faieth of the Goſpell, and the verite of the church, that

one Fortunatus, wrytynge of the prayſe of virgins ſaythe.
            Albanū egregium foecūd a Britannia profert.
            
               Britane of abundance, and plēty moſte able.
               Procreated Albane that martyr honorable.
            
            Whiche worthy man was buried at a place then called VVarlingaceſter, now called of his own name ſainct Albons. Where was exerted a notable monument or abbey, for perpetuall memory of this worthy man. Many other at that time likewiſe ſuffred, for the cauſe of the churche. WhatSaint Thomas of Cā
                  torbury. ſhal I ſtande here vpō the prayſe of that godly man, ſainct Thomas ſometimes archebyſſhop of Cantorbury: vnto whome I wil attribute none other praiſe, then Polydorꝰ Virgilius, & other chrono

graphers do. Who called hym vir
               Polydori Virg. Angl. hiſt li. 13 Charion, cromcor. lib. 3. quart. monar. ter
                     •
                  iae aetatis. Georg. Liuius. 
               ſumma integritate at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   prudentia, a man of muche holynes and wyſdome. Who after he hadde bene in exile more then .vii. yeares, banyſſhed by Henry the ſecōd into Fraūce, not for ambicion as the malicious headdes of the proteſtantes conceiue, but onely for admonyſhing the kyng for miſuſing the liberties of the churche, for peruerting godly orders, for il & wicked liuing, & for exterminating the ſpirituall promocions vpon noughty vſes. Theſe were the cauſes why this man was banyſhed, not here reherſed for zeale, but ſpoken for truthe, not gathered without authoritie, but reported vpon the wordes of chronicles, the faythfull arbiters of thynges alredy paſt. This mā I

ſay to thintent the thinges aforeſayde, ſhould not decaye, had rather to haue geuen his life, not of malice to withſtand the king, vnto whom he bare moſte obediēce, but for the zeale he had to gods churche, the chambre of the pore. But as now there wanteth none if tyme ſerued, whiche would not ſtycke too doo miſchiefe: euen ſo then their wanted not vnhappie harebraynes, to rydde this godly man of his lyfe. Who within aAnno do▪ 
                  
                     ••••
                  
                whyle after as a iuſte rewarde for their cruell facte in a moſte miſerable maner, as the hiſtory declareth, ended their lyfes. The deathe of whiche godly manne was not onely a cauſe of greate repentaunce to the king himſelf, but the people vniuerſally moſte deuoutly be wailed his death ſaying:

               VVe the people and flocke ofThe lamentatiō of the people vpō the death of ſ. Thomas. Chriſt haue loſt our good and godly ſhepeharde. Thus this godlye man of the godly people thē was had in gret admiratiō: although it pleaſeth the gallantes of our time to ſaye otherwyſe. What ſhall I ſtande here vpō the deathIohn Fiſwer the biſſhop of Rocheſter. Sir Thomas More. of Iohn Fyſſher ſemetyme Byſhop of Rocheſter, a man of notable learning & innocencie of lyfe, or the death of the ſecond Cicero, ſyr Thomas More, a man endewed with heauenlye eloquence. Qui demum ambo maluerunt de Vita, quam
               Polidor. lib. 27. 
               de Ro p
                     •
                  ntificis autoritatis ſententia decedere, Vt ocius in caelo, quemadmodum ipſi ſperabant, fruerentur aeuo.
            
            What ſhall I nede to ſtandeThe poore monkes of the Charterhouſe. vpon the poore Monkes of the Charterhouſe, who were contented to ſuffer their bodies to be diſmembred

in peces and to be hanged vpon ſondry gybbettes, rather then thei would yelde to the depriuacion of the Popes authoritie. Whoſe worthy names, worthy perpetuall memory hereafter followe. That is to ſaye: Iohn Houghten, Robert Laurēce, Auguſtine Webſter, Humfrey Middelmore, William Exmewe, Sebaſtian Nedigate, Wylliā Horn, Iohn Rocheſter, Iames Walwerke, Rychard Bere, Thomas Ionſon, Thomas Grene, Iohn Dauye, William Grenewoode, Tho. Screuen, Robert Salte, Walter Pereſon, and ThomasThe abbottes of Rending Colcheſter and others. Reding. What nede I els to ſtay vpon the deathes of the good mē, the Abbotes of Colcheſter, Glaſtonbury and Redyng, or els of Powel, Fetherſtone, Abell, Germayne,

Stone, Forreſt, & manye others, to whome death was nothyng ferefull for the quarell of God and his churche? Theſe and a greate number mo died for the cauſe of the catholyke fayeth, that fayeth whiche hath euer cō
               tinued from age to age, with the conſente of all kyngdomes chriſten, euen from the begynnyng, whoſe memory ſhall be magnified tyll the ende of the worlde. But the deathes of oure cranke Heretykes, lye dead and are buryed in the graue of cankred obliuion, couered with perpetuall infamye, excepte they be enrolled in a fewe threehalfepennye bookes, whiche ſteale oute of Germanye replete aſwell with treaſon againſt the Kyng & Quenes maieſties, as with other abhominable lyes.
            
               Moreouer in the late kynges tyme Edwarde the ſyxte, wherein hereſie expreſſed her game, there were many godly mē which for the defence of the moſte honorable▪ Sacramente of the Altar and the other ſacramentes, yelded their bodies to pryſon. As the late worthye Prelate Doctour Stephen Gardiner byſhop of Wyncheſter, with other Byſſhoppes, and men of greate learning. Yea & if their deathes had bene required, they woulde with moſte willing heartes haue ſuffered the ſame. But the proceders then knewe well inoughe, that that was not the waye too procede in their doynges, leaſte they ſhould haue become odious to all ſortes of people. But they fared lyke VVyat the late rebell

of Kent, who went aboute to achyueWy
                     •
                  t the Kentiſh rebell. his enterpriſe not with rapine and ſpoyle (according to the nature of rebellion) but with all lenite and gentlenes, thereby too allure the peoples hartes, the rather to embrace and aide his attemptes: but as his cloake was then ſpaniſhe, ſo was the others of late time Iewiſhe. Then hauing all theſe not onely wel learned, but alſo godly men, whiche aſwell haue ſuffred paynes of death for their religion, as theſe proteſtātes haue for theirs, what haue they gayned then by this obiection? If the ſtoute death of a man doeth approue his cauſe good, then what cauſe haue the proteſtantes to refell the religion nowe vſed? But here to finyſhe this matter, & to procede in further

explication of the fantaſticall feates and abuſes of the proteſtantes, let vs learne further of Saint Paule: who ſaith theſe wordes. Knowe this (ſaith he) that
               ii. Tim. iii. 
               in the laſt daies ſhal come perillous tymes. For men ſhalbe louers of thē ſelues, couetous, boaſters, proude, curſed ſpeakers, diſobedient to fathers and mothers, vnthankeful, vngodly, vnkinde, truce breakers, falſe accuſers, Riotors, diſpiſers of them that be good, Trayters, heddy, hygh minded, gredy vpon voluptuouſnes more thē the louers of God, hauing a ſimilitude of godlineſſe, but deniing the power therof, and ſuche abhorre. For of this ſorte are they which enter into houſes, and bring into bondage women laden with ſinne, whiche women are led with diuers luſtes euer lerning and neuer
               
               able to come to knowledge of the trut he Nowe lette euerye man weyghe theſe wordes of ſ. Paule And note if we haue not had amonges vs the like falſe prophetes with the lyke cōdicions. FirſtMath. 
                     •
                  . Selfe loue and yelding 
                     •
                  o the fleſh. he ſayeth they ſhall be louers of themſelues. Chriſt ſaieth, He that loueth himſelfe more then me, is not worthy of me. Who be they, whiche loue them ſelfes more thē they do Chriſte? Doubtes they that prefer y• loue of this worlde before Chriſt, geuing place to the worlde, and the luſtes thereof.
            Which vice is commen to al men and vſed of to many, eſpecially to ſuche whereof mencion is made before, whiche neglectynge the brynging of their affections into bondage, liue as their owne ſenſualitie doth leade them, not caringe

for the holſome preceptes of goddes moſte holy worde, but diſobeying the lawes of the magiſtrates conſtituted too a good purpoſe to yoke the heauye carcaſe, to thyntent he maye the better obeye the preceptes diuine.
            For if the appetites do rule with out reſiſtance, they will ſoone ouercome y• imbecillitie of nature. A victory or fielde is ſoone won, if there be none to reſiſte. Then the proteſtantes beynge maryed prieſtes, yeldynge the ſeruyce of their bodye to the fraylitie of the fleſhe, was thereof ouercommed. But if they had bene good ſouldiours, and had fought vnder the ſtanderd of continencie, no doubt but they had wonne the fielde. Thinke you Alexander the greatQ. Curtius, libr
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  
                had he geuen his minde too ſerue

his appefites in his firſt warres, had proued ſo valiant a conquerour▪ No truely. For after his firſt victory agaynſt Darius, kyngA notable example of Alexander touchinge the brydelinge of his own luſtes. of Perſia hauing alwayes in his hoſte the wyfe of theſame Darius whiche incomparably excelled all other women in beautie, woulde neuer after he had once ſene her, haue her to come into his preſence, albeit that he cauſed her eſtate ſtyll to be maynteyned, and with aſmuche honor as euer it was. And to them whiche wondryng at the ladies beautie, marueyled why Alexander did not deſyre too company with her, he anſwered, ſaying: It ſhoud be to him a reproche to be ſubdued by the wyfe of him whome he had vanquyſhed. This was a ryght conquerour & worthy to wynne all the worlde,

whiche in this ſorte could haue the victory ouer his owne luſtes, being a cruel fight for a faint harted ſouldior. This fight fought Scipio ſurnamed Aphricanus, whē
               Titus Liuius deca. 3. libro. 4 Appianus. libro lyb
                     •
                  co. he hadde wonne Carthage. For emonges diuers women whiche were taken, one moſt faireſt emō
               ges the reſt, was▪ brought vnto him to do with her his pleaſure. But when he knew that ſhe was affiaunced to another called Indibilis, he cauſed him to be ſent for, and perceiuyng the louyng tokens betwene them, he deliuered her to Indibilis, paying for her raūſome, and adding further an honourable porcion of his owne treaſure. This was another excellente victorye, gotten of a famous ſouldior, which would not (thoughe he had libertie) violate

his mynde vpon the beautie of a woman. But our proteſtantes and married preiſtes, neglecting their firſt fayth, cared not vpon whom they had beſtowed themſelues, lytle waying the counſell of ſaint Paule, that he can bee noii. Timo. ii. good ſouldiour to God, which enwrappeth himſelfe with ſecular affaires. Theſe be thei which pretended godlynes, and vnder the hypocriſie of marrying deceiued the ſimple, & begyled their owne ſelues. For when they thought themſelues ſureſt of their fained wyues, they did the ſoner forgo them. A iuſt plague of God vpon ſuch diſſolute preiſtes: who cared not what wemen they married, common or other, ſo they might gette them wyues. For true are S. Paules wordes: they enter into
               
               houſes bringing into bondage women laden with ſynne. TheWhat kind of wemen our married preiſtes vſed to marrie. wemen of theſe married preiſtes were ſuch for the moſt part, that either they were kept of other before, or els as cōmon as the cartway, & ſo bound them to inceſluous lecherye, whiche wemen are led with diuers luſtes, euer learning & neuer able to attaine vnto the truth. Were not the ſayd women euer lerning, & neuer able to come to the knowlege of ye truth, beyng led with diuers luſtes, vſing their bodies with other men aſwell as with their ſuppoſed huſbādes: yea & one of them with anothers woman, taking it (as it is thought) for a brotherly loue, one to helpe another, after the doctrine of Freer Luther, theIn libro de caep 
                     ••
                  u
                     ••
                  a
                     ••
                   
                  
                     •
                  ab
                     •
                  
                  lo
                     ••
                  c
                     •
                  . firſt authour of their marriage▪
               
Is it not ſeen nowe by experiēce that ſome of their women beyng diuorced, are married againe to ruffians, & ſuche other gallantes folowing the opinion of ſir Ihon Hoper in his booke of the ten cō
               maundementes? What ſhall I reherſe their ſundrye abhominacions, which ſhame conſtraineth to ſay no more. And theſe women were not onely learnyng & neuer hable to attaine to the truth, but many other ſimpering goſſeppesChatering goſſeps. and parottes of the newe founde worldes are euer learnyng, but as farre from the trueth, as they that neuer went to ſchole. Theſe dames are lyke the wanderyng gyllottes, that folowed the heretikes of olde time, which vnder the color of ſticking to the goſpell couered their euill lyues. And

by ſaint Mary a numbre are contented to runne from their huſbandes into Germanie, the dongion of heretikes, beyng a meete couer for ſuche cuppes. And theſe are thought to be ſuche mates to matche with the proteſtantes in their doinges, that in nowiſe thei can be wt out them. Simon Magus,
               The aun
                     ••
                  
                  ent heretikes in olde tyme vſed womenne a ſocietie, for the better maintenāce of their doynges. Simon Magus Helene. Nicolaus. Marcion.
                to maintayne his opinions, had one Helene a faire wēche to matche wt him. Nicolaus the heretike and furbiſher of all fylthynes in Antioche, had manye women to toyne with him in his art. Marciō
                to prepare the mindes of the people in Rome to fauour his hereſy ſent a woman before muche lyke Ioane Butcher, whiche in the beginnyng of our newfound opinions was greatly maintayned by Cranmer in Cantorbury, & other

places of Kent.
            
               Apelles had one Philomena, notAppelles. Philomena. his owne wyfe, but the wyfe of another man, as a companion in his procedinges. Montanus anotherMontanus. heretike indued with a wicked ghoſt, throughe the helpe of Priſca and Maximilla, firſt withPriſca. Maximilla. money corrupted manye women of honoure and great ſubſtance, and after polluted them with hereſye. Arrius, the rather toArrius. deceyue the worlde, procured a kynges doughter to ſuſteine himDonatus. and to beare him out. Donatus
               Lucilla. in Aphrica had releife of one Lucilla. Finally in all ages at any ryme when one had deuiſed ſome foliſhe errour or other, ſtraight waye wemen were readye to apply to their fāries. Thus as one hereſye begatte another, ſo one

heretike brought furth another. Doutles the weaknes of womē
               The weaknes of wemen. is ſuche, that they be euer prone and ready to miſcheif, & to bryng men to their confuſion. Dyd notGene. iii. 
               Eue deceiue her huſbande in perſwadyng him to eate the apple, at the ſuggeſtion of the ſerpent? Did not Dalida deceiue Sampſon,
               Iudith .xv. by perſwaſion to vtter vnto her, where the force of his ſtrength cō
               ſiſted? Dyd not the Concubinesiii. Reg. x. deceiue Salamon, to make him cō
               mit idolatry? Did not Ieroboams
               Ibi. xiii. wyfe deceiue him in fayning her ſelfe to be another woman▪ How did wicked Ieſabel inuēt meanes to procure the death of Naboth,
               iii. Reg xxi. by bearyng falſe wytnes? Many other ſuche examples there be in holy wryte, to proue the redynes of wemen in deceiuyng of menne

with their vayne perſwaſions. For the deuil hath many ſuche prancking dames in league with him, to the ende to bryng men to miſcheife.
            What brought Alexander theQ Curtius. lib. 6. great to growe inſolent, but only the vayne perſwaſion of Thaleſtris the quene of the Amazons, who from her owne countrey repaired vnto him to haue his carnalIbidem. libro. 5 companye? What cauſed him to deſtroy the noble citie Perſepolis, but the perſwaſion of Thais, the dronken harlot? Therfore let al men beware of the ſubteltie of women, and to folowe their vain perſwaſions. For they bee euer learnyng, and neuer hable to attaine vnto the truth: euer buſye lyke waſpes, rather to do hurte then good. I ſpeake not here of

matrones, whiche are modeſt & ſobre, obediēt to their huſbādes, contented to applie their myndes to the gouernement of houſholde matters, and to bryng vp their children in a goodly ordre, but of ſuche onely whiche are curious in all matters, eſpecially of that, wherof they haue nothing to do: I meane theſe London ladies, &London Ladies. other the lyke, whoſe talke is nothing but of religion, of Peter & Paule, and other places of ſcripture. Whoſe ſcripture mouthes are ready to allure their huſbandes to dye in the lordes veritie, becauſe they would fayne haue newe, muche like to the wyfe of Aman, who gaue her huſbandeHeſter .v. counſell to make a gallowes to hange vp Mardocheus, and yet at length he was hanged vpon the

ſame himſelfe. Diuers other alſo are euer learning & neuer able to come to the knowlege of y• truth, as are thoſe, whiche are of ſuche colde deuotion towardes Gods churche, that they are contented with heate to ende their liues.
            Wemen, as ſayth ſaint Paule,The feru
                     •
                  
                  cie of ſome of our ſhe Apoſtles. ought to be ſilent amōges 
                  •
               he cō
               gregacion. But theſe hote ſoules are ſo feruent in ſprite, that becauſe they may not preache, they are cōtented to burne. O wicked doughters of hereſie, and dames of the deuil himſelfe. Is this your profeſſion at your mariage daye, to bee at commaundement to your huſbandes? And manye of you contrarye to their wylles maintayne youre obſtinacie by death. You ought, beyng Chriſtians, and traded vp in Chriſtes

fayth, rather to ſpend your liuesThe cauſe why w
                     •
                  m
                     •
                   ought to be ſtowe their lyues. for the defence of your chaſtitie, and the liues of your deare huſbandes, then in the cauſe of heriſie, the cauſe of your confuſion. We rede of many notable womē, which were worthy martyrs, for the defence of Chriſtes moſte holy name, and ſuffered ſundry tormētes for the quarel of his fayth. But you not cōpelled, neither to abiure his name, nor yet to forſake his faith, what ſhould be the cauſe of your folly? For ſoth euen the deuil, who goeth about lyke a roaryng Lyon, to ſeke whō he may deuoure. I knowe the woman and her ſeuen ſōnes, wherof we rede in the Machabees, offered2. Macha 
                     •
                  . her ſelfe to death. What againſt the churche of God? No doubtles, but for obſeruyng the commaundement

of God, preſcribed vnto her by the churche. We rede of manye other godly women, whiche dyed for Chriſtes fayth, and the vnitie of his churche: but not as you do againſt his church and the vnitie therof. But peraduenture you wyll ſay, wee are his churche, and wee are his litle ones. But if you ſo be, you are an ill fauoured churche, a deformed churche, a cornered churche, a diſperſed cōgregacion, altogethers deuided, as partely is proued before. You ought rather, as I ſayd before, to ſpende your life for the ſauegarde of your huſbandes, & the defence of your chaſtitie, the bande of matrimonye, as many good wemen haue done in tyme paſt. Michol like a faythfull woman,i. Reg. xix. preſerued her huſband Dauid,

when he was ſought for of her owne father kyng Saul. We rede of a noble womā calledValeri. Maxi. lib. 6. cap. 7. 
               Turia, who to ſaue her huſbande named Q. Lucretius, frō the crueltie of the Romaines, offered her ſelfe into many daungers. Alſo the wyues of certaine notableValerius Maximus. lib. 6. capi. vlt. menne called Mimi, haue lefte behinde them their worthye praiſe. For their huſbandes beyng committed to priſon by the Lacedemoniens, & condempned to dye: their wyues to the intent they might ſpeake with their huſbandes before their death, had leue to entre into priſon, who chaunging their apparel with their huſbandes, & they beyng in their wyues garmētes, counterfaiting alſo their ſorowes, eſcaped priſon, leauyng their wyues behinde them, who

were contented for their huſbandes ſakes to yelde them ſelues to death. Theſe were wyues worthy of immortall fame, & vouchſafed to haue their images to be erected of golde for their perpetual fame. Lucrece the RomaineT. Liuius dec. prim
                     •
                  . lib. 1. matrone, for the loſſe of her chaſtitie kylled her ſelfe, ſaying: what can be ſafe to a womā when ſhe hath loſt her chaſtitie? The fyftie virgyns of the citie of Sparta, beyng ſent by their fathers to Micenae a cicie of Achaia to do ſacrifice, the citezens beyng enflamed with their beauties, required that they might accōpliſhe their luſtes. Who not graunting to their deſires, they were in maner conſtrained. But rather then they would looſe their maydenheades, they were contented to

leaſe their lyues, whiche afterward was reuenged by the Lacedemoniens. Theſe were valiant wemen, whiche rather then they would yelde to the ſeruice of Venus and violate their innocente myndes, were contente to ſuffre death. I would that our wemen martyrs (if they would nedes be martyrs, as I cā ſe no cauſe therof, but onely arrogancie) thus ſhould imploye their lyues, & not for a fantaſticall opinion newely crept out of the ſhell. It ſhould be wiſhed of all godly men, that it would pleaſe God of his ſurpaſſing goodness to poure grace into the heartes of theſe graceles perſones, moſt hūbly to falle downe proſtrate before the magiſtrates of his Churche to aſke mercye, and at length to acknowledge

the vanitie of their errors.
            But yet there were other in y• late malicious tyme, as the effeminateEffeminate biſhoppes and their in conſtancie. biſhops & other, whiche were euer lerning & neuer able to come to the truth, as it appeared by their oftè alteracions of their procedinges. And touching their Cōmunion, they were euer learning, and in thende ſo well learned, that thei fell to the denial of Chriſtes own wordes, not attaining to the knowlege of y• truth, but to the knowlege of errours. Howe long were they learnyngThe Communion table. to ſet their table to miniſter the ſayd cōmunion vpon? Fyrſt they placed it a lofte where the hygh altare ſtode. Then muſt it be ſetProcedinges. from the walle that one might goo betwene, the miniſters beynge in contention on whether

parte to turne their faces, either towardes the Weſte, the Northe or South. Some would ſtande Southward, ſome Northward, and ſome Weſtwarde. Thus turning euery waye, they myſte the right waye, but yet they coulde not hytte it. Then downe it muſt come from Surſum to Deorſum. In ſome places benethe the ſteppes, in the quier, couering it round about with Curtens, for feare of bugges. Within a whyle after, it ſkipped out of the quier into the body of the churche. And in ſome places, neyther in the quier, norAnother procedyn
                     •
                  . yet in the body of the churche, but betwene bothe. And ſome, becauſe they would hitte it ryght, pulled downe the Rodeloftes, making ſuche a confuſion, that neyther was there quyer, nor bodye

of the churche, but makyng if lyke Weſtminſter hail. They ſtailed it aboute 
                  •
               n maner of a Cocke pytte, where all the people myght ſee them, and their cō
               munion. In many places the table ſtoode very nere the churche porch, that it myght the ſoner go out into the churcheyarde. Thus they proceded not vpwardes, but outwardes & downe wardes. Ab equis ad a
                     •
                  inos, that the churche, belles and all, was redy to leepe out of the wyndowes. ThenAn other procedng. touchyng the miniſtration, whether it ſhould be leuened or vnleuened bread, oh what a doe there was? Firſt it muſt be vnleuened, but brooder and thicker then the olde maner was, and in anywyſe the prynte of the name of Ieſus left out, whiche was as odious a

ſight to thē, as ye ſigne of y• croſſe was to Iulianus Apoſtata, who inEuſebiu
                     •
                  . anye wyſe coulde not abyde the ſayde ſygne, neyther in churche, wyndowe, or other place. Then theſe Iulianiſtes to bryng the Sacrament to a more prophane vſe, they deuiſed, that the bread ſhuld be leuened lyke to other common bread: from the whiche though many crommes did fall they forced not, ſo lytle they eſtemed the matter. For ſuche Sacramente, ſuche miniſter, ſuche carpenters, ſuche toles. And too colour the matter for the better deceyuinge of the vnlearned people, they folowed the enſample of a Maſon whē he worketh ſtones to build a houſe. For firſte he doeth rough hewe them, ſomewhat to proportion: thē he polyſheth thē to make

them pleaſant to the eye. In likeThe firſt cō
                  muniō bokes were rough hewē
                maner (ſayde the Proteſtantes, and authors of our late religion) do we. The firſt and ſecond Communion booke, were but rough hewen, wherein they ſayd truth, for god knoweth thei were but homely ſtuffe. But this boke (quod they) meaning their laſte boke of Communiō (which was the worſte of all) is wrought too the perfectiō. Wherin they ſeined muche lyke vnto a poore blynde Maſon, that ſhould come to ſtones that were purely wrought to a perfite forme, by the fineſt workeman that could be founde: who poring on them with his dymme ſpectacles of ignoraunce, doeth thinke with his blunt ruſty & croked toles, to amende the workemanſhyp of the ſtones, and bunglyng

longe about them, made them euer worſe and worſe, tyll at length they ſerued for no purpoſe, touching thentēt of the firſt workeman. Euen ſo did thei. For the holy ghoſt hath wrought in the catholike churche, the perfit faith and righte vſe of the ſacrament of the altar, to be offred to the father, as a moſte ſwete ſacrifice, in remēbraunce of the death of his ſonne, and to be receiued of al faithfull people, in remēbraūce of the ſame death of chriſt. Which is both the offerer & the ſacrifice, offred in the holy maſſe, till theſe bunglers toke in hande the ſame, meanīg as thei thought to amēd it. But as their preſumptiō was vayne ſo in thende it proued. For God ſeing their inconſtant vanities in miſuſing his ſacramētes,

brought all their attemptes to a vaine effect. And touching the ordre in receiuing their cōmunion, it was marueylous confuſe. ForThe confuſed ordres about this cō
                  munion. ſome of the cōmunicantes wold ſtande, ſome ſit, ſome knele, ſome wold holde the cup himſelf, ſome would receiue it at the miniſters hande, ſome of his nexte fellowe, ſome would haue a ſhort pece of bread, ſome a thine, ſome a thicke and thinne. Some wold vſe the miniſtration themſelues, ſome were contented too take it in the churche, and ſome at their owne tables, & after ſouper, according to the inſtitucion. Some would haue the wine to be drōke in pewter, ſome in ſiluer, and ſome in a glaſſe or trene diſhe. Some wold haue a table cloth to couer y• bord ſome a towel, and ſome neither of

them both. Thus in ſome they vſed the matter in ſuche ſondry ſomes, that the Total was nought Thus were they euer learning & neuer able to come to the truthe. But God ſeyng this their Babilonicall Tower of cōfuſion, builded againſt his diuine maieſtie, and his churche, did ſodeinly and miraculouſlye ouerthrowe all their confuſed deuiſes, reſtoring truthe to her former ſtate by the ſprete of trueth, whiche hath led and conducted his churche oute of manye daungerous and ſtormy ſeas, into the hauen of tranquillytie, in vnitie of truthe, the true tryal of Gods ſprete. Which truthe the church learning of the ſprite of trueth, hath euer kepte, and wylll kepe too the worldes ende: where theſe truce breakers

ſhalbe euer learnynge and neuer able to come to the truthe.
            
               
                  COuetous they were (as itCouetous were to be wiſhed none wer nowe) but whether they were ſo let al mē examine with thēſelfes. If they wer not couetous, whatPurchaſing Apoſtles and lā
                     ded diſciples mente they to go about to make their baſtard children legitimate by acte of parliamente, and that their purchaſes of lande myghte be in as good effecte in the lawe, as the landes of anye temporall lordes, or other laye men: meaning in thende to adioyne lande to lande, and to accumulate one poſſeſſion vpon another? Where learned they this trade? Of the primatiue churche, whereof they boſte ſo much? Learned they this in the ſcriptures, wherof they do ſo muche glorye? All thinges amonges

the Apoſtles and other diſciples were commen. And dyd our ioly Apoſtles imitate them ſo well, that of that which was cō
                  men to make it priuate to ſerue their own bellies? A prety imitation. They were wont to cry out vpon the liuinges of the late abbees, & monaſteries, ſaying they were the theues, and ſpoylers of the realme. But who ſhuld haue cryed out vpon them, when they had ſo enriched themſelfes, with ſondry patrimonies, that their brattes, and beggers chyldren ſhoulde haue proued gentlemen? Truely if this caſe be well weyghedSymple fare in the houſes of our wyued byſhoppes. of graue & ſobre men, they maye geſſe at their marke. They ought to haue bene by ſ. Paules rule kepers of hoſpitalitie. But what poore crafteſman, or other

laborer, vſed leſſe? A man myght aſwell haue brooke his necke as his faſte at their houſes. They kept ſuch diete in their fare, that none coulde gette anye reliefe at their doores, but Venus, and her ſonne Cupide. And to thintent others ſhould be no kepers of hoſpitalitie alſo, they vſed to call the ſame y• pompouſe practiſe of the prelates and ſuche like. Yea butDead mennes graues ouerthrowen for money. more couetous thei were yet. For to fynde ryches they would neyther ſpare church, nor ſteple, dead mennes graues, or other place. What goodly monumentes haue theſe ſacrilegers ſubuerted too hunte after pence, the corrupter of mannes life? What graues of honorable mē, and byſhops, haue theſe men left vnouerthrowen: to fynd that was none of theirs?

Surely I may compare them to Darius, that couetous Monarche:
                  Piu
                        •
                     aerehus in vitis illu
                        •
                     riū. who too ſeeke money ſerched the 
                     •
                  ombe of Semiramis the quene of Aſſyria, whiche buylded Babylon: where he founde this poeſie engrauen vpon the ſame. VVhat kynge ſoeuer he be that lacketh money, let him open this Monumente, and take what he wyll Nowe Darius creditynge the wordes of the poeſie, cauſed the ſtoone of the graue to be remoued, where hee founde no money, but another ſaying, wrytten vpon the inner part of the ſaid ſtone, conteyning theſe woordes. Vnleſſe thou haddeſt been an euell man, vnſaciable of money, thou wouldeſt neuer haue ſerched the graues of the dead. O noble woman, whiche not onely in her lyfe tyme hated thys

filthie vice of auarice, but alſo after her death hadde conuenient tauntes to reproue theſame. I would ſhe had ſeene the robery of dead men in our time committed by a ſorte of hūgry whelpes gredy after their pray. The proteſtā
                  tes were accuſtomed too ſaye the papiſtes were maſſemongers, & couetous in ſellynge maſſes for grotes: but thei themſelfes were Goſpelmongers, in making royall and noble Sermons, fyue or ſixe in a day, yea & God knoweth ſuche ſtuffe, that they prouoked more laughter, then anye vice could vſe feates in playing of his interlude. Philippe Sannio wherofXenophon in Sympoſ. we reade in Xenophon, could not deuiſe more toyes to make Calias gueſtes to laughe at, then theſe merie panions deuiſed for their

audiēce: nor yet in the Serycuſans dauncing wenche was more cū
                  ning in deliting Critobulus, Socrates, and the reſt with her ſundrye harmonies, then in theſe pleſant ghoſpelmen was too exhilarate their fellowe diſciples and brethren in Chriſte.
            
            
               BOaſters alſo they were, andBoaſters. repleniſhed with all kyndes of arrogant ſpeche, reuilinge all kinde of doctrine repugnant too theirs, belying the auncient writers and generall counſayles, rauing vpon the doctours of the church, comparing themſelfes to the Apoſtles, ſaying: where went Peter or Paule to ſchole? & why maye not we haue the ſpirite as well as they? With ſuche other woordes, preſuming too affirme themſelues (hauing certayne textes

of the newe or olde teſ
                     •
                  amentes) that they were as well learned, as they that had ſtudied diuinitie .xl. yeares. Thus they ſemed to be doctors of the lawe, not knowyng what they did ſay, nor whereof they dyd affirme. A marueyle it was too ſee the fooliſhe arrogance of ſome ſymple men, whiche would not ſticke out of the ſhomakers ſhoppe toe ſkippe into the pulpet, yea & ſome from treading of morter into the top of a tree to make a collation, as they termed it: but it myght haue ben called a colluſiō, for prophaning of gods holy worde, and deceiuing the ſimple people. Beſides, whatſoeuer in their owne conceiptes they hadde taken for a veritie, the ſame wold thei proudly vtter and ſaye, this is the ueriti
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                  and that is the veritie, crediting nothyng, but their owne vaine expoſitions. Vpon whom the wordes of the comm
                     ••
                  all poete maye be verifyed.
               
                  Nothing more wicked then a m
                        ••
                     
                     T
                           ••
                        ex
                           •••
                        s 
                           ••
                         ad
                           •
                        l
                           ••
                        . vndiſcrete.
                  Onleſſe it come of hymſelfe he thynkes it vnmete.
               
            
            
               
                  PRoude alſo: whoſe myndesProude▪
                   were ſo exalted with arrogancie, that no mā was thought worthy their company, except he were of their ſectes and opiniōs. They woulde heare no man, except he would incline to fauoure their procedinges. No doctours interpretacion could be admitted vpō the places of ſcriptures, but ſuche as were of their owne deuiſes. The auncient fathers would not ſo proudely ſpeake of

their moſt godly workes, as our doctours argued of theirs. The oldedoctors would committe the ſame to the cenſure and iudgement of the churche. But the newe doctours woulde preferre theyr woorkes vpon theyr owne iudgementes. Pride the mother of hereſie begatte theſe her chyldren to reſiſt their predeceſſors. But god from time to time hathIacob, iiii. reſiſted the proude, and hath endewed the meke with his grace. The prophet Eſaye ſaieth. WoeEſaye. 
                        •
                     . be vnto you which ſeme wyſe in your owne eies, and prudent before your ſelues. Therefore God requireth ſuche to be miniſters & interpreters of his worde, which are humble and meke. Suche I ſaye, whiche wyll miſtruſte theyr owne wittes, and crye with the

prophete Dauid: Giue me vnderPſalm. 118▪
                   ſtanding, O lord, and I wyl ſerche thy lawe, to thintente I may learne thy commaundementes. Doubtles the ſhowers of that heauenlye wyſedome, haue not their diſcourſe vpon hyghe moū
                  taynes, but into the lowe valleys. Therfore they that wyll be partakers of the true vnderſtanding of goddes miſteries, ought not to contempne the godly expoſitions of the auncient fathers, but with all humilitie to ſubmit themſelfes as ſcholars glad too learne, & willing to embrace ſuch holſome doctrine, as is taught in the churche of God. And not to play the partes of vnthriftie and proude ſcholars (as the moſte part of our hereticall preachers were, who went about to correct

their maiſters) but with attentife eares to heare, reade, peruſe, and then to receiue as God ſhall put in minde.
            
            
               
                  CVrſed ſpeakers alſo in vſingCurſſed ſpeakers. their tongues after a moſt vile ſort not only agaiſt y• church, the ſpouſe of Chriſte, but alſo againſt our princes, the Kyng and Quenes maieſties, and other magiſtratesThe kinges maieſtie. appointed by God, too the rule and gouernemēt of this realme. And howe abhominablie they haue from tyme to tyme yll ſayd of the kynges maieſtie, reuerence and ſhame conſtrayneth ſilence: vnto whome they oughte to beare al obedience: conſidering it hath pleaſed the Quenes maieſtie to ioyne her ſelfe with hym in marriage, being as nowe one body, ſo that any iniurie or ſlaū
                  der

doone, or ſpoken againſt hys grace, theſame is doone to them both. I can not choſe but wonder to conſider what cauſe ſhuld prouoke them to malice his perſone. What vice haue thei harde, wherin his grace is ſpeciallye noted▪ Unles temperāce, ſobrietie, and deuocion be counted for vices. What ill proportiō of body, or deformitie of vyſage, vnleſſe they wil ſeme to correcte nature▪ Wel, fieth the note of any ſpecial vice, or lacke of natures dutie, hathe not moued them, what ſhould be the cauſe then? With what vertue are they offended? Not with temperance I am ſure, for that is a decent qualitie in a king, and as Tully ſayeth, It is the ornamentOfficio. lib. 
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      of mannes lyfe, and the appeaſemēt of the paſſions of the mynde. Nor

with ſobrietie I dare ſaye: for that garniſheth all other qualities. And if deuocion be the cauſe of offences, they muſte or oughte to be angrye with themſelfes. For what man is there that lyueth, but he hath a certē zeale, or ſparcle of feare towardes the power diuine. Then the kinges maieſtie being a vertuous prince & of himſelfe a noble perſonage, let vs ceaſe of all ſclaunder, if not for his owne ſake, yet for the Queenes maieſties ſake his true and laufull wyfe, and our vertuous and godlye ſoueraygne. But as the proteſtauntes haue vttered their vncharitable ſtomakes vpon the temporall magiſtrates, ſo haue thei vſed the like vpon the ſpiritual. But theſe are they, mencioned in ſainte Iude,

whiche deſpyſe Rulers, & ſpeakeIude. 
                        •
                     . yll of thoſe whiche are in authoritie. Yet Michael tharchaungell, ſayeth he, when he ſtroue againſt the deuel about the body of Moyſes, durſt not geue a railing ſentence, but ſayde, our lorde rebuke the. A wonder it is to ſe theſe curſed ſpeakers triumphe vpon their knowledge of the ſcriptures, and yet haue no power to followe the ſame. I praye God they may be leſſe bablers, and make both thē and all mē better followers. For we ſe manifeſtlye the plagues of God imminent for miſuſing his grace & blaſpheming his name. Yet many, eſpecially the proteūā
                  tes, haue no grace to impute it to impietie of lyfe. But they obiecte the ſayde plagues of God to the cauſe of religion, as though their

owne ſynnes were free and vnworthye punyſhement: and as though the catholike religiō now vſed were a thinge of late inuented: whiche religion hathe continued firme and ſtedfaſt ſithe the raigne of kynge Ethelbert, who was conuerted to embrace chriſtianitieBeda in hiſt. eccleſia lib. i. cap. xxii. by ſaint Auguſtine, in the yere of our Lorde after the computation of Beda. D. lxxx. vi. tyll within theſe .xxi. yeres. And alſo long before the time of Ethelbert, the faith of Chriſt was yet receiued by one Lucius kynge of this realme, who ſent Ambaſſadours to Rome too Pope Eleutherius, that it might pleaſe him to ſende ſome of his learned men, to preache the name of Chriſte, and too miniſter Baptiſme. Who moſte willingly accōplyſhed the kinges

deſire, in the yeare of our lorde a hundred fiftie ſyxe. Soo that it appereth the religion nowe reſtored by the Quenes maieſtie, is not of newe inuencion, but of great antiquitie. And ſo longe as this Realme was in vnitie thereof vndiuided, it continued in inſpeakeable welth, and proſperitie, in marueylous loue and amitie, in true dealing and honeſt ſimplicitie, and in al kinde of god lines and pietie. But ſince it fell from vnitie of religiō, it hath fallen from the grace of God into al kyndes of wickednes, ſkarcitie, falſhode, deceyt, and other abhominable vices, and from the accuſtomed valiaunce in feates of armes into effeminate myndes cōtaminated with horrible le
                     •
                  herie. The experiēce of which vices

piteouſly we dayly fele, as a iuſt rewarde of GOD, for breache of the vnitie of his religion.
            
            
               
                  DIſobedient to fathers & mothers,Diſobediēt to fathers & mothers. whiche vice our lord knoweth, is vniuerſally frequented. For what childe for the moſt parte, doth honour his parentes, according to his dutie? What reuerēce doth he vſe towardes thē, whiche of their owne fleſhe and bloud hath brought him forth in to the world? A dere collope it is 
                     •
                  hat is cut from the owne fleſhe, & yet that degenerate collope, I meane the childe, vnnaturally reſiſteth & diſobeieth the parentes. But hereof the parentes maye thanke them ſelues, whiche for wante of good education, noſel them vp with wantonnes, ſuffring the raynes of youthe to bee

let go, and vnbridled, not conſidering the heate of youth too be prone, and redy to al vices, as HeLibro primo. rodiane ſayeth. The myndes of youth from good and honeſt diſcipline are prone and apt to vanitie & pleaſures. The auncient trade of this Realme in education of youthe (before the late tyme replenyſhed with all myſchief) was to yoke the ſame with the feare of God, in teachyng the ſame to vſe prayer mornyng and euening, to be reuerēt in the church, at their firſt enteraunce into the ſame too make the ſygne of the croſſe in their foreheades, too make beyſaunce to the magiſtrates, to diſcouer their heades, when they mete with men of auncient yeres and of hore heares, accordyng to Ouides verſes.
               
                  
                  Age in tyme paſt, was had inFa
                           ••
                        o. lib. 
                           •
                        . great price.
                  And to a hore head eche chylde did aryſe.
               
               But now cleane contrary, nothyng is leſſe vſed then morning and euening praier, more vnreuerence in the churche neuer more frequented, nor diſobedience too magiſtrates and aged men at no tyme more practiſed. And as for repairing to the churche, is counted a thing of no importance. For howe can the chylde put that in practyſe, which the parentes thē
                  ſelues neglecte? The parentes beinge infected with hereſie, the childe muſt folowe the ſame, and muſt do as the yonge Crab dyd, where of we reade a prety tale in Eſopes fables: who beyng commaūded of his dame, not to go ſo

croked, but to go more ſtrayght: O mother (ꝙ he) go thou before, and I wyl folowe. In lyke maner, if the parentes wold walke more duely in their vocation and dutie, the children would doo the ſame.
               But as the fathers are, ſo are the chyldren. The ill lyfe and hereticall trade of the parentes, maketh ſuche vnhappy and diſobedient chyldren, who in the ende, except thei be loked vnto in time, wyll be the fathers bane. For the chylde, if his father be a catholike man, will not be aſhamed to ſay, he hath a papiſte to his father, or an old doting fole to his mother. A pitifull hearyng, that hereſye the regent of miſchiefe ſhoulde beare ſuche rule without correction, to cauſe ſuche enormities in youth to rayle vpō the parentes.

wherfore to redreſſe the commō
                  vice in chyldren of diſobedience, let them with godly perſwaſiōs bryng them vp, and chiefly in the feare of God, and reuerence too his religion. Let them followe the example of Tobias, who bryngingTob. iiii. v. vp his ſonne Tobie after a godly ſorte, had his ſonne to proue according to his education, & lyued infinit yeares, too the ioye of his parentes. The parentes of Suſanne, bringing vp their doughterDaniel. xiii in the feare of God, had their ioyes doubled by y• marueylous deliuerie of their doughter out of the handes of the cruell iudges. Contrary wiſe if thei ſuffer their chyldren to perſiſt in wycked and wanton life without due correction, they ſhall fele the ſorowe of Hely the prieſt whome for wycked

education of his childrē, God did greatly puniſhe. Here alſo were worthye of remembraunce the correction whiche ought too be doone too apprentiſes and otherApprētiſes. ſeruauntes, who beinge noſelled in libertie, are not onelye odiouſe to the worlde, but alſo vnthryftye towardes their maiſters, and in maner become maiſters thēſelfes. Whoſe brynging vp is ſo leude, that they be growen to ſuche inſolencie, that no good mā or prieſt paſſing by thē in the ſtretes can eſcape without mockes. But let their maiſters take hede, for I beleue when thei ſee their tyme, they wyll mocke them to in thend, hoping one day to haue the ſpoile of their goodes. Beſides this, their diſſolute lyues are ſuche, that no regarde

they haue at all to repayre to the churche vpon the holy dayes, but flocke in cluſters vpon ſtalles either ſkorning the paſſers by, or with their teſtamētes vtter ſome wyſe ſtuffe of their owne deuiſe. So that prayer is ſeldome ſeene to procede out of their graceles mouthes. Therefore let all maiſters take hede vnto their ſeruā
                  tes, and bringe them vp bothe in the feare of God and of themſelues, leſt they wyſhe in tyme too come that they had refrayned thē with due correction.
            
            
               
                  VNthankefull, vngodly, andVnthankefull, vngodly, vnkynde vnkynde, thei be in ſparing from thankeſgeuing, chiefly too God the authour of all goodnes, and next to the Quenes maieſtie our naturall ſoueraigne lady, for the reſtitucion of thancient and

true religiō of this realme, which of late was putte to exile, and in ſtede of the ſame a ſtraunge and baſe woman called Hereſye intertaigned, who hathe ſo pollutedThe proteſtantes be baſtardes by the deuel begotten vpō hereſie this countrey with baſtardes & miſbegotten children, that onles it had pleaſed the diuyne maieſtie to haue ioyned in mariage the moſte excellente and vertuouſe Phylip our Kyng and ſeueraign, nowe with the true inheritour and moſte Godly matrone Mary oure ſayde Quene, the bloud of the ſayde baſebegotten children had vnnethes bene abolyſhed. And yet the ingratitude of vs their ſubiectes is ſuch (eſpecially the Proteſtantes) that almoſte it is intollerable. The vnkindeneſſeIngratitude. of vs in this ſo ample & benefite is extended ſoo farre,

that in maner we deny any benefite receyued at all. Yea and for the moſte parte in recompence of that benefite alredy receyued we rendre vnthankefulnes. But I feare me, as Salomon ſayeth: He that doeth render an euyllPro. xix. turne for a good, euyll ſhall not departe his houſe. I praye God to ſpare that plague from thys realme, whiche for vnthankefulnes it iuſtly deſerued. I feare me a great many in theſe dayes, for that they ſee not the deuyſes of theyr vnthankeful heartes come forwardes, which daily they imagine againſte the Magiſtrates, plaie Achitophels part, who ſeingii. Reg. xvii that his practyſes was not executed againſt kyng Dauid according to his cancred ſtomake, wēt home to his houſe & hanged hym

ſelfe. But in theſe oure ingrate doinges we are much worſe then the poore beaſtes of the yearth,Brute beaſtes be not ingrate. which would remēbre a benefite long after they haue receiued it. And no marueil. For as our creacion farre excedeth ye brute beaſt, ſo is our liuyng in ſome thynges to theirs inferior. What murmuring, grudging, ſlaūders, rumors lyes, bookes, tales, are in theſe daies caried abroad in the world againſt all ſortes of magiſtrates, whom we ought to obey for conſcience ſake, according to the admonition of ſaint Paule. But ifRoma. xiii. ſtay might be made here to touch the particuler abhominations vſed of theſe loitring lubbers, this volume would growe to an infinite bignes. May not the kyng & Quenes maieſties ſaye to theſe

murmurers, as the valiant Themiſtocles
                  Plutarchus in vita Themiſtoclis. ſayde to the Atheniens, whiche murmured againſte his laudable feates done for the libertie of the citie. Why make you theſe tumultes and rumours againſt them, of whō by manifolde waies you haue receiued ſo many cōmodities? May not oure Byſhoppes and other eccleſiaſticall gouernors, ſay the like to this careleſſe multitude, that Pompeius ſayd too Marcellinus, whoo receiuyngPlutarchus in vita Pompeti. many benefytes at his handes, forſoke him and ranne to Caeſar, that afterwardes he was not aſhamed to reuile Pompeius openly in the Senate houſe at Rome? But with a connenient & moderate taunt Pōpeius ſaid theſe wordes: Art thou not aſhamed Marcellꝰ to ſpeake euil of him, by whoſe benefite,
                  
                  of a domme and ſpecheleſſe man thou art made eloquent, and of an hungry ſterueling, thou art now ſo well ſatiſfied, that thou canſt ſkarce refraine vomite? What ſhal I ſay more of this their ingratitude, whiche in ciuile lyfe is a thing moſte odious? But exhorte al men to take a new purgacion, and to purge their ſtomakes of this their malancolike grudginges, leaſt the matter do growe to ſuche abundance, that no purgacion wyll ſerue. Let them cōſider the plague, which redounded vpon the murmuring ſtomakes of Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, whoNume. 1
                        •
                     . Ioſephus de antiq. lib. 4
                        •
                      cap. 2. for grudging againſt the authoritie of Moyſes, were ſwallowed into the yearth. And let all ſuche as will ſeke for none amendment loke for no leſſe, if not the like, yet

as terrible.
            
            
               
                  TRuce breakers alſo bee they.
                  Truce breakers. And concernyng this breaking of truce, vnitie, & concorde; reherſal is made before. For they counted that the continuance in vnitie of religiō, was to ſtale for thē to obſerue, but thei wold ſeke ſome other truth contrary to the truth vſed in all countreis, to purchaſe vnto thēſelues a perpetual name, like vnto Heroſtratus, who to winne a name, caring not whether it were good or bad, attempted many vile enterpriſes, and amōges all, he ſet on fier the temple of Diana in Epheſus, whicheValerius Maximus. lib. 8. Srabo in lib. 14 was the notableſt tēple in all the worlde. Euen ſo theſe truce breakers, to get them a name, peruerted al godly orders many hūdred yeres vſed in the church of chriſt,

and al other holſome inſtituciōs, frequēted in the ſame. And thus in breaking of vnitie, the knot of mannes life, they became altogethers truce breakers, and ſubuerters of Gods truth.
            
            
               
                  FAlſe accuſars, riotous, and deſpiſersFalſe accuſers. Ryotous. Deſpiſers of them that be good. of them that be good, in ſlaūdering of good & vertuous men with il names, callyng them Sodomites, whoremongers, ill liuers. And while they were thus accuſing of others, theī thēſelues lyued moſte abhominably, couering their owne offences, in belying others, muche lyke Pharaos wyfe, who to couer her owne vnſhamefaſtnes, accuſed Ioſeph to her huſbande: and like vnto the Phariſeis, whiche to ſlaunder Chriſt, ceaſed not daily wt impudent wordes to belie him, ſaying:

He is a Samaritane, he hath a deuil within him, he is a blaſphemer, a glutton, a ſeducer of the people, he denieth to pay tribute, and ſuche other wordes, to bring him out of credite with y• people. The like wordes haue the ProteſtantesDiſpiſers of y• godly. vpon religious & godly men, whoſe holynes and auſteritie of lyfe, becauſe they haue no willes to followe, they be not cō
                  tented to ſuffre thē to go or paſſe quietly without their tauntes & reproches: Yea, & ſome to vtter furth the holſome frutes of their ſpirites, care not to put many in daunger of their lyues. Was it not a gooly fruite thinke you for theſe men (whiche crie vpon the lorde, & like the lordes lambes do ſuffre perſecution, as they terme it) in the beginning of the quenes

maieſties raigne, contrary to the obedience whiche ought to be in ſubiectes, & reſiſting the Maior, the Sheriffes, & the Aldermen, to make ſuch a tumult at Paules croſſe, ſeking meanes to kyll the preacher, yea & one of thē ſo boldThe throwing of the dagger at the precher at Paules croſſe. to throwe his Dagger at him? Was not this thinke you a charitable work of their paciēt ſprites whiche they ſo boaſted of, proceding from the entrailes of their thriſting ſtomakes, whiche with thurſting voyces cried ſtyll vpon the worde of the lord? Was there not alſo another fyne piece of worke of theſe charitable & meke lambes vttered: when a gunneShotyng of a gunne at the preacher at Paules croſſe. was ſhot at another preacher makyng a godly ſermon at Paules croſſe? Was not this alſo, thinke you, a mete practiſe of this perſecuted

ſhepe? What I pray youThe cruel acte done at Weſtminſter vpon Eaſterday. anno. 1555. was the abhominable facte done at Weſtminſter in ſaint Margaretes churche, by the like charitable champion vpon Eaſterdaye? Who (all the people beyng in a godly quietnes at our Lordes table, aboute to receiue the bleſſed body & bloud of Chriſt ſuddenly roſe a deſperate ladde & ſtrake at the preiſt, hauing almoſt ſlaine him, and diuers other honeſt perſones there preſent? Was not this alſo ſuppoſe ye a godly acte, mete for ſuche a profeſſour: who profeſſing the deuils religion, became altogether a miniſter and lim
                     ••
                  e of the deuil? Was there not alſo a great learned man, and aFreer Peito hurt with a ſtone. Freer of Grenewich called Peyto almoſt ſlain with a ſtone paſſing in a wherye by the wharfes of a

lighterman, that a long tyme after the poore man lay ſicke, ſcarce yet recouered? And yet for this facte the ſayd godly man ſought none other reuengemente, but when he was demaunded why he cauſed not the partie to be puniſhed, ſayd: God forbid. For noweThe wordes of Peyto touching the mā that did hurt him. I vnderſtandyng his malice, haue a good cauſe to praye for him that he may amende. O good man, and worthy to bee had in eſtimation, who folowing his maiſter Chriſt ſought no reuēgement, but praied for his enemies.
               He did not as that malicious,The reuengement of Bale vpon a worſhipfull man of Hampſhire & heretical Freer Bale dyd, who beyng reproued for a deteſtable ſermon he made in Hampſhire of a worſhipful man, did not onely ſeke reuengement in cauſing the

partie to ſtande vpō the Pyllory, but alſo made a ſhamefull booke againſt him, entitled An expoſtulation againſte a ranke papiſte in Hampſhyre, moſt ſhamefully reuilyng the ſayd man of worſhyp more lyke a fylthye ruffian, then lyke a manne that ſemed to the worlde to haue the ſpirit of God? Many other ryotous ruflynges practiſed by theſe rakehels there bee, whiche for breuitie I nowe omitte. I maye compare them to Silla the cruel Romaine, or toAppianus in ciuili. Ro. bello. Saluſtius in coniuratione Catilinae. 
                  Catiline that vngracious varlet, whiche diſturbed the common wealth of Rome, & ſought meanes to brynge the ſame to vtter confuſion.
            
            
               
                  TRAITOVRS, headdie, andTraitours Headie, highmīded. hyghmynded, are theſe proteſtantes, prouokyng the good

to conſpiracies, alluryng the euil to put the ſame in practiſe, ſondrye wayes vtteryng their trayterous ſtomakes. What newe deuiſes do ſomme of them imagine to make hurly burlyes within this realme? But God the betrayer of all trayterous heartes, euē in tyme diſcloſeth what they bee. And the deuil the authour of treaſon, bryngeth his darelinges infected with treaſon the handmaide of hereſie, to a ſhamefull and vile ende.
               What brought NorthumberlandeNorthumberlande. to his deſerued ende, in going about to diſplace ye Quenes maieſtie of her iuſt tytle, but treaſon and hereſie, the inſtrumentes of his deuiliſhe attemptes? What brought Wyat to his ſhamefullWy
                  
ende, but rebellion begonne for hereſyes ſake and treaſon, continued tyll he was ouerthrowen? What was the cauſe of CrumwellesCrumwell falle, but hereſie begonne with ſpoyle of Abbeis, & treaſon againſt the kyng himſelfe? What was the cauſe of the deathes ofThe late traytours Throgmarton, Vuedall, Stanton, and others. oure late traytours, but hereſie the foundreſſe of their cōſpiracie, and treaſon intended againſt the Kyng and Quenes maieſties, & the ſubuerſion of oure common wealth? What manne or woman was there euer, beyng heretikes but that hereſy ioyned with treaſon hath brought to confuſion? Was not Olde caſtell, wherof weOld caſtle ſpake before, brought to a miſerable ende for fauouring Wycklefe his opinion? Was not Acton ofActon.
                  
his conſpiracie, and came to the lyke ende, for fauouring the ſame opinions? I praye you, to what end came Crāmer the late biſhopCranmer. of Cantorburye, who in his fyrſt ruffe ſoughte the diuorce of the moſt vertuous quene Katherine, lawfull wyfe to kyng Henry thePolydorus. lib. 27. eight, & mother to our moſt gracious ſoueraigne ladye, and afterwardes continued in promotyng of hereſye, and diuorſinge this realme from a godlye wyfe called vnitie, preferryng Hereſy that ſtrumppette to matche with this noble cōmon wealth. Immittens falſem in alienam meſſem Finally to the like endes arriued all heretikes & traitours in all ages. Many notable hiſtories might here alſo be reherſed, to ſet furth the due rewarde incident to treaſon, but

for as muche as mayſter Iohn Chriſtoferſon deane of Norwith hath moſte abundantly treated vpō the ſame in a godly & lerned worke whiche he made, intitled: An exhortacion againſt rebellion.
               
            
            
               
                  THEY haue alſo a ſimilitude of godlines, but deny the powerSimilitudes of godlynes. therof. This vice reheſed by ſaint Paul was to heretiks in al ages a large cloake for euery ſhower, though the ſtorme were neuer ſo great. For a ſimilitude of godlynes is a plaine diſſimulation or hypocritical meanes to ſeme to the worlde to be godly, although in dede quite cōtrary to the thing pretended. This ſimilitude of godlines printed ſo in the breſtes of the proteſtantes, doth merueilouſly in meruailous waies bruſt out to the face of the worlde. Oh

howe they reioyce in theſe their ſimilitudes? Was it not a pretie ſimilitude at the fyrſt chop (in the begynnyng of the miſerable alteration of religion) to baniſhe the Popes authoritie, whicheThe popes authoritie baniſhed. from the beginnyng was the cheife of the Churche here vpon yerth, as is ſufficiently recorded, aſwell in the volumes of aunciēt doctours, as in al cronicles written from the begynning. And for what purpoſe was this practiſe begonne? Doubtles to introduce hereſie the guyde of all miſcheif. Was it not a pretie ſimilitude of godlines to cauſe the kyng by the vngracious counſel of Cranmer and others, to forſake his lawfulThe diuorcement of Quene Katherine. and moſte vertuous wyfe quene Katherine, who for her hūblenes and godly demeanor towardes

the Kyng her huſbande, in 
                     •
                  ye worthely be compared to Sara, Abrahams wyfe, and the reſt of the godly matrones in the olde teſtament. And here beganne fyrſt the occaſion of all our miſery and ſorowe, the calamitie wherof oure fathers haue partly felte, and we their poſteritie do feele the reſt, beſechyng God to ſpare the reſidue of his plagues, whiche this realme hath iuſtly merited for y• diuorcement of this noble womā from her true and lawfull huſbande oure late ſoueraigne lorde Kyng Henry the eight? Who can attribute ſufficient prayſe to this noble Quene, or whoo can poure out ſufficient teares to lament her ſorowfull fate? What duetie whiche ought to be in mariage wanted in her breſt. What

obedience or humblenes of harte towardes her huſbande, lacked in the good education of▪ this heuenly woman? O what feruent loue towardes the poore commons, remayned in her? O what earneſt affection towardes the poore members of Chriſte dayly dyd ſhe expreſſe 
                     ••
                   Her deuocion towardes God was inſpeakeable, her zeale towardes 
                     •
                  h
                     •
                   virgin▪ Mary was wonderfull▪ her continuall meditacions in the bloude and paſſion of Chriſte moſte apparantly is knowen to the worlde. Who to thintent ſhe might geue occaſion too others; to meditate the like, erected a 
                     •
                  uely monument, called the Mounte, which liuely worke afterwardes pitefully was raſed. O moſte happie woman, to happie too raigne

amonges vs: O moſte vertuous quene, more worthy to be crowned in heauen, then to raigne vpō earth. Who moſte paciently (as a woman who had giuen ouer the brunttes of this world, and had armed her ſelfe with pacience) cō
                  tinued to thende in the feare of God, in pietie of lyfe, in her accuſtomed deuocion, and in her wonted conſtancie, ſo that no aduerſitie of fortune could leade her out of that path, wherin ſhe had bene treaded from her infancie. And as her life was godly, ſo was her death: the circumſtance where of Polydorus▪ Virgilius, in the laſte booke of his cronicle▪ deſcribet
                     •
                  . And to the intent it ſhall not bee thought y• theſe: her worthy praiſes, are ſpokē here for flattery or that the
                     •
                  be writtē without hoke,

the wordes of Polidorus Virgilius hereafter enſue. After the deuorcement (ſayth he) this noble woman was appoynted to remayne in a place in Bedfordſhiere, called Kymbalton, a place for the ſituacion of no ſalubrite or holſomnes of ayer: Where ſhe beyng wonderfully armed with pacience, lyued a holy and moſte godly life. After wardes for very ſorrowe & penſifnes of harte, ſhe began to waxe ſicke. Which when the king herd, he entreated Euſtace Cappucius, the Emperours Embaſſadour, to go and viſite her, whoſe commaundement accordinge too his duetie, moſte diligently with all expedicion he accomplyſhed. But this noble Queene within ſyxe daies after, was affected with a great ſickenes, & feling the panges

of death begin to drawe nere ſhe cauſed one of her gentlewomen that was learned, to wryte two letters: the one to the kyng, and thother to the ſaid ambaſſadour. And theffect of this letter ſent to the Kinges Ma. enſueth.
               
                  My deare and welbeloued ſoueraigneThe letter of Quene Katheryne to the kyng her h
                           •
                        ſbād lying vpon her death bedde. and huſbande, humble commendaciōs togethers with my duetie remembred. Nowe approacheth the houre of my death, in the which extremitie very loue whiche I owe too youre maieſtie, enforceth me with theſe fewe wordes to put you in remembraunce of the helthe of your ſoule, whiche you oughte to preferre before al trāſitorie thinges, and in reſpecte therof to neglecte al other cares of the bodye. For the whiche both me your poore wyfe, and alſo your ſelfe, you haue protruded
                  
                  into many cares and miſeries. But I with harte do forgeue you, and as hartely I do wiſhe God to forgeue theſame, as preſently with my good and deuout praiers I earneſtly make peticion for theſame. Moreouer I commende vnto you our dere doughter Marie, the comforte of vsOut ſoueraigne lady and Quene that now is both, to whome I beſeche you, too extende your fatherly pitie, according to ſondry my peticions here to fore made to your maieſtie. And furthermore mooſte inſtantly I deſire your grace to haue a reſpecte vnto my poore maydens, and as time ſhal ſerue, to ſee them well beſtowed in mariage, which requeſt is not great being but .iii. in numbre. And that it woulde pleaſe you too cauſe my poore officers and ſeruauntes to bee paide their wages due, and that by the ſpace of one hoale yere after my
                  
                  departure thei maie be founde of your graces liberalitie, to thintente thei maie not wander like maiſterles men. Finally my laſt requeſt is, that mine eies onely wyſhe to ſee your grace. And thus I betake you to God. In this ſorte departed this godly womā from the cares of her bodye, to the ioyes of her ſoule, the .viii. of Ianuarie. 1535. & in the .xxvii. yeare of his Maieſties reigne. But when the kyng read her letters, he moſte louingly bedewed the ſame with the teares of his eyes. Thus farre wryteth Polydore of the lamentable ſtate of this noble Quene Katherine: who for her vertue exerciſed in this worlde, & her loue ſhewed too all ſortes of people, was worthely named of thē the good quene Katherine. And ſo

named to this preſent day. Whoſe name not onely in heauen for her vertuous behauiour, & deedes of of charitie, is enrolled in the voke of lyfe, but in earth is regiſtred in the maine liedger of immortalitie. So that to remembre the calamites whiche enſued this diuorcement, it woulde make an yron harte with teares too lament the ſame, yea, if it were as harde as the ſtony Caucaſus, or as ſauage is the Tigres of Hircania. And whereof ſprange this miſerie? Doubtles by the ſimilitudes of godlines, which then was pretended to the kynges maieſtie by certen yonge whelpes newely crept oute of the ſtable, who too bryng the ſame to paſſe, inuented a ſimilitude of godlynes, too banyſhe

the popes authoritie, which with all meanes poſſible withſtode the ſame. But here I know certen good fellowes wil obiecte ſayinge: Sir, you begyn to rage to far vpō vs poore proteſtantes, & lay al this geare to our charge, as though none but we and oure ſkolemaiſters were the doers hereof. But ſir I pray you, did you neuer reade a booke made by the biſhop of Wincheſter deceaſed, entituled of true obedience, whiche boke inueyeth againſt the authoritie of the Pope? Yes in deede goodman proteſtāt, I haue read the ſayde booke in latyn, and of late I reade the ſame alſo in englyſhe, but howe faithfully tranſlated, I leaue that to the iudgement of him which wyl compare them bothe together, before the

whiche is annexed a dronken prologue made by ſome hote ſpreted brother, no doubt of as fine matter as the maker coulde deuyſe. But foraſmuche as it is obiected that the author of that boke and others alſo inueyed againſt the ſayd Popes authoritie, & that they were not only proteſtantes which ſought the abandoning of the ſame: Wel then I wold wyſhe that the proteſtātes which were then the originalles of the ſame, would do as the ſayde byſhop of Wyncheſter and other good byſhoppes haue done ſynce, ſeke all meanes poſſible to reſtore the ſame agayne, and to reduce that to the olde ſtate, whiche the proteſtantes for ambicion, and the other for feare, did then ſeke meanes to diſplace. And as it is well

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
knowen that it hath pleaſed god to call thautor of that boke to his mercy ſince, who with a repentant harte with ſainte Peter, lamented the denial of gods truth, ſo I wold it were as wel knowē that the other (I meane Cranmere) had repented in ſemblable maner, and would haue acknowledged goddes truthe to thende. For the one hath ended his lyfe after natures direction, thother hath ſhortened his lyfe contrarie to nature. The one in his bedde, the other in the fier: the one in the vnitie of the churche, the other in the diſcord of heretikes: the one honorably, the other miſerably: the one as a catholyke, the other as an heretike: the one a true mā to God and the crowne, the other a falſe man to God & the realme.

Therfore I appeale to al mennes iudgementes, herein to conſider, whether partie ſought y• deſtructiō of this realme, or whether partie more worthy to be blamed.
               The one worthy of blame, but y• other worthy condemnaciō. And therefore pretented accordyng to their diſpoſitions, ſimilitudes of godlines, but denied the poower therof. Thē folowed ſubuerſiōsSubu
                        •
                     rſiō of monaſteries. of abbaies, being another ſimilitude of godlines perſwaded by the ſayd proteſtantes, by whoſe pytifull ſpoyle procedeth the decaye of our common wealth. For it was thought before their ſubuerſion that all thynges woulde be better cheape, but they became as good cheape as thinges did in Rome, after the makyng of the lawe, called Agraria. For whylesT. Liuius De
                        •
                     . prima. the Senatours and other rulers of

the citie were ſtriuing for thaſſignementesAppianus lib. primo De bellis ciuilibus R
                        •
                     ma. of their porcions, the hoale publike ſtate was brought to ruyne by diſſenſion and ciuile warres. The landes and poſſeſſions belonging to the ſayde abbaies, beyng let ſlyp at liberttie from the ſure bandes, wherewith thei were before duely kept to the cōmodite of the realme and relief of the poore, are nowe neyther ſo profitable to the owners (al thinges conſidered) nor yet comodious to the common welth. It is to be thought that ſome whiche wer appointed doers about theſe poſſeſſions, played the parte of a Romaine called Quintus Fabius
                  Cicero Offic. lib. primo▪
                   
                  Labeo, who beynge appointed a daieſman betwene the Nolanes & Neapolitanes, about the boundes of their lādes, did debate the matter

with either of them a parte, whē thei were come to the place, and to thintent they ſhoulde not enc
                     •
                  oche vpō eche other, the ſame was ſtaked oute indifferentlye. Nowe in the middes there remained a parcel of groūd vntouched, which parcel of ryght alſo ought to haue bene ſtaked out to thuſe of either partes, but he adiudged the ſame to the people of Rome. In lyke maner whyle ſome were in debating the abbaie poſſeſſiōs, and ſtakinge the ſame oute to the kinges vſe, ſome remained in the middes, mete for their owne vſes. Thus theſe ſimilitudes of goodlines in reprouyng the abbaiemen of their ill lyues, haue brought both the abbaies and all to vtter ruyne. And whiles they were tickling the kynges maieſt.

in the eare with the abuſes vſed in the ſame, they thēſelfes ſought meanes to aſpire vnto honoure, not caring for the miſerie whiche myght enſue, nor yet ſeking reformatiōs of the ſayd abuſes. What a ſhewe of godlines was it, trowye, to induce ſo many ſtraunge alteracions of Religion, after the death of kyng Henry the eyghte, but only to deny the power therof? Did not men crye alwayes vpon goddes booke, the worde of the lorde, the heauenly fode, the ſpirite of truthe, and ſuche lyke? But howe contrarye their dedes were, too theſe their outcries let thēſelfes be iudges. Many other ſimilitudes of godlines haue thei brought forth, to the ſhew of theThe power of godlines denied. worlde, but the power of al godlines they vtterly denye with the

effecets. And to come to ſome particuler pointes: haue they not denied the power of goddes word, to worke any thyng too the iuſtifying of manne, by the water of baptiſme? Haue they not alſo denied the moſte manifeſt woordes of god ſpoken, touching the conſecration of his reall body in the ſacramēt of thaltar, and ſay that thoſe wordes be ſpokē tropically and figuratiuely, and that they can woorke no ſuche effecte, as bread to be tranſſubſtanciated in to his body, although Chriſte by his Euangeliſtes, Apoſtles, Prophetes, Doctors, Martyrs, doth moſte playnely affirme the ſame? Haue they not alſo denyed the power of God, in the wordes ſpokē by the prieſt at the tyme of confeſſion, beyng ſo playnly commaunded

by Chriſte ſaying. WhoſeIohn, xx. ſynnes you forgiue, the ſame ſhal be forgeuen? Haue they not alſo denied the power of gods worde in the reſt of the ſeuen ſacramentes, aboliſhyng fyue quite out of their cōpany as vnworthy therof, yea and the other twayne remaining as they handled thē, ſkarce worthy the name of a ſacramēt? And as they haue denyed the power of godlynes in theſe Sacramentes: ſo haue they alſo denyed the ſame in the workes of GOD wrought by his grace in all godly men, to be any meanes too attayne to iuſtification, contrary to the wordes of S. Iohn ſaying. To as manye as receyued hym,Iohn .i. (meanyng Chriſte) he gaue them power to bee made the ſonnes of God, euen them that beleued in

his holy name: ſome peraduēture wyll ſaye here, that fayth onely includeth ſo this power, that no kynde of mannes woorkes after faith receiued, can helpe him to be made the ſonne of God. But this their ſaying will not ſtande with S. Iohns wordes. For he ſayth that to as many as receiued him, and beleued in his holy name, too ſuche people ſo receiuing & ſo beleuing him, he gaue to them power to be made the ſōnes of god. Then if he gaue too them power to be made the ſonnes God, there be workes wrought after faythe ſo receiued, wherby thei haue power (in the merites of Chriſte) to be made the ſonnes of God. And thus by fayth (and not by faythe onely) haue they this power too woorke the will of God, whiche

workes helpeth a man to iuſtificatiō, as ſaint Iames affirmeth, ſaying: What auaileth it my brethren,Iacob▪ ii. though a man ſaie he hath faith, if he haue no dedes, cā faith ſaue him? How chaunceth it then that the proteſtantes with theyr onely faith beareth ſuch ſwynge, & glorie ſo in the ſcriptures, ſithe ſaint Iames ſo manifeſtly ſaith, that withoute workes a man can not be ſaued? If a brother or a ſyſter (ſayeth he) be naked, or deſtitute of daily fode, and one of you ſaieth vnto them, God ſende you warmnes and fode, notwithſtā
                  ding you geue thē not thoſe thinges nedefull to the bodye, what ſhal it helpe▪ Euen ſo faith without workes, is dead in it ſelfe. He alſo ſaieth in another place, that Abraham and Raab, wer iuſtified

by workes, and cōcludeth ſaying, that of dedes & not of fayth only a man is iuſtified. What more plainer wordes can be wiſhed for to proue that workes auayle too iuſtification? But what ſhall we ſaie vnto you then (o ye peſtilent proteſtantes) whiche with youre ſugred talke and ſwete woordes haue begiled the poore people in ſuche ſorte, that thei beleue verely they ſhalbe ſaued in a beleuing faith, without any workes at al? What ſhall we ſay vnto you, (O ye betrayers of your countreye) for this your laſtinious preaching of onely fayeth too exclude good workes, the chief ſtate wherfore we were borne? O wicked men worſe then the deuel your father, of whoſe progeny ye are lyneally deſcended, What ment you herein

to robbe God of his glory, and to bereue from his poore membres their reliefe and fode? What glorious ſimilitudes haue you vſed in theſe your practiſes, to begile the poore men? Hope in the bloud of Chriſte, truſte in his redemption, he is our ſatiſfaction, his death only can iuſtifie vs, and ſuche like ye were wont to vſe to inſtil a zeale to the hartes of your herers, the rather to credite your doctrine. Theſe be ſwete wordes doubtles, and mete to be hadde in price of all men. But howe? as ye meane thē? God forbidde. I may aſwell ſaye. Doeſt thou beleue in the bloude of Chriſte? Then do what thou liſte, his death is ſufficient. But let euery catholike man beware of this doctrine, for it is a lying doctryne, a deceitfull

argument, and a doctrine of deuels. We knowe that our iuſtification procedeth of God only, by the paſſiō of his derebeloued ſōne Ieſus Chriſte. But this his paſſion beyng not to vs applied by folowing his ſteppes, ſo farre as it lieth in our powers, in doynge the dedes of charitie, the ſame to vs is not auailable. For although his death is ſufficient enough to attaine to iuſtification, yet if in the merites of the ſame, we do not worke euerye man according to his vocation, the ſame to vs yeldeth no comfort. Sainti. Cor iii. Paule therefore ſayeth: that the hearers of the lawe are not iuſte, but the doers of the ſame ſhalbe iuſtified. Therfore accordyng toIohn .iii. the ſaying of Saint Iohn: let no man ſeduce you, for he that doeth

righteouſnes, is iuſtified. ThePro
                        •
                     er. xi. Sa
                        •
                     . x. Eccl. ii. vi. Pſal. 7. 11. 10. Mat v. vii. x. and .xx. Luke▪ vi. Iohn .v. xi. Rom. ii. 
                        •
                     . Cor. v. Coloſ. iii. Gala. vi. T. Liuius dec. 
                           •
                        
                        ▪ lib. 5. ſcriptures are full of theſe exhortacions, in doing the woorkes of iuſtice the rather by Chriſt, & not by faith only to attayne to ſaluacion. Therefore theſe odible perſwaſions of the proteſtantes touching this opinion, ought too be from the harte of man clerely repelled. And as Liuie reherſing the oracion of Menippus Embaſſadour to Antiochus, ſpokē to the Romaines ſaieth, that faire perſwaſions in the beginning ſeme pleaſant, but in thēde they be ſorrowfull, euen ſoo the vnhappie ſermons & more vnhappy bokes made by theſe hedgecreping proteſtantes, ſemed at the firſt ſhow pleaſant ſtuffe, but thendes therof, god wote, are moſte lamentable. For beſides the ill opinions,

beaten into the heades of the carelesLibertie y• praie of y• proteſtātes multitude, libertie of lyfe, hathe borne ſuche ſwynge, that good life bereth no rule. Libertie by meanes of theſe ruffians hath takē ſuch holde faſt, that it hath daſhed good life quite out of coū
                  tenance. Libertie is rooted ſo in mannes harte, that to moſte mē it is frākely retayned. Libertie a roiſter hath ſuch interteignemēt that of many he receyueth a double welcome. Libertie a paraſite at euery mannes borde, is choked with the fare of many daintie diſhes. Thus moſte ſortes of men glad too haue libertie, care not what haſte they make to the deuell. O deuelyſh libertie, I woldApoſtrophe to the vice of libertie 
                        •
                      our countr
                        •
                      men in Germany. to GOD Germany might haue kepte the ſtyll: ſo Englande had neuer bene troubled with the. I

would to God thou haddeſt had all our Englyſhe bier too drynke dronke with Hance and Yacob in Straſborowe, vpon condiciō London had neuer reteyned the. I would to God thou haddeſt remayned in Switherlande a conquerour, ſo that thou haddeſt neuer had conqueſt in Englande. For ſythe thy arriuall hether, many poore men by thy vngracious marchaundiſe are vndoone. Many a good Englyſhe man at the firſt glad to entertaygne the, for curteſie as a ſtraunger, wold now be rydde of their gueſte, but they cannot. But I truſte ſhortly to ſee the bankeroute and glad to flye the realme. I heare ſaye thy poore companions nowe in Geneua, Emden, Frieſlande, Straſborough, and other places of Gernye,

                  
                     •
                  urſe the time that euer they knewe the and thy haunte, if credite may be geuen to the coiners frō thence. Whoſe miſerie is ſuch that a chamber as bygge as a Swynecotte is of as good rente as the beſt marchauntes houſe in Londō. And no maruaile though our cornerkreapers be ſo frendely welcomed, paying ſoe well for their welcome. I heard ſaye of one in Graueſende Barge, belykeThe report of a pilgrim that came from Gods churche. ſome pilgryme of Goddes churche, that the poore menne of that coūtrey which in dede were very poore, before the repayre of our engliſhmen thether, are now become iolye fellowes. And by what meanes thinke you? By lettyng out their cotages in the townes to our countreymē. Who becauſe they be glad to haue thē,

vſe no debating of the matter, as we do, but bidde them aſke and haue. And they ſtrayning ſmall curteſie, are contented too take their offer. O lamētable caſes of a ſorte of thurſtie ſoules, whiche for the thurſt of the lordes worde as they cal it, do thurſt after their owne deſtruction. The Lordes woorde was taught here & eſtablyſhed longe before your dayes, and the hole lāde beleued therin. And wil you deuiſe a new lordes worde to cole your dronken ſtomakes? Hath Germany a better lordes worde, then y• wherin england firſt did inſtruct you, & bring you vppe from youre ſwadlyng cloutes? Are you wiſer thē your fathers, or more ſkilful then your mothers? Thynke you to be ſaued, more then your parentes, or

doe you iudge them already condempned? For either of you are in harde caſes. Well well, conſider your caſes and repente in tyme. Get ſome of that precious roote called Baaras deſcribed by Ioſephus,
                  De bello Iud. Lib. 7. cap. 25. whiche for euell ſpirites is very medicinable, and diſpatche the ſprites out of your ſtomakes. Midſomer mone is paſt, you ſe al your deuiſes will take no place. The neſt is founde and the burdes are taken, and in cage. Youre triformed bookes can beare no ſwynge. Men regarde not Turnors
                  The bokes of the brethrē & perſecuted flock by thē made ſithe their runninge awaye into Germany. boke of the wolfe, nor yet the cropeared foxe, Hornes Apologie, Bales vocation, Poynetes folyſh cō
                  futacion againſt the lerned treatyſe of doctor Martin ſtrande in no ſteade, Noxes doctrinall of the Maſſeboke, and your newe reuiued
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
                  
lordes worde: and haue you not herein an outward face of godlines, and in very dede denye theffect thereof. The partie which played boo pipe in the wal, calledThe bird in the wall. the Byrde in the wall of Alderſgate ſtreate, at ſuch a tyme as ſhe was examined, wherfore ſhe had ſo deluded the world, ſhe anſwered: the lordes worde cauſed her ſo to doe. And the poore wenche afterwardes making an open cō
                  feſſion of her practiſe, and deſyryng the people at Paules croſſe to forgiue her, & to praye for her, made this exclamacion vpon thē and the like which had procured her to do that feat, ſaying. Wo be vnto you heretikes, phy vpō you all, that thus haue the Lorde in your mouthes, and the deuell in your hartes. This preſent daye

haue I a good cauſe to crie oute vpon you, that in this ſorte haue brought me to offende God and the Quenes maieſtie in this my late practyſe, and to be a gaſyng ſtocke to the hoale worlde to my gret ſhame. And therfore beware good people beware of theſe heretikes, for as thei haue vndone me in counſailing me to attēpte this wicked enterpryſe: ſoo they wyll vndo you all, vnles ye take hede by times of their noughty opinions: With many other woordes ſpokē by her with weping teares againſt thoſe miſcheuous perſōs. And there by y• preacher that day (maiſter Wymſley) the hole circū
                  ſtaunce of that practyſe, was vttered and was of the audiēce very much abhorred.
               So I dare ſaie y• partie whichThe Catte that was did hāge vp the Catte in Cheape

ſyde, in mockerie of prieſtes, andhanged vp in Cheapeſyde. deluſion of the bleſſed ſacrament of thaltar, thought that feate to be a worthy enterpryſe. And I dare ſay, thought himſelf a ſtout champion of the faithe, eſpecially eſcapyng ſcotfree. But lette hym take hede, it is an olde ſaid ſawe▪ 
                  Qui mockat mock abitur, he may peraduenture mocke ſo longe till he be mocked himſelfe.
               And he alſo thought himſelfeThe diſfiguring of ſ. Thomas picture. a ioly fellowe that did mangle the poore picture of ſaint Thomas, placed ouer the porche of Saint Thomas of Actes by y• worſhypfull companye of the Mercers. Who could not tell▪ what other deſpight to worke to the Saint, but to diſfigure the picture. But Syr, dyd you neuer heare tell of this prouerbe. Non-est bonum ludere cū
                  
                  
                  ſanctis, it is not good to mocke with ſaintes: well I feare me you wil mocke ſo longe til you wil mocke at the gallowſe. And I dare ſaie if this man had bene demaunded why he did ſo, his anſwere wold haue bene, the lordes worde prouoked me. Thus of the Lordes woorde in all their doynges, they make a ſhypmans hooſe, to vſe it as they liſte to do good or il. The deuell in his attemptes aſwell againſt man the excellent creature of God, as alſo againſte Chriſte himſelfe, vſed the titles and places of Goddes worde. And is it any marueile, though his vnfained miniſters practiſe their maiſters leſſons? Trowe ye that fatherBrowne commonly called Father brown Browne the Broker of Bedlem, could ſeme ſo pleaſant a mā to the proteſtantes, and it were

not for his cloake of gods worde that hydeth his ſhepehardes apparell? Could his peuiſhe prophecies be hadde in ſuche eſtimacion amonges the warme brethren, without his diſſimulate veſture and his ſtaffe lyke a ſhepehooke? would the marchant men of Lō
                  don with Pet peny ale, Sympering Syſſe, and other fleeryng flurtes, their wiues vſe their accuſtomed peregrinacions and pilgrimages to viſite the bliſſed Rode, called poore father Browne, that hathThe lordes gifte. the lordes giftes, at Iſlyngton, Barnet and other places aboute London, were they not moued with the ſprite? In lent was .xii. moneth, at ſuche tyme as goodman Browne was newely creptThe hiſtory of certen aſſemblies out of Bedlem, and then lying at Iſlington, to reſt his ſory bones,

I harde ſaie of many prodigiouswhiche repayred to father brown at Iſling
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                   wonders, wherof then he enformed the congregacion. And I being glad to here y• prophet ſpeake▪ reſorted thether with two gentlemen of myne acquaintaunce, who were deſierous to ſe the maner of the ſymple ſoule. When we came thether we vnderſtoode he laye in a typlyng houſe, next the ſigne of the Mermayde. But our inquiſicion too knowe where hee lodged was by a ſecrete meanes. At our e
                     •
                  trie intoA 
                        •
                     o
                        ••••
                      prophet. the houſe, there was neuer a worde but goſſep, all was whiſt. For priuely in a corner certen goſſeps were in a marueilous ſecret talke with father Browne: I trowe he was tellyng their ſortunes or ſuch lyke. At lenght the
                     •
                   brake of▪ Then one gaue him ſpices

to comforte his weake ſtomake,Oblacions to father Broune. another gaue hym ſalues to greaſe his bones, whiche before were anoynted with a bliſſe begger, another ſuger. And after their oblacions thus made, they departed. Thē wēt he into a parlor wher was aſſembled another route, who very ſore longed for his comming, partely accuſynge him of his lōge tarriance. Being ſetled to talke, the two gentlemē and I with diuerſe other ſtepped to the dore partely to heare what he ſayde, & partely to marke the countenaunces of thaſſemblye. For no man except he was of ſpeciall acquaintaunce, could be admitted to go in. Where ſecretly he was demaunded queſtions.Geſtures of one of thaſſemblies. But for the moſte parte we could here no worde, but the Lorde be

prayſed, and ſawe ſondry eleuacions of their eyes towardes the top of the houſe, and ſuche lyke. In fyne before he had done, commeth in a poaſt, a prentiſe of Lō
                  don, to tell him his maiſtres was cōme. Forth with Browne brake of from that company and went to the prētyce maiſtres, who had beſpokē a parlor hard by. Whome we with diuers other folowed. And at the firſt ſalutacion he calledA very yōg mother fo
                        •
                      ſuch an o
                        ••
                      Squyer. her mother, and very ioyfully greted her. And after the mother, the ſonne & the ſiſters, had with ſondry bliſſinges and congratulacions wel clawed one another,Iacke prentiſe and his teſtament. Iacke prentiſe was called in for his teſtament, who reaching the ſame from his girdle, deliuered it to his maiſtres and turning the boke, ſhe turned to a place of S.

Mathewes ghoſpel, where chriſtMath. v. ſaieth to his Apoſtles. Reioyſe, your rewarde is great in heauē, for ſo haue they perſecuted the prophetes whiche were before you. &c. OBrownes anothers expoſition vpō a place of the teſtament. good father Browne (qv his mother) howe haue you been perſecuted for the wordes ſake, what perſecution haue you ſuffered frō time to tyme? But the Lorde be prayſed for your deliuerie and cō
                  ſtancie in quiet ſuffering thereof. The prophetes, chriſt ſaith, hath been ſo handled. Therefore be of good chere mā & take no thought▪ For one daie I truſte we ſhall allThe dewe of y• lordes worde. be mery in the lord, and ſhal haue the dewe of the worde once more be ſprinckled vpon our faces, at what tyme I truſt we ſhalbe euē with theſe ſhauelyng prieſtes, & ſhaue their crownes a litle deper.

Yes mother (qv Browne) I amBrownes wordes to his mother. of good chere, for I haue good cauſe ſo to be, for I am cheryſhed of ſuche good women as yeare, that I lacke nothyng. And howe then can I be ſorrowfull hauing ſuch cauſe to be mery in the lorde In the meane tyme certen other Siſterwiues I thinke thei wer,Siſterwyues or prieſtwyues. for their apparayle were freeſe roabes and certen marchantmen tarried in the courte withoute, one aſking another whē the preaching time was. And we hearing of ſome ſermon towardes, leauing Brownes communication with 
                     •
                  is mother, walked vp and doune in the courte. Not long after, Browne cōmeth forth with his mother and ſiſter, and Iacke prentiſe alſo with his teſtament▪ Browne wente into the Stable

where tarrying a while belyke in doing his buſynes, anone he called in the cōgregacion, & amōges them thruſt we. Where Browne leanynge vpon hys horſebacke,Browne & his Iade. whiche was a iade ſcarſe worth ſyxe pence, ſitting vpō the maunger, he beganne to alledge certen places of Eccleſiaſtes withoute booke, one vpon another in heapes.Brownes ſermon. Then beganne he to talke of thre Religions. The one he termed my lorde Chauncelors religion: the other Cranmers, Latymers and Ridleys religion: And the thirde he called goddes Religion. My lorde Chauncelors, he ſayde, was nought. Cranmers & the others religion not good: but Goddes religion was beſt. With ſuche other vayne woordes not worthy the tyme in reherſal. And

hearing this beaſtly talke, we departed lamenting the great folly of the people, whiche in this ſorte dyd dayly ſpende their tyme too heare ſuche lying ſpirites. And goyng homewardes, we met dyuers companies both of mē and women, of purpoſe going to Iſlyngton, to heare the ſermon of this peltig prophet. But within a whyle after I heard ſaye, thys father Browne & his brood with the congregacion, were remoued from that place and were diſperſed into corners. Truly pitie it is he is ſuffred in this ſort to range the countreis without reſtrainte, not only for corrupting the people with ill opinions, but alſo for diſſeminating his vaine Prophecies to excite rumors. But this opinion I haue of Browne, that

he had rather liue a proude confeſſor then burne a ſtinking martyr. With many ſuch ſimilitudes of Godlines, manye of the proteſtantes in our tyme be inſpired. Here myght alſo be reherſed the zeale that the lame mā that was burnt of late at Stratford had,The lame mās croche that was burnte at Stratford. when he called for his croche, too haue the ſame likewiſe to be burned with him, thinking without the ſame he could not meritie the crown of martirdome. And thus they haue certen reſemblances of godlines, and deny the power thereof. And in vſing theſe their counterfait zeales, they doo not onely mocke with God, but they deceyue his poore people with incēſing their frayle natures, with a thouſand mo of theſe their practiſes, whiche here I omytte. And

theſe their folyſhe deuyſes are ſo folyſhe, if they be duely marked, that nothing can be more foliſhe. And if it be well conſydered, any Indifferēt man may ſone diſcerne to what ende their purpoſe is to directe the ſame, for thende is either to bringe their conceyued opiniōs in credite with the world, or els to ſturre vp wicked brutes and lies vpon the magiſtrates, & ſuche as pleaſe not their fancies to make vproares and comocions within the realme. Therby to reedefie their cōfuſed churche, or els to ſeke the deſtructiō of this ſaid noble realme, and vs all the people thereof.
               And cōcerning the other vices whiche are of theſe ſortes of mē, wherof ſaint Paule prophecied, becauſe they be partly deſcribed

before, I purpoſe nowe to conclude, exhorting all men that entende to aſpire to ſaluacion, to waye diligently the premiſſes. Firſte to conſider the vnitie of Chriſtes churche, whiche in all thinges touching our faith, vniformely doth agree: and to conſider the ſundrie factions of y• proteſtantes vpon the fayth, wherin they do not agree. Waye their falſhode in alleging the places of the ſcriptures, onely to ſay euil of the churche, and to miſreport the ſame. Ponder the wordes whiche S. Paule propheſieth vpon ſondrye heretikes, whiche ſhould come, denying marriage, and eatyng of meates to bee vtterly nought, and howe maliciouſly they applye the ſame vpon the Churche, whiche with honourable

wordes doth commend them bothe. Perceiue aduiſedly with your ſelues what cauſe the Proteſtantes haue, to ſhorten their lyues by fyer, and what cauſe they haue to call their iuſte puniſhementes perſecutions. And conſider with youre ſelues the ſtate of Chriſtes Churche in the beginnyng, and the ſtate thereof at this preſent, which in one vnitie of doctrine is all one, thoughe not then ſo firme as it is nowe. Waye alſo the folly of the vngodly, whiche preſumptuouſly chalenge to them ſelues the tytle of Martyrs, and more fondly offer themſelues to ye fier, not cōpelled thervnto as the true Martyrs were, but obſtinately, as who would ſaye, in the deſpite of the Churche. Examine with your

ſelues alſo what faith the church of Chriſt teacheth, whether it denieth God, refuſeth the ſonne, or contempneth the holy ghoſt, as Infideles and other miſcreantes do Emonges whiche infideles, if theſe menne ſuffered, then more truely they might name themſelues Martyrs. But the churche profeſſeth with more ſinceritie, that God whiche they do, that Chriſte, that holy ghoſt that they do. The Churche dothe teache the ſacramentes to be in numbre vii. as the ſcripture leadeth, and as the Apoſtles tradicions and holy doctours do preſcribe. The Churche in nothing concernyng the ſubſtāce of religiō doth varie or altar. The churche teacheth that the inuiſible bodye of Chriſt, ſytting at the right hand

of God the father, is here in the viſible formes of breade & wyne, inuiſibly contained in the ſacrament of the Altare, the deareſt iewel whiche Chriſte lefte vpon earth, and offered of the Preiſt in a lyuely and pure ſacrifice at Maſſe to God the father, for the comfort of the whole churche, accordyng to the prophecie of Malachie the prophete, ſpeaking in the name of God the father theſe wordes. I haue no wyll and pleaſureMalach. 
                           •
                        . in you, and I wyll receiue no offering or rewarde at your hande. From the riſing of the ſunne, to the ſetting, my name is great emonges the Gētiles, and in euery place there ſhalbe ſacrifice done, and a pure and cleane oblatiō ſhalbe offered to my name. The churche alſo teacheth the adoration of this moſte pure

ſacrifice, not y• outwarde formes of bread and wyne, but the body of Chriſt inuiſibly therin contained. The churche teacheth all kyndes of lyuely and holſome doctrine, as Faſting, Prayer, Charitie, Almeſdedes, Amendement of lyfe, Penaunce, and all other good workes mete to be obſerued of a chriſtian man. Therfore waye with your ſelues ones more, what cauſe haue theſe graceleſſe menne thus to miſreport the church, or to ſpende their lyues againſt the churche. Then fynally conſider whether thoſe vices reherſed by ſaint Paule, whiche ſhould be moſte frequented in the latter tyme, were not moſte practiſed of the ſaied Proteſtantes. Whiche thynges duely conſidered I ſhall moſte humbly

exhorte all menne for the loue of God, and in the Paſſion of his ſonne Ieſus Chriſte, and in his name, that ye al ſpeake one thing and that there be no diſſenſion emonges you, accordyng to the counſaile of ſaint Paule to the Corinthians. And that ye maye be a whole body of one mynde, & meanyng, entreating you alſo in like maner, as he doth in another place, ſaying: Whatſoeuer thinges are honeſt, whatſoeuer thinges are iuſt, whatſoeuer thinges are pure, whatſoeuer thinges are conuenient, whatſoeuer thynges are of honeſt reporte, if there bee any vertue, if there be any praiſe of learning, thoſe ſame haue you in your mynde, whiche you haue bothe learned, & receiued, heard, and alſo ſeene in me, the ſame

thinges do, and the God of peace ſhalbe with you▪ Whiche coūſaile if we followe, doubtles we ſhalbe the membres of one bodie, not repugnant, or obſtinate, but meke & obedient. Then ſhall we baniſhe all ſectes and opinions, and remayne in concorde & vnitie. Thē ſhall wee ſaye with the prophet
                     •
                   Dauid: Beholde what a pleaſant thing it is for brethren to lyue in vnitie. Then ſhall we reedifie our auncient common wealthe, whiche by diſcorde we haue loſt. Then ſhall the membres agree with the belly, whiche with diſcorde in maner was cōſumed for hunger, as Menenius Agrippa tellethT. Liuius dec. prim
                        •
                     . lib. ii. the hiſtore, when he went about to recōcile the commons, to the obediēce of the Senators. Thē ſhall we be inuincible & without

feare of forein realmes. The ſhall we be impregnable without feare of any naciō. And finally we ſhal be acceptable to hym, that is the author of attonemente, whiche is Ieſus Chriſte the ſonne of the the lyuing God. To whome with the holy ghoſte, be all prayſe and honor for euer.
               (⸫)
            
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               An Index or Table, mencioning ſuche ſpeciall matter as is before conteigned in this preſent volume.
            
               A.
               ABbotes of Reding, Colcheſter, and Glaſtonburye, and of theyr death. fol. 69
               Abſtinence how profitable a thing. fo. 27
               Abſtinence of the Perſians. fol. 29
               Acton a traytor & herete
                     •
                  . fol. 46. 103
               Adoraci
                     •
                  
                  ̄ of the ſacramēt of thalter. fo. 128
               
                  Aeneas verſes to Dido. fol. 32
               
                  Aḡamemnon and his ſentence recited out of Seneca. fol. 9
               
                  Albanus a true martir, and died for the catholike fayth. fol. 66
               
                  Alcibiades. fol. 41
               
                  Alexander the great & his cōtinēcie. fo. 72
               Almeſdedes. fol. 34
               Anabaptiſtes in Englande. fol. 18
               Anne Aſkewe with her ſto
                     •
                  tnes and behauiour in the time of her death. fo. 47
               
                  Antonius an olde father. fol. 28
               Anncient ordres in this realme for bringing vp of youthe. fo. 93.
               
                  Apelles the heretike. fol. 75
               Aunſweres of catholikes too obiections. fol. 13. 108
               
                  Apoſtles purchaſing. fol. 84
               Apoſtrophe to the vice of libertie & our countreymen in Germany. fol. 116
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     pohthēgma of Papinianus & Baſsianus. fo. 31
               Apprentices & their ill education. fol. 9
                     •
                  
               
               
                  Ariſtotels rebuke to Caliſthenes his ſcolle
                     •
                  . folio. 31
               
                  Arrius of Alexandria. fol. 61. 75
               Arrogancie and ſelfloue the cauſes why our coūterfaite martirs do burn. fo. 48
               
                  Artemiſia quene of Caria compared to our goſſeps whiche are in loue with oure mery martyrs. fol. 6
                     •
                  
               
               
                  S. Auguſtine for the burning of heretikes. folio. 43. 59
            
            
               B.
               
                  BAaras a rote medicinable againſt ill ſpirites. fol. 11
                     •
                  
               
               
                  Bale the freer reuenged vpon a worſhypfull man of Hampſhere. fol. 101
               
                  Bales boke called his vocation fol. 118
               Beaſtes be not ingrate fol. 97
               Biſhops effeminate. fol. 80
               
                  Blandina a virgine and true martir of Chriſte. fol. 47
               Blynde Bayarde and his corage fol. 48
               Boaſters. fol. 8
                     •
                  
               
               Bones of our ſuppoſed martirs of ſome of their confeſſors preſerued for reliques. fol. 6
                     •
                  
               
               
                  Bokes of the brethr
                     •
                   in Germany. 
                     〈…〉
                   A Bric
                     •
                  laier taking vpon him the 
                     •••
                  ice of preaching. fol▪ 19
               Browne the ſhepeheard, commōly called father browne. fol. 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               Brownes mother. fol. 123
               Brownes mothers expoſition, vpon a place of ſcripture. fol. 1
                     •
                  3
               Browne and his Iade. fol. 1
                     •
                  4
               Brownes ſermone. ibide
                     •
                  
               
               
                  Brutus the fyrſt conſul in▪ Rome. fol. 54
               Burning of heretikes. fol. 40
               Byrde in the wall in Alderſgate 
                     •••
                  ete fol. 120
            
            
               C.
               
                  CAius Pontius the Samnite. fol. 14
               
                  Caluine. fol. 17
               
                  Candaules kyng of Lydia. fol. 6
               
                  Cranmere. fol. 17
               
                  Cranmere late byſhop of Cantorbury a traytor. fol. 10
                     •
                  
               
               The Catholiques how they auoyde the place of S. Paule to Timothe, obiected by the heretikes, and the ryghte ſenſe therof. fol. 23
               Catholike churche in all thinges obſerueth an ordre. fol. 29
               Catholike churche perſwadeth good lyfe▪ fol. 34
               
                  Catholike relegion in this realme how long it hath continued. fol. 91
               The Catte that was hāged vp in chepe
                  
                     •
                  yde. fol. 120
               Catholike churche what it is. fol. 12
               Catholike church how to know it. fo. 12
               
                  Carolſtadius and his 
                     〈…〉
                  . fol. 16
               Cauſes of our myſeri
                     •
                  . fol. 10
               Cauſes wherein men ought to ſpende their lyues. fol. 54
               Cauſes why the proteſtantes in kynge Edwardes tyme did not punyſhe the catholikes by death. fol. 70
               Cauſes wherin women ought to ſpende their lyues. fol. 78
               Cauſes of Goddes plagues. fol. 91
               Cauſes why Englȳſhmen be welcomed in Germany. fol. 117
               
                  Centaur
                        •
                     
                   certen monſters. fol. 14
               
                  Chriſoſtome proueth that yonge wydowes did vowe. fol. 25
               
                  Chriſoſtome for ye puniſhing of heretikes. 6
               The Champion of the fayth. fo. 118
               
                  Circes cuppes. fol. 
                     ••
                  
               
               
                  Codrus kyng of Athenes. fol. 55
               Communion table & procedinges about the ſame. fol. 80
               Confuſed ordres about the late communion. fol. 83
               
                  Conſtancie wherin our martirs triumphe. fol. 5
                     •
                  
               
               Maiſter Chriſtopherſonnes booke againſt rebellion. fol. 103
               Couetonſnes▪ fol. 84. 8
                     •
                  
               
               Crumwell, fol. 
                     •
                  0
                     •
                  
               
               The croche of the lame man that was burned at Stratford. fol. 12
                     •
                  
               
               Curſſed ſpeakers. fol. 89
            
            
               D.
               THe death of quene Katherine. fo. 107
               
                  Demoſthenes tale of an aſſes ſhadow. 49
               Deſpyſers of the godly. fol. 99
               The difference betwene the catholike & Sciſmaticall churche. fol. 127
               A diſcourſe touching the burning of heretikes. fol. 40
               Diſobedience to parentes. fol. 92
               The doctrine of the churche. fol. 127
               
                  Donatus the heretike. fol. 75
               A duche man and his opinion. fol. 19
               A duche man and his hypocryſie. fo. 46. 57
               The Duke of Northumberland. fo. 102
            
            
               E.
               Elders and miniſters and of their late wicked preceptes in the church. fo. 5. 6
               
                  Emden a cytie in Frieſlande. fol. 116
               Englande the mother of vs all. fol. 6
               
                  Eſsai and their abſtinence. fol. 28
               A text of Eſaie the prophet, very myſuſed of the proteſtantes againſt faſting. 37
               
                  Ethelbert. fol. 9
                     •
                  
               
               Example of an orator & Emperor. fo. 39
               Example of a Maſon. fol. 82
            
            
               F.
               FAble of the Crabbe. fol. 94
               Falſe accuſers. fol. 99
               Faſt. fol. 33
               Feruencie of She Apoſtles. fol. 77
               Freer Peyto hurt with a ſtone. fo. 100
               Freer Bale reuenged vpon a worſhypfull man of Hampſhere. fol. 101
               Iohn Fiſſher biſhop of Rocheſter. fo. 68
            
            
               G.
               GEneua. fol. 116
               Geſtures of an aſſembly that repayred to Browne the ſhepehearde at Iſlyngton. fol. 122
               Glorious wordes of y• proteſtātes. fo. 114
               Goſſeps and parrotes of the newefound worlde. fol. 74
               Goſſeps promoters of hereſie. fol. 75
               Graues of dead men ouerthrowen. fo. 85
               
                  Gyges tale out of Plato applied to the proteſtantes. fol. 6
               
                  Gyges kinge and the ſtraunge nature

thereof. ibidem
            
            
               H.
               HEreſie & the definicion therof. fo. 1
                     •
                  
               
               Hereſy a common womā. fo. 32. 103
               Heretikes in the primatiue churche. 16
               Heretikes why thei wer not puniſhed in the primatiue churche. 60
               The heauens diſpoſed to wonderful inclinacions in the beginning of Luthers doctrine. fol. 15
               Hil
                     •
                  ne Simon Magus winche. fol. 75
               The Heathen puniſhed the deſpiſers of their religion. fol. 41
               A notable hiſtorie of a true martyr. fo. 52
               The hiſtorie of certen aſſemblies which repayred to father Browne lying at Iſlyngton. fol. 12
                     •
                  
               
               
                  S. Hierome for ye puniſhing of heretikes. 62
               Hoper. fol. 17
               Hornes apologie. fol. 118
               Hoſpitalitie of our late Apoſtles. fo. 85
               
                  H
                        •
                     ſsi
                        •
                     es a ſecte in Germany. fol. 17
               
                  Hydra the ſerpent. fol. 14
            
            
               I.
               IAcke prentice with his teſtament. fol. 123. 124
               
                  Ignatius a true martyr. fol. 53
               Ingratitude. fol. 96
               
                  Infidelitie. fol. 
                     ••
                  
               
               Ioane Butcher of kent and her opinion fol. 19. 75
               Ioane Bucher and her ſtoutnes when ſhe was burnt. fol. 47. 17
               Iohn Cawode the Quenes prynter, whoſe name the brethren in Germany put to ſome of their libelles as Imprinter therof. fol. 118
               
                  Iulianus apoſtata. fol. 82
               Iuſtification not by fayth only. fu. 112
               
                  Iuſtinus martyr. fo. 53
               
                  Ixion. fol. 14
            
            
               K.
               QUene Katheryne deuorced. fo. 104
               Quene Katherins letters written to her huſbande kyng Henry theyght vpon her death bedde. fol. 106
               The kynges maieſtie that nowe is kyng Phylip. fol. 89
            
            
               L.
               LAmentacion made by the people for ye death of ſ. Thomas of Cātorbury. 
                     •
                  8
               Latymers combate with ſir Thomas Seamer his ſpirite. fol. 44
               Latymers wordes to proue that it is the cauſe and not the death that maketh the quarell good. fol. 45
               
                  London ladies. fol. 77
               
                  Lucilla. fol. 75
               
                  Lucius king of this Realme: fol. 91
               
                  Lucretia of Rome. fol. 79
               
                  Luther and his opinion. fol. 16
               Libertie of life. fol. 116
            
            
               M.
               
                  MArcion the heretike. fol. 75
               
                  Marcionites people of his ſecte. fo. 66
               
                  Makebraies boke. fol. 118
               
                  Ma
                        •
                     ſolus king of Carſa. fol. 63
               
                  Menippus wordes, Embaſſadour to Antiochus. fol. 115
               
                  Michol kyng Dauides wyfe. fol. 78
               Coūterfayte martirs and their deathes with their toyes vſed in the tyme of the ſame. fol. 47
               Monaſteries & Abbaies ſubuerted. 110
               
                  Montanus an heretike in the primatiue churche. fol. 66. 75
               Monkes of the charterhouſe with the cauſes of their death. fol. 68
               Sir Thomas More. ibidem
               A Monſter brought forth in Germany, in the beginning of Luthers doctrine with the diſcription thereof. fol. 15
               
                  Muſculus. fol. 17
               
                  Mutius Scaeuola and his ſtoutnes. fol. 54
            
            
               
               N.
               
                  NAſturtium an herbe. fol. 29
               Nature cōtented with a litle. fo. 28
               
                  Nicolaus the heretike. fol. 75
               
                  Noxes doctrinal of the Maſſeboke. fo. 118
            
            
               O.
               OBiectiōs of y• heretikes. 13. 22. 65. 108
               Obſtinacie the cauſe of error. fol. 10
               Oblacions or offringes to Browne the ſhepeharde. fol. 122
               
                  Oecolampadius and his opinion. fol. 17
               Iohn Oldecaſtel and the cauſe of his death fol.
               Oldecaſtell a traitor. fol. 102
               Ordre. fol. 30
            
            
               P.
               
                  PAulus an auncient father. fol. 28
               The Perſians abſtinencie. fol. 29
               
                  Peter Martyr. fol. 17
               
                  Pet penyale. fol. 121
               
                  Phaeton and of his climming vp to his fathers chariot. fol. 7
               A Pilgrym of Goddes churche. fol. 117
               
                  Philomena. fol. 75
               
                  Philip Sannio. fol. 86
               
                  Pompeius apohthegma to Marcellinus. fol. 97
               The parable of the Cockle obiected by

the proteſtantes and the meanyng thereof. fol. 57
               The Popes authoritie banyſhed. fo. 104
               
                  Polycarpus a true martyr▪ fol. 53
               
                  Poynetes doctrine with his two wi
                     •
                  es. 24
               
                  Poynetes falſhode. fol. 25
               
                  Poynetes boke againſt the learned treatiſe of doctor Martyn. fo. 118
               Mointes ſpecially to be required in a martyr. fol. 50
               Power of godlynes denyed. fol. 111
               Practices of the proteſtauntes. fol. 22
               Practiſe of prelates newe reuiued. fo. 118
               Preſumption and the rewarde therof. 8
               A Prieſt and of his ſtraunge opinion about twenty yeares paſt. fol. 18
               Prieſtes married what womē they vſed to marrye. fol. 74
               
                  Priſca and Maximilla. fol. 75
               Procedynges. fol. 80. 81. 82
               Proude proteſtantes. fol. 88
               The Proteſtantes how thei plaied their partes after thei had corrupted the no bil
                     •
                  tie. fol. 6. & 7
               The worde Proteſtant what it is. fol. 8
               The proteſtantes without vnitie of doctrine. fol. 14
               The proteſtātes how thei peruert a text of S. Paule. 21. et deinceps.
               
               
                  The proteſtantes in ſhepes app
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  e. 35
               The proteſtantes fa
                     ••
                  . fol. 36
               The proteſtantes with one truthe ſ
                     •
                  me to confounde another. fol. 3
                     •
                  
               
               The proteſtantes conſciences. fo. 36
               The proteſtantes are baſtardes. fol. 96
               Prayer. fol. 34
               P
                     •
                  tto a Tanner & his opinion. fol. 18
            
            
               Q.
               Quene katheryn deuorced. fol. 104
               
                  Quintus Fabius Labeo. fol. 110
            
            
               R.
               REmedies to auoyde ſynne. fol. 32
               A rynge of a ſtraunge nature. fol. 6
               Rogers burnt in Smythfielde, and of the fonde Imaginations of many in the tyme of his death. fol. 64
            
            
               S.
               THe Sacramēt of the Altar. fo. 83. 112
               
                  Semiramis poeſie in reproche of couetouſnes. fol. 86
               Sectes that did forbidde meates to be eaten. fol. 26
               Sermons pleaſaunt. fol. 30
               
                  Scipio Aphricanus and his continēcie. fo. 73
               Selfloue and yelding to the fleſhe. fo. 71
               Scriptures to proue the burnynge of

heretikes. fol. 41. 42
               Similitudes of Godliu
                     •
                  s. fol. 
                     •
                  03
               
                  Simon Magus. fol. 75
               
                  Sin
                        •
                     n that begiled the Troianes. fol. 65
               Shoting of a gonne at the preacher at Paules croſſe. fol. 100
               Sir Thomas Seymer rayled vpon by Latymer before the late kynges Maieſtie. fol. 44
               Scorye the preacher. fol. 47
               Siſter wiues. fol. 124
               
                  Socrates. fol. 41
               A ſpiritual hoape lōged for by Brownes mother the Shepehearde. fol. 123
               Straſ
                     •
                  orou
                     •
                  h a cytie in Germany. 116
               Striking of ye prieſt at weſtminſter. 100
               Foure Suſſex men of late burnt & their opinions. fol. 19
               
                  Syrenes wherof Homere maketh menciō. 22
               
                  Sympering Syſſe. fol. 1
                     •
                  1
            
            
               T.
               
                  TAunies whiche procede out of the mouthes of our martyrs. fol. 50
               
                  Th
                        ••
                     s the harlot. fol. 76
               
                  Thaleſtris quene of the Amazones. fol. 76
               Saint Thomas of Cantorbury and his martyrdome. fol. 69
               S. Thomas picture diſfigured. fol. 1
                     •
                  0
               
                  
                  Thaborites 
                  
                     •
                   l
                     •
                  te ſe
                     •••
                   in Germany. fo. 1
                     •
                  
               
               A ſort of ſaynt Paule peruerted by the proteſtauntes. fo. 2
                     •
                  
               
               Toyes of our falſe martyrs in the tyme of their deathes. fol. 47
               
                  Themiſtocles Apothegma to the Atheniens. fol. 97
               Traitors. fol. 10
                     •
                  
               
               Throwyng of a dagger at the preacher at Paules croſſe. fol. 100
               Trucebreakers. fol. 98
               
                  Turia a Romaine ma
                     •
                  roue. fol. 79
               
                  Turnors ſolempne boke of the wolfe▪ 118
               True reliques contempned. fol. 6
                     •
                  
               
               A Tyler and his opinion. fol. 18
            
            
               V.
               VNthankefull. fol. 95
               Virgins of the cytie of Separta. fo. 79
               The vnitie of the churche. fo. 20. 21. 126
               Vnitie the badge of the churche. fol. 
                     •
                  0
            
            
               VV.
               WEakenes of women. fol. 76
               Women euer learnyng, and neuer able to attayne vnto the truthe. fol 74
               Women promoters of hereſie. fol. 75
               Whether it be the cauſe or the death that maketh a martyr. fol. 44
               
                  What tyme the temporall 
                     •
                  worde begin to ſerue the ghoſpell. fol. 60
               Wyues of certen men called Mi
                        •
                     i. fo. 79
               Wyat and his practiſe. fol. 7
                     •
                  
               
               Wyat and his treaſon▪ fol. 102
               Wordes of the ignoraunt people vpon the heretikes paſſing to death. fol. 43
               Wordes of father Peyloe a freer of Grene wiche, touchyng the partie that dyd hurte hym. fol. 101
            
            
               Y.
               YAcob and 
                     •
                  ance of Stra
                     ••
                  orough. fol
                     •
                  o. 116
            
            
               Z.
               
                  Zwynglins and his opinion. fol. 16
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Impr
                  •
               nted at London, by Robert Caly, within the precin
                  •
               t of the late deſſolued houſe of the graye Freers, nowe conuerted to an Hoſpitall, called Chriſtes Hoſpitall.
            
               MENSE IV LII.
            
            
               Ann
                     •
                  . 1556.
         
      
   