
      
         
            
            
            
               A LETTER WRITTEN BY A TRVE CHRISTIAN Catholike, to a Romaine pretended Catholike.
            
               Wherein vppon occaſion of controuerſie touching the Catholike Church the 12.13. and 14. Chap. of the Reuelations are breifly and trulie expounded. Which conteine the true eſtate thereof, from the birth of Chriſt, to the end of the world.
            
               
                  REVEL. CAP. 6. & 7
               
               
                  Veni, & vide, Lege, perlege, intellige, crede & viue. Veni vt videas, Vide vt legas, Lege vt perlegas, perlege vt intelligat Jntellige vt credas, Crede vt viuas.
            
            
               IESVS CHRISTVS
               ERO MO
                     •
                  SVS INFERNI TVVS. OSE. 13
               
               CONFINTE VICI MV̄DV̄. IOA. 1
                        •
                     
                  
               
               VE
                     •
                  T
                     ••
                   
                  
                     •
                  ORS VICTORIA. 1 COR. 
                        ••
                     
                  
               
            
            Imprinted at London by Iohn Windet dwelling in Adling ſtreete at the ſigne of the white Beare, neere Baynards Caſtle. 1586
         
         
            
            
               
                  FORTITVDINE ET PRVDENTIA
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A LETTER WRITten by a true Chriſtian Catholicke, to a Romane pretended Catholike.
            
               AS it hath pleaſed Almightie God in theſe latter daies with the ſpirite of his mouthe to waſte and conſume the Kingdome of Antichriſt, and to erect and reeſtabliſhe the Church and Kingdome of Chriſt, deliuering both to the Magiſtracie the ſworde, and to the Miniſtery the worde for that purpoſe: ſo hath the Diuell and his adhaerents in no age beene more forward or furious, either to ſuſtaine the tottring towers of the one, or to hinder and ſuppreſſe the increaſe and augmentation of the other, to which end he now moſt carefullie armeth, as it were for the laſt conflict, with malice, fraude and force, his Liuetenant generall, the Biſhop of Rome with his freindes and confederates the fauorites of that Babilonian ſtrumpet, who ſeing her ſelf forſaken, her painted ſhewes, her deceitfull, toyes and traſh, both deſciphered and deſpiſed by al ſounde iudgements, ſtormeth like another Iuno, enraged with malice and madneſſe, carying
            
               
               — alta mente repoſtum
               
               
                  Iudicium Paridis, ſpretaeque iniuriae formae
               
            
            
               — Layd vp in deepeſt thought,
               The doome of Paris, and the wrong of bewty ſet at nought.
            
            This her malice, that ſhe may the more furiouſlye execute againſt this realme of England ſometime her darling, but now her infeſt, ſhe putteth all meanes in proofe & practiſe, that either fraude or force may miniſter vnto her. She frameth vnto her ſelfe inſtruments of our owne nation to wreak her wrath vppon their natiue countrie, ſhe bewitcheth them with the ſleights and ſorceries of error and ſuperſtition, and ſo ſendeth them to allure & ſeduce others: ſhe maketh them brokers of her bewtie, extollers of her power, publiſhers of her praiſes, and miniſters of her practiſes. They tearme her the Sea of holines, the Catholike Church, the ſpouſe of Chriſt, the mother of the faithfull. Quiſquis amat ranam, ranam putat eſſe Dianam.
               
                  Who ſo a frog doth loue, loe he
                  That frog Diana thinks to be.
               
Whereas in truth ſhee is the chaire of peſtilence, the ſeate of Antichriſt, the forge of treaſons, the receptacle of traitors, the cage of euery filthie and vncleane bird, the hell of the liuing, and a ſeconde Babylon, as it was well noted by Petrarch comparing her with the former in an epiſtle writtē vnto a frend Fuit illa omnium peſsima, eaque tempeſtate foediſsima: haec vero iam non ciuitas, ſed laruarum a clemurum domus eſt, & vt breuiter dicam, ſcelerum atque omnium dedecorum ſentina. Viuentium etiam infernus, tanto ante dauidico ore notatus quam fundalus aut cognitus. Quicquid de Aſſiria, vel Aegiptia Babilone, quicquid de quatuor Labyrinthis,

quicquid de Averno limine, deque Tartareis ſiluis, ſulphureiſque paludibus legisti, huic Tartaro admodum fabula eſt. Hic Turrificus ſimul & terrificus Nimrhod, hic pharetrata Semiramis, hic inexorabilis Minos, hic Rhadaman thus, hic Cerberus vniuerſa conſumens, hic Tauro ſuppoſitae Paſiphae, mixtum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   genus, (quod Maro ait) proleſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   biformis, Minotaurus inest Veneris monimenta nephandae. Hic poſtremo, quicquid confuſum, quicquid atrum, quicquid horribile vſquam eſt aut fingitur, aſpicias. &c. That was of al other the worſe, and in that age the moſt filthy This nowe is not a cittie, but the houſe of terrefiing ſpirits and deuils, and that I may ſpeake breiflie, the ſinke of all wickedneſſe and ſhameful diſhoneſty, the hell of the liuing noted by the mouthe of Dauid ſo long before it was either knowne, or the foundations thereof were laid. Whatſoeuer thou haſt reade of the Aſſirian or Egiptian Babylon, whatſoeuer of the foure Laberinths, whatſoeuer of the fal of Auernus, of the hellie woods and Brimſtonie mariſhes is vnto this Hell but (as it were) a fable. Heere that toureformer and terrifier Nimrhod, Here is the warlike harlot Semiramis. Here is the vntreatable Minos, here is Rhadamanthus, here is Cerberus deuouring all things, here is the beaſtlie bullouer Paſiphae, and the mixed kinde (that Maro ſpeaketh of) and the biformed iſſue, Minotaurus the moniment of a wicked luſt, finally here thou maiſt behold what thing ſoeuer is lothſome, and what horrible thing ſoeuer is either found or feyned.
            But this will they not ſee that blinded with affection, and banded into faction labor and indeuour to blinde and bewitche others, ſeducing the ambitious with promiſes of honor, the ſimple and ignorant with oſtentation of learning, who conceaue their hipocriſie to be pietie, their ſuperſtition to bee

religion, their falſehoode to be faithfulneſſe: their reconcilement to the Romain Church and Prelat, to be neither treacherie to their prince nor treaſon to their countrie, but a ſafetie to their ſoules, quietnes to their conſciences, and an vniting of themſelues to the miſticall bodie of Chriſt. But in this Viridi latet anguis in herba.
               
                  Within the graſſe that ſhowes ſo greene
                  An adder lurks that is not ſeene.
               
            
            For in truth this their reconciliation (which they perceaue not) cutteth them off from the Church of Chriſt, and maketh them the limmes and members of Antichriſt, vnfaithfull to God, diſloyall to theyr prince, treacherous to their countrie, as hauing vowed their obedience to the mortall enimie of all three. It is a miſterie repleniſhed with miſchiefe, a clowd couering many cruell intentes, a Troian horſe full of Greekiſh or rather Romiſh & Reamiſh wiles, and wickedneſſe, a diueliſh and Popiſh practiſe, a Maſſeſecreate prouided for the Maſſacring of England. By theſe meanes, treaſons are conſpired, forces are prepared, monies collected, euill minds vnited, fires kindled within our owne bowels: to the whiche forraine flames will ſoone bee added to cōſume vs: the miniſters of theſe miſchiefes are crept vnto our Dioces, they haue peruerted manye, they haue reconciled many, and now of late in this countrie they haue trauelled much, I knowe they are not vnknowne to you, and that either their woordes or writings or both haue very much preuailed with you. As a gentleman I do fauour you, as a ſeduced man I doe pitty you, as a reconciled man (if ſuche a one you be) I muſt deteſt you, ſith thereby you haue abandoned the miſticall body of Chriſte, and haue

ioyned your ſelfe to the miſchieuous body of Antichriſt. In that you came of curteſie to ſee me, I muſt thanke you, and am right ſorye my leiſure did not ſerue me to haue further ſpeches with you. You deliuered vnto me two Propoſitions, as the grounde-worke of your opinion, the one, that the principles of your doctrine, are grounded firmelie vpon the catholike Church, which antiquitie, vniuerſalitie, and conſent doe plainelie make manifeſt vnto you. The other, that the ſignes giuen of a true Church by thē of the reformed religion, which are the ſincere preaching of the worde, the right adminiſtration of the ſacraments, religious prayers & holeſome diſcipline are no true ſignes of a true Church, but ſo to affirme them is an error in Logique, for that the Church is a ſigne of them, and not they of the Church. For your firſt propoſition that the errors thereof may better appeare, I will brieflie handle theſe 3. points.
            Firſt that neither the Catholike Church nor the doctrine, antiquity, vniuerſality, or conſent thereof can otherwiſe be knowne then by the ſcriptures.
            Secondly, that ſundry principles of your religion are not at all grounded vpon the catholike Church.
            Thirdly, that the Romaine Church vpon the which your principles are grounded, is neither the Catholike Church, nor a ſounde member of the catholike church.
            For your 2. propoſition, that the errors thereof may likewiſe be ſeene, I will in few words deale with 
                  •••
               ſe three points.
            Firſt that of a particuler Church no better iudgement can be giuen, whether it be ſounde or vnſound or of two particuler Churches which is the ſounder, then by the worde and doctrine that they preach, by the ſacraments that they miniſter, by the praiers

that they vſe, and by the diſcipline that they exerciſe for where theſe are moſte purelieſt and perfectlieſt done, that Church is to be thought the pureſt and perfecteſt member of the Catholike Church. Where theſe are impureſt and corrupteſt, that Church is to be iudged the impureſt and corrupteſt member, & where theſe are not at all, there is to bee accompted no viſible Church to be at all. Thus to affirme is an error in Logike but a truth in diuinitie:
            Secondly that of the truth of the doctrine, of the right adminiſtration of the ſacraments, of the ſinceritie and puritie of the praiers, of the godly exerciſe of the diſcipline in any Church, the onelye perfecte abſolute and true touchſtone is the holy ſcripture, which ought diligently to be read of all men.
            Thirdlie that for the true vnderſtanding of the Scripture in thoſe things that are neceſſarie, the circumſtance of the place, the conference of other places, the proportion of the doctrine, the ſummary of our faith, and the holy Ghoſt working in our harts doe ſufficiently enable and enlighten vs.
            The holy Catholike Church wee define to bee the congregation, companie and ſocietie of all thoſe that haue beleeued in Chriſt from the beginning of the world to this preſent time, all that nowe beleeue in him, and all that from henceforth ſhall beleue in him to the end of the world. It is called Sancta holy becauſe it is ſanctified & hallowed by the holy ghoſt it is called Catholica, catholike or vniuerſall, becauſe it conteyneth all ages, all places, al perſons that beleeue: it is called Eccleſia, becauſe it is a calling out or euocation of people out of ignorance and error vnto the faith and knowledge of God. This Church is the miſticall body of Chriſt, who is the true and onely heade of it, which gouerneth it in omnipotē
               cie,

and is ioyned vnto it in charitie. Saint Auguſtine vpon the 56. pſalme, confirmeth this our definition of the Church.
            
            
               Corpus Chriſti eſt Eccleſia non autem ista aut illa, ſed toto orbe diffuſa, nec ea quae nunc eſt in hominibus qui praeſentem vitam agunt, ſed ad eam pertinentibus etiam ijs qui fuerunt ante nos, & ijs qui futuri ſunt post nos, vſque in finem ſoeculi: tota enim Eccleſia conſtans ex omnibus fidelibus, quia fideles omnes ſunt membra Chriſti, habet illud caput poſitum in coeleſtibus quod gubernat corpus ſuum, & ſi ſeperatum eſt a viſione, annectitur Charitate. The body of Chriſt is the church, yet not this church or that, but that whiche is diſperſed throughout the whole world, neither yet that alone which is in men that liue at this preſent, but that vnto which they likewiſe appertayned that haue bene before vs, and that are to come after vs vnto the worlds end. For the whole church conſiſteth of all the faithfull, for all the faithfull are members of Chriſt, hauing that head placed in the heauenly places, which gouerneth his bodye, though it be ſeparate from the ſight, it is adioyned in charitie.
            It is deuided into two parts the militant and triumphant: the triumphant already in bliſſe and glory ineffable: the militant, hoping for the like happineſſe, and in the meane time vnder the banner of Chriſt Ieſus, warfaring heere on earth, againſt the world the fleſh and the Diuell.
            This church for antiquitie ſo auncient, for number ſo great, for eſtate ſo diuers, for ſituation ſo vniuerſall, no mans age coulde ſerue to knowe, no mans knowledge were able to conceiue, no mans conceit were of ſufficiēcy to comprehend, if the holy Scriptures, wherein the ſpirit of God hath deliuered theſe thinges for our inſtruction, were not extant amongſt

vs.
            In them we are taught that the churche began in Adam, that the firſt Martyr was Abel, the firſt perſecutor Cain, that by the Breach of Gods commaundement mankinde fell into that miſerable and corrupt eſtate that it was not able to performe that Law of perfect obedience and righteouſneſſe, that GOD had giuen and grauen in the hartes and mindes of men, by the accompliſhment whereof, they were to haue life, and by the impeachment whereof they were to haue death eternall: and that then GOD in his infinite goodneſſe and mercie graunted a remedie for vs in the promiſed ſeed, which ſhould reſtore mankinde, and treade down the ſerpents head which was the firſt preaching of the Goſpell, publiſhed by God himſelfe, apprehended by faithe & beleeued by Adam.
            
            Afterward of God reiterated to the holye Patriarches, by them imbraced and taught to their children and families, preached and foretolde by the Prophetes, ſhadowed out in the Lawe written, & in the Leuitical ceremonies, performed in Chriſt, teſtified and publiſhed by the Apoſtles, confirmed with ſignes and miracles, beleeued of al nations, maligned by the Deuill, perſecuted by the wicked in all ages, and yet continued to the end of the worlde, by Gods eſpeciall grace & prouidence. Theſe things wee plainely ſee conteyned from the firſt of Geneſis, to the laſt of the Reuelation, which otherwiſe coulde neuer haue come to our knowledge. In them wee may ſee the beginning increaſing continuance and perpetuation of the church, the eſtate and condition of it in tyme paſt, at this preſent, & in time to come: the doctrine deliuered by the holy Ghoſt to the Patriarches, to the Prophets, to the Apoſtles: and the

faith imbraced by the children of God in all ages, there may we obſerue the antiquitie that yeeldeth to no nouelties, there may we ſee the vniuerſalitie, that giueth place to no ſchiſme or diuiſion, there may we finde that conſent that grounded in veritye is polluted with no error or iniquity. Therefore S. Auguſtine rightly iudgeth, that the catholike church is to be ſought in the Scriptures: his words are theſe: contra Petiliani Donat epiſt.
            
            
               Si autem Christi Eccleſia Canonicarum Scripturarum diuinis & certiſsimis teſtimonijs in omnibus gentibus deſignata eſt quicquid attulerint, & vndicun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   recitauerint, qui dicunt ecce hic Chriſtus, ecce illic: audiamus potius ſi ouer eius ſumus, vocem Paſtoris noſtri dicentis, Nolite credere: Illae quippe ſingulae in multis gentibus, vbi ista eſt non inueniuntur: Haec autem quae vbi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   eſt, etiam vbi illae ſunt, inuenitur: ergo in Scripturis ſanctis eam Eccleſiam ſcilicet requiramus. If the church of Chriſt throughout all nations be diſcerned by the diuine and infallible teſtimonies of the Canonicall ſcriptures, whatſoeuer they ſhall bring, and whenceſoeuer they wil alledge which ſaye, Lo heere is Chriſt, Lo there is Chriſt. Let vs heare rather (if we bee his ſheepe) the voice of our ſhepheard ſaying, Doe not beleue them, for al thoſe in many nations where the ſame is, are not founde, but this ſame which is euery where, is alſo founde where they are, therefore let vs ſeeke the ſame church in the holy ſcriptures.
            And in his treatiſe de vnitate Eccleſ. cap. 16. Eccleſiam in ſcripturis ſanctis Canonicis debemus agnoſcere, non in varijs hominum rumoribus, opinionibus, factis, dictis, & viſis inquirere. We are to acknowledge the church in the holye canonicall ſcriptures, and not to ſeeke it in the ſundrie rumors, opinions, doings, ſayings & conceits of men.
            
               And againe in his 166. epiſtle: In Scripturis didicimus Chriſtum, in Scripturis didicimus Eccleſiam, has ſcripturas communiter habemus, quare non in ijs Chriſtum & Eccleſiam communiter retineamus? In the Scriptures we haue learned Chriſt, in the Scripturs we haue learned the church, this ſcripture we haue common amongſt vs, wherefore doe wee not in them likewiſe reteine Chriſt and the Church?
            Hereunto alſo accordeth Chryſoſtome in his 49. homily vpon Math: Antea multis modis ostendebatur quae eſſet Eccleſia Christi, nunc autem nullo modocognoſcitur niſi per Scripturas. Before by many means was it ſhewed whiche was the churche of Chriſt, but nowe by no meanes is it knowne but by the Scriptures.
            Thus by the iudgement of theſe Fathers, and by the nature of the catholike church it ſelfe, we ſee that the knowledge of it is to be deriued from the ſcriptures: which ſo being, what can be more cleare then that neither prayers for the dead, nor inuocation of Saintes, nor worſhipping of images, nor the Popes primacie ouer the church, nor his ſuperiority ouer princes and kingdomes, nor his doctrine of Purgatorie, nor his power there to releaſe ſoules, nor tranſubſtantiation, nor the halfe communion, nor monaſtical vowes, nor forbidding of marriage, nor meritorious faſtes, nor workes of deſert and ſupererogation, nor ſacrificing Chriſt euerie daye, nor releaſing ſubiects of their othes of allegiance, nor diſpencing with Princes for periuries and inceſt, nor ſale of pardons, nor offering vnto reliques, nor a thouſand other doctrines practiſes and ceremonies of the Papiſticall religion were euer grounded vpon the catholike church. Let the whole volume of the ſcriptures be pervſed, you ſhall ſee none of theſe thinges taught, beleeued, practized vſed or imbraced by the

catholike church, examine the faith, doctrine, writings and documentes of the patriarches, the Prophets, the Apoſtles, Chriſt himſelfe, you ſhall finde theſe things either not conteyned in them, or contraried by them: Try them by antiquitye, you ſhall proue them far younger then the time of the Apoſtles, try them by vniuerſalitie, you ſhal perceiue, that neither the church before the Lawe, nor the church vnder the Law, nor the pureſt churches vnder grace did euer embrace them, trye them by conſent, you ſhall finde that neither the patriarches, nor the Prophets, nor the Apoſtles, nor the faithfull by them taught in ſundrie churches, did euer agree in them, or once beleeue them, it muſt needes bee then that they are not grounded in the catholike church, but are ſome later inuentions, and doctrine of a particuler church, from whoſe errors and corruptions, they haue proceded, which particuler church, is the Church of Rome, which we will briefly ſhewe, neither to be the catholike church, nor to haue beene for many yeeres any ſounde member of the catholike church.
            The catholike church (as we before rehearſed) conteyneth all them that haue beleeued, doe beleeue or ſhall heereafter beleeue in Chriſt Ieſus to the end of the world:
            The church of Rome conteyneth not all thoſe that haue beleeued (for in the dayes of many of them it had no beeing at all) nor all them that doe beleeue, nor all them that ſhall beleeue:
            Therefore the church of Rome is not the catholike church.
            The catholike church conteineth all partes both of

the church triumphant and militant.
            The churche of Rome conteyneth no parte of the church triumphant, nor all partes of the churche militant.
            Therefore the church of Rome is not the catholicke church.
            
               Reuel. 12.
                Within the catholike church Chriſt was borne, and of a bleſſed member of the catholike church.
            Chriſt was not borne in the church of Rome nor of any member of the church of Rome:
            Therfore the church of Rome, is not the catholike church.
            The catholike church alloweth not the adoration or deuine worſhipping of any creature:
            The churche of Rome alloweth the adoration and deuine worſhipping of creatures
            Therefore the church of Rome is not the catholicke church,
            The maior is the expreſſe ſentence of S. Aug, in his 2. booke de moribus eccleſiae cath. cap. 30.: it is alſo the expreſſe doctrine of Chriſt in the 4. of Mathew: 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                Him onely thou ſhalt worſhip. And of the Angell in the 19. of the Reuelat. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Before God ſhalt thou fall downe.
            The minor is proued by the Nicene councel, which teacheth that the image of the Trinity and the croſſe are to be adored & worſhipped with the ſame kinde of adoration and worſhip that the trinitye & Chriſt himſelfe are to be worſhipped with: and by Thomas of Aquine an approued Doctor of the Romain church in his third booke of ſentences the ſecond diſtinction, & by Nauclautus Clugienſis whoſe words are theſe:

               Non ſolum fatendum est fideles in Eccleſia adorare coram imaginibus, vt nonnulli ad cautelam forte loquūtur, ſed & adorare imaginem ſine quo volueris ſcrupulo, quin & eo illā venerari cultu, quo & Prototipon eius. It is not onely to be yeelded vnto, that the faithfull in the church do worſhip before images, (as ſome happely ſpeak for a cautell) but alſo doe adore the image without any kinde of ſcruple whatſoeuer, yea and doe honor the ſame with that worſhip, wherewith the thing or perſon thereby repreſented, is to be honored. And by Andradius the late defender of the Tridentine counſell whoſe workes are ſeene and allowed by the Romiſhe church, Non inficiamur (ſaith he) hac nos latriae adoratione Chriſti praeclariſſimam crucem colere & venerari. We denie not, that we worſhip and honor the moſte excellent croſſe of Chriſt with this adoration of greateſt honor & worſhip: but both the croſſe of Chriſt, and the image of the trinity and al other images are creatures, therefore our concluſion is ſtrong and certaine, that the church of Rome is not the catholik church. Infinite arguments to this purpoſe might be drawne, and euerie of them in effecte demonſtratiue, but the matter ſo cleere, theſe few may ſuffice.
            Let vs then examine ſith it is not the catholike church, whether it be a catholik church in that ſenſe that the word catholik is imitatiuely taken, for ſoūd and ſinceere, that is, whether it be a pure and perfect member of the catholike church. It is very ſure and certeine, that ſometime it hath bene a verye notable member, and (as it were) a right arme, an ayde confort and ornament to the reſt of the partes, but the queſtion is, what it is at this preſent, and for manye yeeres hath beene, whether now it be a ſound member of the catholike churche or no: for the deciding heereof, wee can haue no better or more manifeſte

tryall, then by the doctrine that it teacheth, by the ſacraments that it adminiſtreth, by the prayers that it vſeth, and by the diſcipline that it exerciſeth, and heerein we come to the firſte point, that controleth your ſecond propoſition.
            As in the body of a man ſo long as any principall member as the arme or the leg, hath the bone vncruſhed vnperiſhed, or vnwreſted, the fleſh and muſcles vnbruſed, vninfected and vnhurte, the veins ſinewes and arteries, neither ouerſtretched diſtorted, or ſhrunke, the skinne vnannoied vnexulcerated, vnimpeached, we terme and accompt it a ſound member. But if in any of theſe points it be defectiue, rekon it vnſound in that proportion and degree that the nature and qualitie of the defect is of. So in the body of the church as long as any member or particuler church (as the Church of Rome, the Church of Antioch, the Church of England, the Church of Fraunce) hath the worde of God whiche reſembleth the bone or pith vppon the whiche it ought to growe and depende, vnperiſhed, vnwreſted and vncorrupted, the praiers and ſupplications which are (as it were) the fleſh and muſcles of it, wherewith it ought to be filled and repleniſhed vnwaſted, and vnconſumed with atheiſme and ſecuritie, and vnpoyſoned and vninfected with Idolatry and ſuperſtition. The holy ſacraments which repreſent the veynes ſinewes and arteries, wherewith it is both noriſhed & vnited, vnmā
               gled, vndiſordred and vnſtrayned, and the diſcipline which is like to the skinne that enuironeth, compaſſeth, and defendeth the reſt vnexulcerated and vnenflamed with the tumors of tiranny, or cankers of couetouſneſſe, or otherwiſe vnſtained with iniquity, we are to tearme and accompt it a ſounde member of the catholike churche, and ſo much the leſſe

ſounde, by how much the more it is in any of theſe pointes defectiue, or euill affected.
            If wee caſt this leuell ouer the Romaine churche, ſhall not wee ſoone diſcouer howe crooked and corrupt it is? and howe much it hath ſwarued from the vprightneſſe and ſinceritie wherein it was firſt eſtabliſhed?
            The holy Scriptures it hath not onelye corrupted and wreſted (as by infinite examples might be ſhewed) but alſo depriued of force and ſtrength, & where it ought to haue depended of the Scriptures, it maketh the ſcripture depend of it. And whereas the ſenſe of the holy ghoſt, is ſure, certaine, and immutable, it maketh it variable and alterable, according to the temporary practiſe of that church. This ſhall you finde in the epiſtle of Cardinall Cuſanus,
               Cuſ. ep. 2. & 7.
                no leſſe blaſphemouſly then barbarouſly recorded.
            The Sacrament of the Lords ſupper it hath mangled into a half communion, and a priuat Maſſe, diſordred with the monſtrous fantaſie of tranſubſtantiation, and thereby altered the commemoration to an adoration, the Sacrament, to a Sacrifice propiciatorye.
            The ſacrament of Baptiſme it hath peſtered, if not polluted with manye ſuperſtitious and ſuperfluous ceremonies.
            The names and dignitye of ſacramentes it hath ſtrayned and ſtretched to other things contrarye to their nature.
            The prayers and ſupplications which ought only to bee made vnto God, and ſo made vnto God as the congregation may both in vnderſtanding and deuocion, ioyne with them and ſaye Amen: It hath what with inuocation of Saints, what with worſhipping of images: what with a ſtrange and vnknowne

language made either impious or vnprofitable.
            The diſcipline which ſhould keep all things in order and frame in it, is altogether ſtained with ambition and couetouſneſſe: finally, it is a member ſo ful of corruption, ſo ſwolne with pride, and ſo envenomed with ambitiō, that it perſwadeth the world, that it is the body, and that all the reſt of the partes are but members of it, and that whatſoeuer parte is not like it, is corrupt: and carying vppon it the Romaine Byſhop as a moſt peſtilent vlcer it ſaith, that is the head, to which all other partes muſt ſubmit and ſubiect themſelues,
            And is it not then rightlye to bee iudged an vnſound member, and an vnſincere?
            Examine in like ſort any other particuler church: Do it vprightly and ſincerely, and it ſhal make manifeſt vnto you whether it be a ſounde, or vnſounde member of the catholike church: and if vnſound, in what degree, proportion and meaſure it is ſo to bee iudged and accompted.
            Theſe therefore are perfect and pregnant ſayings which can neuer deceaue you, if the lampe of eternal light, Gods holy and heauenly worde beare any credite or authoritye with you: for by that ſhall you knowe whether the doctrine of any church be pure, or impure, whether the Sacraments be rightly or otherwiſe adminiſtred, whether the praiers be godlye and religiouſly, or Idolatrouſly and ſuperſtitiouſlye made and vſed: & whether the diſcipline be ſincere and perfect, or diſorderly and corrupt: and in this we fall to the ſecond point that aunſwereth your ſecond propoſition.
            If the doctrine of any church is conformable to the doctrine of the Patriarkes, the Prophets, the Apostles, whoſe doctrine and documents the holye ſcripture

layeth downe, it is to be iudged ſound and ſincere: and ſo much the leſſe ſounde, be how muche it more ſwarueth from their faith and doctrine.
            If the Sacraments in any church bee miniſtred according to their firſte inſtitution and vſe, which the holy ſcriptures doth declare, they are to be accompted rightly and duely adminiſtred.
            If prayers in any church be vſed according to that forme, manner, purpoſe and intent that the godlye of all ages teſtified in the ſcriptures did vſe and exerciſe, they are to be reckoned godly, deuout and cō
               mendable.
            If the diſcipline be according to the Law of God according to the direction of godly Magiſtrates, according to the councel and commandements of the Apoſtles, and according to the vſe and practiſe of the pureſt churches: whereof the holy ſcriptures are true records vnto vs, we iuſtly may accompt it good and ſincere.
            Therefore hath God commaunded, and all good men commended the ſtudie, ſearch, reading & meditation of the ſcriptures. In the 6. of Deuteronomie wee read: Sunto verba iſta in corde tuo, ea
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   acutè ingerito filijs tuis, ac loquitor de ijs cum ſedes domi tuae, & cum ambulas per viam, cum cubas & cum ſurgis, alligato ea in ſignum manui tuae, inſcribito ea poſtibus domus tuae, & portis tuis. Let theſe wordes be in thy harte, & the ſame diligently teach vnto thy children, and talke of them when thou ſitteſt in thy houſe, and when thou walkeſt by the way, when thou lyeſt downe, and when thou riſeſt vpp, binde them for a ſigne vppon thine hand, write them vppon the poſtes of thine houſe, and vpon thy gate. And of the worde of God it is ſaide in the 4. of Deuteronomie Haec eſt ſapientia veſtra ante oculos populorum: This is your wiſedome before

the eyes of the people. Abraham ſaith, Habent Moſen & Prophetas audiant eos: They haue Moſes and the Prophets let them heare them. Chriſt ſaith Scrutamini ſcripturas: ſearch the ſcriptures. S. Paule ſaith Tota Scriptura diuinitus inſpirata, vtilis eſt ad docendum, ad arguendum, ad corrigendum, ad erudiendum, in iuſtitia vt perfectus ſit homo Dei ad omne opus bonum inſtructus. The whole ſcripture inſpired of God is profitable to teach to improue, to correct and to inſtruct in righteouſneſſe, that the man of God may be perfecte, inſtructed vnto euery good worke. Irenaeus in his thirde booke the firſt chap. Euangelium in Scripturis Apoſtoli nobis tradiderunt columnam & firmamentum fidei noſtrae futurum: The Apoſtles haue deliuered vnto vs the goſpell in the ſcriptures, to be the piller and vpholder of our faith.Lib. 6. cap. 9.
                
               Saint Augustin de Ciuitate Dei his 3 booke and firſt chapter: Ciuitatem Dei dicimus cuius Scriptura teſtis eſt. We call that the citie of God, wherof the Scripture is witneſſe. Saint Ambroſe vpon Luke Si qua eſt Eccleſia quae fidem reſpuat nec Apoſtolicae praedicationis fundamenta poſsideat, deſerenda eſt. If there bee any church which reiecteth the faithe, or poſſeſſeth not the foundation of the Apoſtolike preaching it is to be forſaken. Saint Chryſoſtome vpon the 2. to the Theſſalonians the third homely, Omnia clara & plana ſunt in ſcripturis diuinis, quaecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   neceſsaria ſunt, manifeſta ſunt. All thinges are cleare and playne in the holie ſcriptures, what thinges ſoeuer bee neceſſary, are manifeſt. Saint Auguſtine in his thirde epiſtle: Sacra Scriptura ea quae aperta continet, quaſi amicus familiaris ſine fuco ad cor loquitur, indoctorum at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   doctorum: the holy ſcripture ſpeaketh thoſe things which it plainelye conteineth, like a familiar freind without guile to the hart both of the learned and of the vnlearned. And in his booke de vnitate Eccleſiae, the 13. chapter:

               Vtrum ipſi Eccleſiam teneant non niſi diuinarum ſcripturarum canonicis libris ostendant, quia nec nos propterea dicimus nobis credere oportere, quod in Eccleſia Chriſti ſumus quia ipſam quàm tenemus commendauit Optatus vel Ambroſius, vel alij innumerabiles Epiſcopi, aut quia nostrorum Collegarum conſilijs ipſa praedicata eſt, aut quia tanta mirabilia fiunt, aut quia ille ſomnium vidit, & ille ſpiritu aſſumptus audiuit. Whether they holde the church let them not ſhowe, but by the canonicall bookes of the holy ſcriptures, for neither do wee therefore ſay that we ought to be beleeued becauſe that we are in the church of Chriſt, becauſe Optatus or Ambroſius or other innumerable Biſhops haue commended the ſame which we holde, or becauſe it is praiſed in the counſel of our fellowes, or becauſe ſo great & ſtrange things are wrought, or becauſe ſuch a one hath ſene a dreame, or ſuche a one taken vp in the ſpirite hath heard.
            
               Saint Paule writing to the Coloſsians doth admoniſh them diligently to reade the ſcriptures. Sermo Chriſti habitet in vobis copioſè in omni ſapientia. Let the worde of God dwell in you aboundantly in all wiſedome. Saint Chryſoſtome in his 19. homely thereuppon, Audite quotquot eſtis ſeculares, & vxori, ac liberis praeestis, quemadmodum & vobis det in mandatis maxime ſcripturas legere, nec leuiter & negligenter, ſed magno ſtudio. Heare you as manie as are ſeculer, and haue gouernment ouer wife and children, how he giueth you in charge, chiefly to reade the ſcriptures, not lightly and careleſly but with great ſtudie. Ierome vpon the ſame place Hic oſtenditur verbum Christi non ſufficienter, ſed abundanter etiam Laicos habere debere, & docere ſe inuicem, vel monere. Here it is ſhowed that the laye men alſo ought to haue the word of Chriſt, not ſufficientlye, but aboundantly, & to teach or warne one another.
            
               
               Origen vpon Eſay the 2. homely: Vtinam omnes faceremus illud quod ſcriptum eſt, Scrutamini Scripturas.
            
            Would to God we all did that is written, ſearche the ſcriptures. S. Chryſoſtome vpon Iohn the 13. homely, Admoneo, & maiorem in modum rogo, vt libros comparemus: I warne, and in earneſt ſort requeſt that we get bookes. And in an other place vpon the epiſtle to the Coloſsians the 9. homely: Audite obſecro ſeculares omnes comparate vobis biblia animae pharmaca ſi nihil aliud vultis vel nouum testamentum acquirite: Heare I praye you all the ſeculer, prouide vnto your ſelues the bible the preſeruatiue of the ſoule, or the new teſtament if ye will nothing els. And hom. 3. de Lazaro, Semper hortor & hortari non deſinam, vt non hic tantum attendat is ijs quae dicuntur, verum etiam cum domi fueris, aſsiduè divinarum ſcripturarum lectioni vacetis, quod quidem qui priuatim mecum ingreſsi ſunt, non deſtiti inculcare. I ſtil exhorte and will not ceaſe to exhorte that not onelye you attend heere vnto thoſe thinges whiche are ſpoken, but alſo when you ſhall bee at home, that you would continually apply the reading of holy ſcriptures: which thing I haue not lefte to exhorte thoſe, which haue profeſſed themſelues with me. And againe, Ne negligamus nobis parare libros, Let vs not deſpiſe to get vs bookes. And further, Sume librum in manus, lege hiſtoriam omnem & quae not a ſunt memoria te nens, & quae obſcura ſunt, parumque manifeſta frequenter percurre. Take the book in thy hand, reade al the hiſtorie, and keeping in memory thoſe thinges whiche are euident, peruſe often thoſe that are obſcure and leſſe euident.
            Of the perfection of the ſcriptures, Irenaeus: Scripturae quidem perfectae ſunt, quippe a verbo Dei & ſpiritu eius ductae: The ſcripturs truly are perfect, for as much as they are ſprong out of the word of God, and of

his ſpirit.
            Of their authoritie: Augustine. Maior eſt Scripturae authoritas quam omnis humani ingenij capacitas comprehendere potest, profecto inuiolabilem Sacrarum literarum authoritatem confiteri debemus. Greater is the authoritie of the Scripture then the capacity of all mans wit is able to comprehend, certainely wee ought to acknowledge the inuiolable authoritie of the holye Scripture,
            Of their authoritye and trueth in an other place: Cedamus & conſentiamus autoritati ſcripturae ſanctae, quae neſcit falli & fallere: Let vs giue place and conſent to the holy ſcripture, which cannot bee deceiued, nor deceiue.
            Finally of the ſcriptures, Irenaeus: Scripturis diuinis niti, quae certa & indubitata veritas est in firma & valida petra eſt do mum ſuam edificare, hac vero derelicta alijs niti quibuſcun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   doctrinis in certam effuſae arenae, vnde facilis ſit euerſio eſt ruinam ſtruere. For one to leane to the holy ſcriptures which is the certeine and vndoubted truth is to build his houſe vppon a firme and ſtrong rocke, but this being lefte, and to leane vnto other doctrins whatſoeuer, is to an aſſured ruine, to build vppon the quicke ſande, whence it is eaſilye ouerthrowne.
            So that we maye conclude this pointe with S. Ciril Neceſſarium nobis eſt diuinas ſequi literas, & in nullo ab earum praeſcripto diſcedere: It behoueth vs to followe the holy ſcriptures, and in no point to departe from the ordinance thereof.
            It reſteth that we ſhowe that the true ſenſe of the ſcripture is obtayned by waying the circumſtaunces of the place, by conference of other places, by obſeruing the proportion of the doctrine, by noting how it agreeth with our Catechiſme, or ſummary of our

faith, by feruent prayer, often meditation, and the holy Ghoſt working in our harts.
            
               Lib. 1. de 
                     •
                  ri.Touching the firſt Hillarie ſometime Biſhoppe of Proycteux giueth vs a good rule. Optimus Lector eſt, qui dictorum intelligentiam expectat ex dictis potiùs quam imponat, & retulerit magis quam attulerit, ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cogat id videri, dictis contineri, quod ante lectionē preſumpſerit intelligendum: He is the beſt reader that expecteth the vnderſtanding of words, out of the words, rather then putteth thereto, and ſhal carie therefrom rather then bring thereto: neither ſhall enforce that thing to ſeme conteyned in the words which before the reading he purpoſed to be vnderſtood.Lib. 4
                And againe Intelligentia dictorum ex cauſis eſt ſumenda dicendi, quia non ſermoni res,
               Lib. 5.
                
               ſed rei eſt ſermo ſubiectus, Verba ſenſum enuntiant, ſenſus rationis motum, rationis motus veritatem incitat, ex verbis igitur ſenſum ſequamur, ex ſenſu rationem intelligamus, & ex ratione veritatem apprehendamus: the vnderſtanding of the words is to be taken of the cauſes of ſpeaking, for the matter is not ſubiecte to the ſpeech, but the ſpeech vnto the matter. The wordes do ſhow forth the meaning, the meaning the motion of reaſon, the motion of reaſon ſtirreth vp truth Therefore by the words let vs followe the meaning, by the meaning let vs vnderſtand the reaſon, & by the reaſon let vs apprehend the truth.Lib. 9
                And againe, Dictorum intelligentia aut ex praepoſitis, aut ex conſequentibus expectetur: Let the vnderſtanding of the wordes, be looked for either be thoſe thinges that are before, or that followe after.
            
               Lib. 8. cap. 2. in Ioan.And for the circumſtances Saint Cirill very wel noteth: Ante omnia quando locum Scripturae rectè intelligere volumus, tria diligenter conſideranda ſunt, tempus quā
                  do ſcriptum eſt quod dicitur, perſona quae dicit, vel per quā vel de qua dicitur, et res propter quam aut de qua ſcribitur,

ſic enim abſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   errore ſenſum poterimus verum inueſtigare. Before all thinges when wee will vnderſtand a place or the ſcripture aright, three thinges are to be conſidered, the time, when that that is ſpoken is written, the perſon which ſpeaketh, or by whom or of whom it is ſpoken, and the thing for the which, or of the which it is written, for ſo we may without any error finde out the true ſenſe.
            Conference of places we terme the collation of a fewe with manye, of the obſcure with ſuch as are more plaine and manifeſte, whereof great lighte of knowledge and vnderſtanding doth proceed.Lib. 2. de doctr. Chr. cap. 6.
                For as S. Auſten well obſerueth, Magnifice & ſalubriter ſpiritus ſanctus ita ſcripturas modificauit, vt locis apertioribus fami occurreret, obſcurioribus autem fastidia detergeret, nihil enim ferè de illis obſcuritatibus eruitur, quod non planiſsimè distum alibi reperiatur. The holy ghoſte hath ſo mightily and helthfully tempred the ſcriptures, that in the plaineſt places he might ſatisfie hunger, and in the darker places caſt away lothſomneſſe, for of thoſe obſcurities, nothing almoſt can be brought forthe, which may not be found moſt plainely ſpoken of in ſome other place.
            And in an other place, Sacra Scriptura inuitat omnes humili ſermone quos non ſolum manifesta paſcat,In Epiſt. 3. ad voluſ. ſed etiam ſecreta exerceat veritate: hoc in proruptis quod in reconditis habens, ſed ne aperta faſtidirentur eadē rurſus operta deſiderantur, deſiderata quodammodo renouantur, renoua ta ſuauiter intimantur, hic ſalubriter & praua corriguntur, & parua nutriuntur, & magna oblectantur ingenia. Ille huic doctrinae inimicus eſt animus qui vel errando eam neſcit eſſe ſaluberrimam, vel odit aegrotando medicinam.
            
            The holie ſcripture inuiteth all men with gentle ſpeech whome it doth not onely feed with the manifeſt, but alſo exerciſe with the hidden verity, conteining

the ſelfe ſame thing in the plaine, which it hath in the obſcure: but leaſt thinges plainelye ſet downe ſhould become lotheſome, they againe couered are coueted, and ſo being coueted, are in ſome ſort renued, and ſo renued are delightfully intimated, that very healthfully the wits of men being euill are corrected, being ſmale are increaſed, beeing deepe are delighted: that minde onelye is enemy thereunto, which either through error, knoweth it not to bee moſt holſome, or being ſick hateth medicine.
            
               Lib. 3. de doctr. Chr. cap. 28.
                And againe, Per Scripturas diuinas multo tutius ambulatur quas verbis tranſlatis occupatas cum ſcrutari volumus, aut hoc inde exeat quod non habet controuerſiam, aut ſi habeat ex eadem ſcriptura vbicū
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   inuentis at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adhibitis eius teſtibus terminetur. By the diuine Scriptures, wee walke farre more ſafely: which when we will ſearche forth, being vſed in borrowed woordes: either this effect iſſueth thereof, that it hath no further controuerſie, or if it hath, the ſame may be ended by teſtimonies, wherſoeuer gathered and alleadged out of the ſame ſcripture.
            
               hom. 12. cap. 34.
                
               Origen vpon Exodus, Quis noſtrum ita ſe ad diuinae legis ſtudia conuertit? Quis noſtrum it a operam dedit? quis tā
                  to ſtudio ac labore diuina quaerit studia, quanto quaeſiuit humana? Et quid conquerimur, ſi quod non diſcimus ignoramus, aliqui veſtrum vt recitari audierint quae leguntur ſtatim diſcedunt, nulla ex his quae dicta ſunt inquiſitio ad inuicem nulla collatio: which of vs doth ſo addict himſelfe to the ſtudie of the lawe of God: what one of vs geueth ſuch diligence? who with ſo great ſtudie and labor followeth diuine meditations and ſtudies, as wherewith he hath ſought after humane things? And why then do we complaine, ſithence we remain yet ignorant of that which we will not or els neglecte to learne. Some of you, ſo ſone as ye heare ſome things

recited which are reade doe immediately depart: ſo farre is it off that any inquiſition and examination is made of thoſe things which are vttered, or any conference vſed or collation.
            The proportion of the doctrine, we call that vniformitie and conformitie that is betweene the faith embraced by the Patriarches, by the Prophets, by the Apoſtles, and by the faithfull of all ages, whereof the holy ſcriptures are witneſſes vnto vs, that doctrine of God, in all pointes abſolute in nothing contrarie to it ſelf, wil ſoone diſcouer anie erronious doctrine that ſhall be produced, if wee carrie the true modell of it in our minds, as in the ſcriptures it is expreſſed and ſet foorth. Hereof S. Ierome notably,Con. in cap. ſextum Ep. ad Gal. 
               ad normam omnia diriguntur & vtrum praua rectaue ſint cum regula appoſita fuerit arguuntur, ita & doctrina Dei quaedam quaſi norma ſermonis est quae inter iuſta iudicat &. iniuſta, quam qui ſecutus fuerit habebit pacem in ſemetipſo, quae ſuperat omnem ſenſum, & poſt pacem miſericordiam quae praecipua est in Deo Iſrael.
            
            All thinges are directed and ordered according to rule, and whether in deede they bee euill or good, crooked or ſtraight, when the rule or line is applied vnto them, they are prooued and found out: In like manner alſo the doctrine of God, is as it were an exact rule and perfect ſquare of ſpeech which iudgeth and diſcerneth betweene thoſe things which are iuſt and thoſe which are vniuſt: which whoſoeuer truely followeth and cleaueth vnto, hee ſhall haue peace in himſelfe, which ſurmounteth and exceedeth all vnderſtanding: and conſequently after this peace of conſcience, mercie which is moſt chiefe in the God of Iſrael.
            
               S. Auguſtine of the bodie of the doctrine,H. 11. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 3.
                
               hic prius per Prophetas, deinde per ſeipſum poſtea per Apoſtolos

quantum ſatis eſſe Iudicauit locutus, etiam ſcripturam condidit quae Canonica nominatur eminentiſsimae autoritatis cui fidem habemus de ijs rebus quas ignorare non expedit, nec per nos ipſos noſce idonei ſumus.
            
            He firſt by his Prophetes, then by himſelfe, afterwarde by his Apoſtles ſpeaking ſo much as he knewe to be ſufficient, hath framed and made the Scripture which is named Canonicall, being of moſt excellent and effectuall force and authoritie: vnto the which we giue credite concerning thoſe thinges, which it is not expedient that we be ignorant of, neither are we apt or able of our ſelues to know and conceaue.
            The ſummarie of our faith, and that which faith requireth we call the Apoſtolicke Creede the tenne Commandements and the Lordes prayer, wherein a certaine rule or methode is deliuered vs, how to beleeue, how to liue, howe to pray, this alſo will well lighten our vnderſtanding, that it fall not vnto vndecent, vncharitable, & monſtrous conceits, whereof S. Auguſtine verie well, Si preceptiua locutio est, aut flagitium aut facinus vetans, aut vtilitatem & beneficentiam iubens non eſt figurata.
               De doctr. Chr. lib. 3. cap. 16.
                
               Si autem flagitium aut facinus videtur iubere, aut vtilitatem aut beneficentiam vetare figurata eſt, niſi manducaueritis (inquit) carnē filij hominis & ſanguinem biberitis non habebitis vitam in vobis, facinus vel flagitium videtur Iubere, figura eſt ergo precipiens paſsioni Domini eſſe communicandum & ſuauiter at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vtiliter recondendum in memoria quod pro nobis caro eius crucifixa & vulnerata ſit.
            
            If it be a precept forbidding wickedneſſe and enormitie or commanding vertue and goodneſſe it is no figuratiue ſpeech. But if it ſeemeth to command a wicked deede and enormitie, or to forbid goodneſſe and vertue, it is figuratiue. Except you eate (ſaith he) the fleſh of the ſonne of man, and drinke

his bloud, you ſhall not haue life in you. He ſeemeth to commaund, a wicked enormitie, it is figuratiue. Therefore commaunding vs to communicate to the paſsion of the Lorde, and profitably to call to remembrance that his fleſh was crucified and wounded for vs.
            Had the Romiſh Church obſerued this rule it had neuer fallen to that blaſphemous doctrine of tranſubſtantiation which contrarieth the articles of our Creede,Lib. 3. de doctr. Chri. cap. 5.
                wherefore we may rightly ſay with S. Auguſtine: In principio cauendum eſt ne figuratam locutionem ad literam accipias, ad hoc enim pertinet quod ait Apoſtolus litera occidit, ſpiritus autem viuificat. Cum enim figurate dictum ſic accipitur tanquam proprie dictum ſit carnaliter ſapitur, neque vlla mors animae congruentius appellatur, ea demum eſt miſerabilis animae ſeruitus ſigna pro rebus accipere & ſupra creaturam corpoream oculum mentis ad hauriendum eternum lumen leuare non poſſe.
            
            Firſt heede is to be taken that thou ſhalt not take a figuratiue ſpeech according to the letter. For to that pertaineth it which the Apoſtle ſayth, the letter killeth, but the ſpirite geueth life. For when the figuratiue ſpeech is ſo taken as though it were properly ſpoken, it taſteth of the fleſh: neither can anie thing be more fitly called the death of the ſoule. To be ſhort, it is a miſerable bondage of the ſoule, to take the ſignes for the thinges ſignified, and not to be able to lift vp the eye of the ſoule aboue the bodily creature, to receaue the eternall light.
            Of prayer and meditation we reade in Origen.
               Supr. exod. hom. 12. cap. 34.
                
               Oſtenditur non ſtudium ſolum nobis adhibendum eſſe ad diſcendas literas ſacras: Verum & ſupplicandum Domino, & diebus ac noctibus obſecrandum vt veniat agnus ex tribu Iuda, & ipſe accipiens librum ſignatum dignetur aperire.
            
            It is ſhewed that not onely ſtudy is to be vſed for

to learne the holy ſcriptures: But alſo wee ought to pray to God, and to craue day and night, that the lambe of the tribe of Iuda will come, that he taking in hand the booke ſealed, will vouchſafe to open it. And in Saint Hillarie, non ergo ex nobis est quod intelligimus,In pſal. 125.
                   ſed ex eo qui quae innoſcibilia erant fecit intelligi. Itaque ab eo ſperanda intelligentia est qui & pulſantibus aperiet, & querentibus demonſtrabit, & petentibus nō negabit.
            
            Therefore it is not of vs, that we doe vnderſtande, but of him which maketh vs to comprehende thoſe thinges which would not be knowen. Therefore of him knowledge is to be hoped, which will open to them which knocke, will ſhewe to them that ſeeke, and will not denie to them that craue. Hereof Saint Bernarde writeth right well: Quo ſpiritu ſcripturae factae ſunt eo ſpiritu legi deſiderant, ipſae etiam intelligendae ſunt. Nunquam ingredieris in ſenſum Pauli, donec vſu bonae intentionis in lectione eius, & ſtudio aſſiduae meditationis ſpiritum eius imbiberis, ſic
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   de reliquis.
            
            By the ſame ſpirite whereby the ſcriptures are reuealed, do they require alſo to be reade, by the ſame alſo they are to bee vnderſtoode. Thou ſhalt neuer enter into the vnderſtanding of Paule, vntill with a good intent thou mayeſt ſucke out his ſpirit, by continuall reading and daily meditation, and ſo of the reſt. And we may well ſay that both the roote and frute of prayer and meditation in the worde of God is the ſpirite of God which openeth our vnderſtanding, and leadeth vs vnto all truth. For from Gods grace theſe godly exerciſes doe proceede and by the continuall vſe of them his grace is increaſed & augmented in vs, to the outwarde hearing of the word of God and meditation thereof, the inward working and operation of the holie Ghoſt being ioyned and vnited, which is both promiſed and performed to

all the faithfull euen to all the children of God.
            We reade in the 59. of Eſay, Spiritus meus qui in te eſt, & verba quae poſui in ore tuo & ſeminis tui in perpetuum non deficient. My ſpirite which is in thee, and my words which I haue put in thy mouth and of thy ſeede ſhal not depart for euer. Chriſt ſaith in the 14. of Iohn: Spiritus ſanctus docebit vos omnia, & ſuggeret vobis omnia quae dixi vobis. The holie Ghoſt ſhall teach you all thinges, and miniſter all things which I haue ſpoken vnto you. S. Iohn ſaith:Iohn. 2.
                
               Vnctionem habetis a ſancto, & noſtis omnia, vnctio docet vos de omnibus. You haue your annoynting of the holy, and knowe all thinges, the annoynting teacheth you all thinges.
            
               Saint Paul ſaith: Animalis homo non percipit ea quae ſunt ſpiritus Dei, at ſpiritualis diiudicat omnia,
                     1. Corin. cap. 2.
                   Spiritus enim omnia ſcrutatur etiam profunditates Dei.
            
            The carnall man perceaueth not the thinges which are of the ſpirit of God, but the ſpirituall diſcerneth all thinges, euen the depth of God.
            To conclude we learne of S. Paul that faith commeth of hearing, and hearing of the worde of God, for the ſtudy and obſeruation thereof hath the working of the holy ghoſt ioyned therewith, which produceth faith, which is not of our ſelues, but is the gift of God as the ſame Apoſtle teacheth vs, in the 2. Chapter of his Epiſtle to the Epheſians, ſo that by the outwarde hearing of the worde and the inwarde operation of the holie ghoſt, faith is in vs kindled, Chriſt thereby apprehended, his iuſtice and righteouſneſſe to vs deriued, God reconciled, our ſinnes pardoned, his mercie obteined, we in Chriſt Ieſus adopted to be the children of God, and inheritors of euerlaſting ſaluation. Therfore the Diuell our mortall enemie, that euermore laboureth our confuſion by his chiefe inſtrument Antichriſt & his adherents

and by his owne falſe and ſlie ſuggeſtions woorketh all he may to ſtay men from reading and hearing the worde of God, and from comming to thoſe places where it is read and taught, that is from publike ſeruice and ſermons whereby ſuch as are skilfull in the tongues and haue trauelled in the ſtudy of the ſcripture, the circumſtances of places are laide open, the ſence made manifeſt, the proportion of the doctrine taught and declared, conference & collation of places vſed and applied, the vſe & fruite thereof ſignified the breade of life deuided and deſtributed for the nouriſhment of our ſoules, our faith thereby kyndled and confirmed, laſtly the holy Ghoſt therewith powred and beſtowed vpon vs for our further comfort and enſtruction.
            Thus haue I briefly anſwered your two propoſitions, whereby you may ſomewhat be induced to the conſideration of your eſtate, of the corruption of the church that you follow, of the weakenes of the grounds that you ſtand vpon, of the daunger that thereby you are in, and of the meanes whereby you may eſcape it. And that I may yet more amplie ſatiſfie you in the queſtion of the Church, the miſtaking whereof is the roote of your error, I haue herewith ſent you a hiſtorie of the Church of Chriſt from the natiuity of our Sauiour to the end of the world, laid downe by the holy Ghoſt, by the pen of S. Iohn, in the twelfth, thirtenth, & fourtenth of the Reuelation, where unto I haue added ſuch light of interpretation as my ſmall talent hath enabled me vnto, wherein I fore ſee I ſhalbe aſſayled by the maleuolent, with two bitter obiections, the one of curioſity, the other of preſumption, it ſhall ſuffice me to ſhield my ſelfe againſt both with that notable ſentence and cenſure of Ieſus the ſonne of Sirach in the 39. of Eccleſiaſticus.
            
            
               1 He onely that applieth his mind to the Law of the moſt high and is occupied in the meditation thereof, ſeeketh out the wiſedome of all the auncient, and exerciſeth himſelfe in the propheſies.
            
            2 He keepeth the ſayings of famous men, and entreth in alſo to the ſecrets of darke ſentences.
            
            3 He ſeeketh out the miſterie of graue ſentences, and exerciſeth himſelfe in darke parables.
            
            4 He ſhall ſerue among great men and appeare before the Prince, he ſhal trauell through ſtraunge countries, for he hath tried the good and the euil among men.
            
            5 He will giue his hart to reſort early vnto the Lorde that made him, and to pray before the moſt high, and will open his mouth in prayer and pray for his ſinnes.
            
            6 VVhen the great Lord wil he ſhal be filled with the ſpirit of vnderſtanding, that he may powre out wiſe ſentences, and giue thankes vnto the Lord in his prayer.
            
            7 He ſhall direct his counſell and knowledge: ſo ſhall he meditate in his ſecrets.
            
            8 He ſhall ſhew forth his ſcience and learning, and reioice in the Law and couenant of the Lord.
            
            9 Many ſhall commend his vnderſtanding and his memorie ſhall neuer be put out nor depart awaie: but his name ſhall continue from generation to generation.
            
            10 The congregation ſhall declare his wiſedome, and ſhow it.
            
            11 Though he be dead, he ſhall leaue a greater fame, then a thouſand if he liue ſtill, he ſhall get the ſame.
            
            
               
               The expoſition vpon the 12. 13. and 14. Chapters of the Reuel.
               
               
                  CHAP. 12.
                  
                     
                        
                           Verſe 1. And there appeared a great wonder in heauen: A woman clothed with the ſunne, and the Moone was vnder her feete, and vpon her head a crowne of twelue ſtarres:
                        
                           2. And ſhe was with child and cried traueling in birth, and was pained, ready to be deliuered.
                     
                  
                  
                     HEERE is firſt laid downe vnto vs by the holye Apoſtle, a deſcription of the true Church of God the true ſpouſe of Chriſt: the true mother of all the faithful, which hath bene one and the very ſame euen from the beginning of the world vnto this day, ſhe is deſcribed in the forme of a woman clothed with the Sunne, this ſunne, is the ſunne of righteouſneſſe Chriſt Ieſus, the whiche the church his ſpouſe hath put on, with whom only ſhe thinketh her ſelfe adorned, & beautified, in ſo much that ſhe nether ſeeketh nor coueteth any other mans righteouſneſſe to clothe her or deck her withall: but accompteth her ſelf in him and by him to haue ſufficient beauty, and purity, the which ſhe knoweth & acknowledgeth to haue altogether of his mercy and goodneſſe, and not by her deſart or merit.
And the Moone was vnder her feete.
By the moone may be vnderſtood al worldly & earthly things, which are ſubiecte to changes and alterations

whiche haue their diminiſhinges, and increaſings, their waxines and wanings, as honor, riches, power, authoritie, dignitie, and ſuche like: with all the vaine pleaſures and delightes of this world: all the which this true church and ſpouſe of Chriſt doth deſpiſe, contemne, and treade vnder her feete. The Moone alſo may put vs in remembrance of the chā
                     ges, and alterations, which the church is ſubiect vnto in this world: ſome times being in quiet, ſometimes in proſperity, ſometime in aduerſity, ſometime conſiſting in many, ſometime in few.
                  Further it geueth vs to vnderſtand that as the Moone receaueth all her lighte and beautye from the Sunne, ſo the churche receaueth all her puritie, righteouſneſſe, and glorye from Chriſt. Thus the Moone was vnder her feete, and vppon her head a crown of twelue ſtarres,
                  
                  This number of twelue, is the number of perfection or fulneſſe, and by the ſtarres, ſhynings in the church, are ment the Patriarches, the Prophets, the Apoſtles, the Martirs, the godly miniſters of al ages which ſhine in the church both in life and doctrine, which all, doe receaue their lighte, of the ſunne of righteouſneſſe, wherewith the church is clothed.

                        2 And ſhee was with childe, and cried trauelling in birthe, and was pained ready to be deliuered.
This place is to bee referred to thoſe times of the church, that were before the incarnation of Chriſt. When as the congregation of the faithful, that is to ſay, the church did maruelouſly longue, and (as it were) trauailed in minde, to haue that promiſed ſeed borne and brought to light: that ſhould repaire the miſerable ruine of mankinde, and treade downe the ſerpents head, the which ſeed was our Lorde and Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus, who was born within the church

and of a bleſſed member of the church.
                  3 And there appeared another wonder in heauen: and behold, a great red dragon hauing ſeuen heads, and tenne hornes, and ſeuen crownes vpon his heads:
                  
                  4 And his taile drew the third part of the ſtarres of heauen, and caſt them to the earth.
                  
                  Hauing deſcribed the church, now he falleth to the deſcription of the principall enemie of the church which is Sathan: he is deſcribed in the forme of a dragon, that is to ſay full of venome, full of poyſon, wherewith he infecteth, & corrupteth the world: of a red colour, to declare his bloudines, his cruelty, his ſpite and malice, hauing ſeauen headdes: that is to ſaye being full of deuiſes, ſubtilties, craftes, and deceipts, to entrappe and deſtroy men withall. He hath alſo ten hornes & ſeuē crownes, his hornes ſignify his mighty force, power and violence: his crownes, his dignity, honor and authority in this wicked world: wherof he is called Prince and chiefe potentate of this darkenes.
                  4 And his taile drew the third part of the ſtars of heauen, and caſt them to the earth.
                  
                  The dragons taile are falſe prophets, hypocrites, and ſuch as by a ſhew of holines deceaue men: teaching falſe doctrine, drawing men from heauen to earth, from worſhipping God in Spirite, and trueth, to earthlye adorations, Imaginations, and conceiptes. Of this tayle were the Scribes and Phariſyes, and other religious folke of the Iewes: of the ſame alſo are all ſuch as by falſe doctrine haue drawen any out of the firmament of Chriſtes church, that were once there placed as ſtars by baptiſme, and regeneration. Hereunto the Prophet Eſay doth allude, ſaying the falſe prophet is a verye tayle: but ſuch ſtarres were not fixed in

the firmament: therefore the dragons tayle had power ouer them.
                  
                     And the dragon stoode before the woman which was ready to be deliuered, to deuoure her childe when ſhe had brought it forth. So ſhe brought a man childe which ſhoulde rule all nations with a rodde of yron: and her ſonne was taken vp vnto God, and to his throne.
                  
                  This childe that the church brought foorth whom the Dragon ſought to deuoure, was Chriſt our Sauiour: againſt whom the Dragon ſtirred firſt Herode, then the chiefe of the Iewes, the Scribes, the Phareſies, the highe Prieſtes, laſtlye the whole multitude, to the ende to deuour this man childe, that the church had brought foorth to her euerlaſting comforte, and to the Dragons eternall ruine.
                  
                     5 She brought forth a man childe which ſhould rule all nations with a rodde of yron.
                  This was that childe whom Dauid by the ſpirite of propheſie ſpeaketh of in the ſecond Pſalme. I will preach the law whereof the Lord hath ſayde vnto me, thou art my Sonne this day haue I begotten thee: deſire of me and I ſhall giue thee the heathen for thine inheritaunce and the vttermoſt partes of the earth for thy poſſeſsion: thou ſhalt bruſe them with a rodde of yron, and breake them in peeces like a potters veſſell.
                  
                  And her Sonne was taken vp vnto God, and to his throne.
                  Thus when the Dragon had ſpitte all his venome, had vſed all the deuiſes and ſubtilties of his ſeauen heads, al the force and violence of his ten hornes, all the authority & dignity of his ſeuen crownes, finally when he had ſhewed al his ſpite, crueltye & malice, he preuailed no whit at all, for the childe whiche hee perſecuted Chriſt Ieſus, aſcended into heauen,

was taken vp vnto God and to his throne: and there ſitteth at the right hand of the father, in moſt glorious and eternal maieſtie.
                  
                     6 And the woman fled into the wildernes where ſhe hath a place prepared of God, that they ſhould feed her there a thouſand two hundred and three ſcore daies.
                  And the woman that is to ſay the church, the cō
                     gregation of the faithfull, fledde and was diſpearſed into the wildernes of the world, among the Gentils, in that huge and waſte forreſt: wherof the Romaine Emperour was chiefe Foſter, who is the beaſt, that in the beginning of the next chapter is deſcribed: there remained the church in this wildernes, ſubiect to the iniuries of the Emperours and other his vnder officers, yet notwithſtanding fedde by Gods eſpeciall prouidence, in myddeſt of all perſecution with heauenly and ſpiritual foode, by godly and ſincere miniſters.
                  And this ſtate did ſhe continue in a thouſand two hundred and three ſcore daies.
                  That is to ſay two and forty moneths the which if we reckon after the accompt of Daniel euerie moneth for a ſabboth of yeres, it amounteth iuſt to two hundred foure ſcore and fourteene yeres: the which number of yeares containeth the whole perſecution of the Primitiue church: from the firſt of Herode to the laſt of Licinius who being ouercome by that moſt renowmed Emperour Cōſtantine the great, the church enioyed therupon after a long & grieuous ſtorme, a ſweete, bleſſed & happy calme. In the meane time ſhe was by Gods eſpeciall prouidence preſerued & nouriſhed: not in pompous & glorious oſtentation, but in hydlock, and as it were in the deſert, not perſecuting, but perſecuted, not giuing, but receiuing the crowne of martyrdom: not glittering with tēporall

riches, but ſhining with ſpirituall vertues: not practiſing the law of armes, but preaching the law of God: not ſuperiour to all gouernments, but ſubiect to all gouernours: not releaſing ſubiectes of their allegeance, but inſtructing them to the doctrine of obedience: not making merchādize of gods mercies freely beſtowed vpon vs, but diuiding frankly, and faithfully to the children of God the bread of life. O how wel beſeemed this the church of Chriſt, & how contrarie vnto this is the church of Antichriſt.
                  
                     7 And there was fought a great battaile in heauen, Michael and his angels fought with the dragon, and the dragon and his angels fought.
                  Here is deſcribed a fight and great battayle, whereof the place and parties are ſpecially to bee conſidered: for the place it was in heauen, that is to ſay in the church, for the congregation of beleeuers is termed heauen: euen as the companye of the vnfaithfull and vnbeleeuers is called the earth: ſo wee finde in the beginning of this chapter, that the Dragons tayle, that is to ſaye falſe teachers, tyrants, perſecutors, and ſuch like drewe the thyrde parte of the ſtarres of heauen, that is to ſaye a great number that were accompted beleeuers and members of the church militant, and caſte them to the earth, that is, made them reprobates & vnbeleeuers. The parties are Michael and his angels on the one ſide, that is to ſay Chriſte and his miniſters, that is godly magiſtrates & inſtructers, according to the ſaying of the prophet Daniel in that time ſhall Michael the great prince ariſe, which ſtandeth for the ſins of thy people. On the other ſide is the Dragon and his angelles: that is Sathan and his miniſters, which are tyrants, perſecutors, ſeducers, falſe prophetes, hypocrytes, and

ſuch like, with death, ſinne, hell and damnation.
                  
                     8 But they preuailed not, neyther was their place found any more in heauen.
                  Here he declareth vnto vs the ſucceſſe of the battaile, the victorie was Michaels, the dragon was conquered, driuen out of the church, and had no place in the hearts of the faithfull. Thus Chriſt vanquiſhed the Diuell, death, hell & ſinne, in ſo much that none of theſe haue any power or authority, vpon his elect and choſen people.
                  
                     9 And that great dragon was caſt out, euen that old ſerpent, which is called the Diuell, and Sathan which deceaueth all the worlde, hee was euen cast into the earth, and his Angels were caſt out with him.
                  The dragon that is to ſay the Deuill beeing driuen out of heauen, out of the Church, out of the heartes of the godlie was caſt into the earth, that is, into the reprobate, the vnbeleeuers, the wicked, whoſe heartes are the temples of Sathan, whoſe ſences are groſe and earthlie, whoſe adorations and religions are terreſtriall, whoſe affections are altogeather fixed vpon earthlie and worldlie thinges. And his Angels were caſt out with him: death, ſin, hell & ſuch other the Dragons aſſociates, & miniſters: as they haue no place with the faithful, ſo amongſt the vnbeleeuers & reprobates, they haue their proper ſeate, and throne, being together with Sathan their leader caſt into the earth: that is to ſay, among the wicked and earthly people.
                  
                     10 Then I heard a loude voyce ſaying: now is ſaluation in heauen, & ſtrength, & the kingdome of our God, & the power of his Chriſt for the accuſer of our brethren is caſt downe, which accuſed thē before our God day & night.
                  Here is laide before vs the reioyſing of the heauenly Citizens, for the felicitie, and happines, of the

church that by Chriſts death and paſsion had ouercome and obtained the victory ouer the Diuell and his aungels. For Michaell ouercame the Dragon, Chriſt vanquiſhed the Diuell, ouerthrew his dominion power and authoritie, and now raigneth only himſelfe, in moſt heauenly and triumphant ſorte in the hearts and mindes of the faithfull. So the accuſer is caſt downe that we may well ſay with S. Paule VVho ſhall accuſe the elect of God? It is God that iustifieth VVho is he that condemneth? It is Chriſt which died, yea which roſe againe: which is alſo on the right hand of GOD, which maketh interceſsion for vs.
                  
                  
                     So the accuſer of our brethren is caſt downe which accuſed them before our God day and night.
                     
                        11 But they ouercame him by the bloud of the Lambe, and by the word of their testimony: and they loued not their liues vnto the death.
The faithfull, the choſen and elect people of God, ouercame the Diuell, but how? Not by their deſartes workes or merits, but by the bloode of the Lambe, and worde of their teſtimonie: that is to ſaye, by the death and paſsion of Chriſt: and by beleuing in him that raiſed our Lord Ieſus from the dead, who was deliuered to deathe for our ſinnes, and is riſen againe for our iuſtification: the apprehenſion by faithe of this incomprehenſible benefite, which was the word of their teſtimony, by the blood of the Lambe doth ouercome the Diuell, conquer the world, vanquiſh the fleſh, ouerthrowe ſinne, death hell and all infernall powers, according to the ſaying of Saint Iohn This is the victory that ouercōmeth the world euē our faith.
                     And they loued not their liues vnto the death.
That is to ſay, they moſt willingly ſuffered death for the truthes ſake and for their teſtimony, in reſpecte whereof they loued not their liues, but after the

counſell of our ſauiour, in the fourteenth of Luke, denied themſelues, tooke vp their croſſe and followed Chriſt, and hated their life in this worlde, to the end to keepe it to life euerlaſting.
                  
                     12 Therefore reioice ye heauens, and ye that dwell in thē. VVoe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the ſea, for the Deuil is come down vnto you, which hath great wrath, knowing that he hath but a ſhort time.
                  Therefore reioyce o ye congregation of the faithful, and ye that dwell in them: Wo to the inhabitāts of the earth, wo vnto you earthly and wicked people woe vnto you inhabitants of the Sea, woe vnto you wauering, inconſtant and vnſtedfaſt in beleefe: for the Deuill is come downe vnto you, who ſhall vexe you with ſundry calamities, both inwardly and outwardly ſhal repleniſh you with al vices, torment you with anguiſh and greife of minde, ſtir vp hatred, diſſention, debate, war and murder amongeſt you, for his wrath is great, knowing he hath but a ſhort time. For he is a roaring Lyon, that knowing his ende to be at hand, is the more fierce▪ He is that cruel tirant, that knowing his raigne to be but ſhort, ſheadeth ſo much the more blood: the more his time is diminiſhed, the more is his malice increaſed: what he wanteth in meaſure, he will fill vp in waight.
                  
                     13 And when the Dragon ſaw that he was caste into the earth, hee perſecuted the woman whiche had brought forth the man child.
                  When the Dragon that is to ſay the Deuil perceaued himſelfe to be vanquiſhed and ouercome, driuē and expulſed out of the harts of the faithfull: caſte and throwen downe amongſt the vnbeleeuers, and reprobats, hee perſecuted the woman whiche had brought forth the mā child: he perſecuted the church the congregation of the faithfull, which to her eternall

happineſſe had brought forthe the man childe Chriſt Ieſus, euen the Lord her righteouſneſſe, her beauty and her ſaluation.
                  
                     14 But vnto the woman were giuen the wings of a great eagle that ſhe might flie into the wilderneſſe, into her place: where ſhe is nouriſhed for a time, and times, and half a time, from the preſence of the ſerpent.
                  The prouidence of God aſsiſted the Churche, againſt the malice of Sathan: The Church hauing her faith ſupported by the two teſtaments, as it were, by the two wings of a great eagle in this wilderneſſe of the world, did infinitly ſpread it ſelf by the outward preaching of the goſpel, and the inwarde operation of the holy Ghoſt. The time, times, and halfe a time that is to ſay a yeare, two yeeres, and halfe a yeare is the ſelfe ſame that we reade before, a thowſand two hundred and threeſcore daies, the which wee there reduced to 42. monethes, and expounded the moneths by Sabaoths of yeares, according to the prophecie of Daniel. It may alſo ſignifie both heere and in the place before, the whole time and troubles of the church militant frō the birth of Chriſt, to the end of the world, reckoning for a time, 500. yeares, for times 1000. yeares, for half a time 250. yeares.
                  
                     15 And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water after the woman, like a flood, that he might cauſe her to be caried away of the flood:
                  Sathan that curſed ſerpent abounding in malice againſt the church, caſt out of his mouthe water after the woman: that is ſtirred and procured ſundrie people, nations and gouernments (which heere are compriſed in the word water) to perſecut and to endeuor to extinguiſhe the church. Like a flood: that is to ſay aboundantly, violently, and ragingly.
                  
                     That he might cauſe her to be carried away of the floode.
                     
That is to the end that he might cauſe her to bee deſtroyed by perſecution: and as it were caried awaye by violence from the face of the earth. 
                        16 But the earth holpe the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and ſwallowed vp the flood which the Dragon had caſt out of his mouth. The church increaſed by perſecution dayly, the perſecutors died, the earth ſwallowed them vp in their graues: and as it were opened her mouth dailye for them: and they daily fell in. But the church remained, continued, and augmented euery day: and the blood of the Martirs became the ſeed of the church. So the earth holpe the woman, and ſwallowed vp the floode.

                        17 Then the Dragon was wroth with the woman, and wēt and made warre with the remnant of her ſeede, which keepe the commaundements of God: and haue the teſtimony of Ieſus Christ.
The Dragon that is to ſay the Deuil hauing attempted firſt the head Chriſt Ieſus. Secondly the church his body, aand finding his labor fruſtrated, and his power too weake to worke the deſtruction of either of them, taketh a third courſein executing of his malice: which is to moleſt and perſecute the members of the church: which are the remnant of her ſeede, which keepe the commaundements of God, & haue the teſtimony of Ieſus Chriſt. To the whiche ende he hath ſpecially ſtirred certain diueliſh and wicked inſtrumentes: whoſe eſtats, qualities, actions, and proceedings, are very liuely, pithelie, and effectually ſet forth in this next Chapter enſuing.

                        18 And I ſtood on the ſea ſand.
Heere the holy Apoſtle and Euangeliſt S. Iohn, procureth in vs a certaine attentiueneſſe and earneſte animaduerſion of the viſion following, declaring

firſt the place wherein he ſtoode, ſecondly what hee ſawe, which is this that followeth.
               
               
                  CHAP. xiii.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 And I ſawe a beast riſe out of the ſea, hauing ſeauen heades and tenne hornes, and about his hornes were ten crownes, and vpon his heads the name of blaſphemy.
                        
                           2 And the beaſt that I ſaw, was like a Leopard, and his feete like a beares, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion, and the Dragon gaue him his power and his throne, and great authoritie.
                     
                  
                  
                     HEERE is deſcribed vnto vs the Romaine Empire, vnder the forme of a beaſt, moſt monſtrous, moſt cruell, moſt ſtrong, and moſt terrible Saint Iohn heerein alludeth to the deſcription laid downe thereof by the Proph. Daniel in his ſeauenth Chapter. The fowrth beaſt (ſaith he meaning the Romain Empire) was grimme and horrible and maruelous ſtrong: it hath great iron teethe,
                     Daniel. 7.
                      
                     it deuoured and deſtroyed, and ſtamped the reſidue vnder his feete. it was vnlike the other beaſts that were before it, for it had tenne hornes.
                  
                  Which ten hornes are expounded in the 24. verſe of the ſame chapter to be ten kings, which ſhal grow out of the ruines of this empire. And therefore the tenne hornes are heere laide downe to haue vppon them ten crownes, of theſe kings and kingdomes we ſhal ſpeake heereafter: it had alſo ſeauen heads, which are the ſeauen hilles whereon Rome ſtandeth Vppon which heades was the name of blaſphemye. For ſo much did the Romaines attribute to their proweſſe and pollicie, their force and foreſight: that they

termed their city Romam aeternam, and as it were mating the moſt mighty, vaunted
Diuiſum imperium cum Ioue Caeſar habet.
                  
                  Which their wickedneſſe is well heere expreſſed by the name of blaſphemye. Moreouer it is likened to a Leopard in proportion, and ſhew: to a Lion for the mouth, and for the feete to a beare: whereby we vnderſtand that it not onelye had the countries and countenances, the poſseſsions and proceedings, the might and maieſtye, the conditions and crueltie of the former monarchy, but alſo in al euil and tiranny farre and much exceded them. Daniel vnto this place giueth very great light, who likening the Babilonian monarchy to a Lion, the Perſian to a beare, the Macedonian to a Leopard, teacheth vs, that S. Iohn in this Romaine Monarchy foreſawe the mouth and foote, the pride and paſe, the ſtate and ſteppe, the rage and rauening, of all the former to be expreſſed, contayned and repreſented. Heereunto is added that the Dragon haue him his power, and his throne and greate authoritie:
                  
                  That is to ſaye, the Deuill aſsigned him to bee his cheefe inſtrument in perſecuting the members of the church, thoſe that haue the teſtimony of Ieſus. And to that end aduanceth his power throne and authoritie in this wicked world.
                  
                     3 And I ſawe one of his heades (as it were) wounded to death, and his deadly wounde was healed, and all the world wondred at the beaſt.
                  Theſe heades ſeeme vnto me to haue three ſignifications: two of them are laide downe by the Angell, in the ſeauentienth chapter, where they are expounded to bee mountaynes or hilles, as heretofore we haue taken them: and alſo kings or gouernors, as hereafter we ſhall ſhewe them. But in this place it ſemeth

to bee taken neither for the one, nor for the other: but for a chiefe and principal parte, of the eſtat euen for Roome, and Italy it ſelfe. Which aſwell by the ciuill warres of Caeſar and Pompey, Auguſtus and Anthony: as by the looſe and execrable gouernments of Claudius, Tiberius, Caius, Caligula, Claudius the brother of Germanicus, Nero the ſonne of Domitius, and Aulus Vitellius, was as it were wounded and that moſt greeuouſly. Which in the time of Flauius, Veſpaſianus, Titus, Nerua, Traiane, and the Emperours ſucceding it recouered: whereby the deadlye wound was healed.
                  And all the world wondred at the beaſt.
                  Such was the might and maieſtie, the force and fortune of the Romaine Empire, that all men wondred and maruailed at it: had it in admiration, regarde and reuerence, as an eſtate moſt happye, ſacred, and in a manner diuine.
                  
                     4 And they worſhipped the Dragon, which gaue power vnto the beast, and they worſhipped the beast, ſaying VVho is like vnto the beaſte? VVho is able to make warre with him.
                  By reaſon of the falſe religions and Idolatries of the Romaine Empire, the Dragon that is to ſaye, the Deuill, was worſhipped. And by reaſon of the might and puiſſance of the forſaid eſtate, it was of al nations feared, and honored, inſomuch as they thought that none other was like vnto it: nor any able to make warre againſt it.
                  
                     5 And there was giuen vnto him a mouthe that ſpake great things and blaſphemies: and power was giuen vnto him to doe 42. moneths.
                  The pride and blaſphemye of the Romaine Emperors wee haue ſomewhat declared before. The time of their perſecuting power heere expreſſed by

two and forty months is the ſame that in the former chapter is reſolued, and a thouſand two hundred & threeſcore daies, which gathered into ſabbaoths of yeares, after the account of Daniell, contayneth the whole time of the primitiue perſecution, from the firſt of Herod, to the laſt of Licinius, the particularities of their pride and blaſphemies, as to be called Gods to haue their images placed in temples, and to haue diuine rites & ceremonies done there in their honor.Ioſeph. de bello iuda ico lib. 2. cap. 3.
                      The hiſtories of their times doe diſcloſe, the ſundry perſecutions in great crueltye by them and their authority executed againſt the profeſſors of the truth: the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtories doe mention at large: Whereby the interpretation of this place and of the verſes following is very cleare and manifeſt.

                        6 And he opened his mouth vnto blaſphemy againſt God to blaſpheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heauen.
The blaſphemous ſpeeches and actions of the Romaine Empire, being corrupted with all kinde of Idolatry and impietie, was bent firſt againſt the name of God, ſecondly againſt his tabernacle, thirdly againſt them that dwell in heauen. Againſt the name of God, that is to ſay againſt the eſſence, maieſtye, worde and wiſedome of God: Whereas in ſteade of the creator, they honored creatures, in ſteade of one true God, they ſerued many falſe Idols, and adored them in corporall rites and ceremonies: in ſteade of him that was to be worſhipped in ſpirit and truth: againſt his tabernacle, that is to ſay his church for of the church it is ſpoken, beholde the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwel with them, and they ſhalle his people, and God himſelf ſhalbe their God with them.
                  
                  Againſt them that dwell in heauen, that is to ſay, againſt

the members of the Church: for that wee are no more forrenners, and ſtrangers, but citizens wtih the Saintes, and of the houſhould of God. And therefore may be well termed dwellers in heauen. For that as the Apoſtle ſaieth in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes. In that we are members of the miſticall bodie of Chriſt, we are come to the mount Sion, and to the Citie of the liuing God: the caeleſtiall Hieruſalem, and to the companie of innumerable Angels, and to the congregation of the first borne, which are written in heauen. And to God the iudge of all, and to the Spirites of iust and perfect men: and to Ieſus the Mediatour of the new Teſtament, & to the bloud of ſprinkling, that ſpeaketh better thinges then that of Abel. Wherefore as in the former chapter, the Dragon, that is to ſaye the Diuell, perſecuted firſt the man childe, that is Chriſt Ieſus. Then the woman clothed with the Sunne, which is the Church. And laſtlie the remnant of her ſeede which keepe the commaundementes of God, and haue the teſtimonie of Ieſus: that is to ſaye, the members of the church. So this principall inſtrument of the Deuill the Romaine Idolatrous Empire blaſphemeth, gainſayeth and perſecuteth, firſt the name of God: that is his worde and wiſedome Chriſt Ieſus. Secondlie his tabernacle, that is his church. Thirdly, thoſe that dwell in heauen: that is to ſay the faithfull, that are the members and ſeede of the church.
                  
                     7 And it was giuē vnto him to make war with the ſaints, and to ouercome them: and power was giuen him ouer euerie kindred, and tongue and nation.
                  They that before were tearmed dwellers in heauen, are heere tearmed ſainctes, againſt whome this Romaine Empire hath made warre, rayſed perſecution, and preuailed in all cruell tormentes and rigorous kindes of death, & that not in one contrie

or prouince alone, but throughout all the worlde, for the authoritie therof and power did reach in effect ouer euery kindred and tongue and nation.
                  
                     8 Therefore all that dwell vppon the earth ſhall woorſhippe him: whoſe names are not written in the booke of life of the lambe which was ſlaine from the beginning of the worlde.
                  Such therefore as are not the elect of God, whoſe eyes are not illumined with his heauenly light, and whoſe mindes are not ſanctified with his holy ſpirit: whereby they may diſcerne trueth from falſehoode, but are whollie led with earthly conceites, worldly conſiderations, and terreſtriall appetites, and therin doe as it were dwel and inhabite, vnwilling any way to be weaned from it. They ſhall worſhippe, obey, reuerence, and followe in all Idolatrie, and naughtineſſe this Romaine Empire: iudging it to bee the beſt way for their ſaftie, benefit and aduauncement, although in truth it worke their ruyne ouerthrowe, and euerlaſting deſtruction.
                  
                     9 If any man haue an eare let him heare: if any leade into captiuitie, he ſhall goe into captiuitie: if any kill with a ſworde, he muſt be killed by a ſworde. Here is the patience, and the faith of the Saintes.
                  With good reaſon it is here required that men ſhould be attentiue: for here is declared the courſe of the iudgementes of God, whoſe diuine maieſtie not vnlike to the lawe of Talion, puniſheth men by that by the which they doe offende
                  
                     10 For if anie leade into captiuitie, he ſhall goe to captiuitie: If anie kill with a ſworde, he muſt be killed by a ſworde.
                  Sith therefore this Romaine Empire by force and fraude, by power and pollicie hath wrought the ruyne, and ouerthrowe of manie: it is the

iudgement of God, that by force and fraude, by power and pollicie, manie ſhall worke the ruyne and ouerthrowe of it: how inſeparable and inſuperable ſoeuer it ſeeme.
                  
                     Here is the patience and the faith of the Sainctes.
                  
                  That is that in the expectation heereof, there is matter giuen for the Sainctes to exerciſe their faith and patience. For it was not a matter ſo probable, but that faith was needefull: nor yet ſo quickely accompliſhed, but that patience was requiſite: ſeeing that by little and little it was waſted and conſumed. For as the Popedome which here next is deſcribed, did by degrees increaſe: ſo did the Empire decay by the ſame meanes: that the dignitie of the one was aduanced, the authoritie of the other was diminiſhed.
                  
                     11 And I behelde an other beaſt comming vppe out of the earth, which had two hornes like the lambe, but he ſpake like the Dragon.
                  The former beaſt roſe out of the ſea, that is out of the waues of worldlie gouernementes, out of tumultes and tempeſts of people and nations: out of the which in time was produced and brought foorth the Romaine Empire. And Saint Iohn when he ſawe that viſion, ſtoode vpon the ſea ſande: that is entered into conſideration of worldlie gouernementes, eſtates and dominions: whoſe foundations are like vnto the ſande of the ſea, vppon the which there may be no ſure building: for that they are ſubiect to the variable tumultes of people and nations: as the ſand is to the raging waues and ſurges of the ſea. But this other beaſt commeth vp out of the earth: a place of more conſtancie of greater ſtabilitie, a place of fruitfulneſſe and fertility, which ought to yeelde a plentifull croppe to the Lorde of

the harueſt: who hath prepared for the pure wheate of his elect, the barnes of euerlaſting blyſſe. The earth heere therefore ſignifieth the church, out of the which the ſeconde beaſt commeth, which is the Popedome.
                  Which had two hornes like the lambe: but he ſpake like the Dragon.
                  That the Popes pretende the hornes of the lambe, that is the power and authoritie of Chriſte: aſwell touching his prieſthoode, as his principalitie, all chriſtendome can witneſſe: who knowe right well that as Chriſte is in trueth the chiefe Prince, and chiefe Prieſt of the faithfull: ſo for theſe manie yeares the Byſhoppes of Rome haue applyed theſe two hornes of the Lambe vnto themſelues. As concerning the Popes prieſthoode, Durandus one of his fauourites thus writeth: This is Melchiſedeth whoſe Prieſthoode is not comparable Vnto others, hee is the heade of all Byſhoppes: from whome they all growe, as members growe from the heade, and of whoſe fulneſſe they all receaue: as touching his Princehoode, thus writeth Pope Adrian to the Emperour Fredericke: My ſeate is in the citie Rome: the Emperours ſeate is in Acon, in Arden (a foreſt of France) what ſoeuer, the Emperour hath, hee hath it of vs: as Pope Zacharias tranſlated the Empire from Greece into Germanie: ſo may we againe tranſlate the ſame frō the Germaines to the Greeks. Beholde it is in our power to beſtowe the ſame vpon whō we liſt. Therefore are we appointed of God ouer nations and kingdoms, to pull downe, to roote vp, to buylde and to plant againe, in reſpect of both theſe authorities, Pope Boniface the eight at Rome in a great Iubilie, as it were in the face of the worlde went in publicke proceſſion, one day in his prieſtly

pontificalibus, and the next day in the robes Imperiall, with a naked ſword carried before him, cauſing this ſentence to be proclaimed, ecce hic duo gladij beholde here are the two ſwordes. Thus this ſeconde beaſt hath two hornes, that is to ſay, prieſthood and princehood like the lambe, that is like Chriſt: but he ſpeaketh like the Dragon: that is like the Deuill: falſelye and corruptlye, ſubtillye and maliciouſlye, proudely and prophanely: ſuch is the ſpeach and doctrine: wherein he reſembleth the Dragon, who is a murtherer and a lyer from the beginning, and the father of lyes.
                  
                     12 And he did all that the firſte beaſt coulde do before him: and he cauſed the earth and them that dwell therin to worſhip that firſt beaſt, whoſe deadly wound was healed.
                  The might, poyſons and authoritie of the Popedome, grewe to be ſuch that it was equall altogether, if not ſuperiour in power and dignitie to the olde Romaine Empire, in ſo much that it could do in commanding and gouerning the prouinces & potentates of the world, as much and as throughlye as euer the old Romaine Empire in his greateſt dignity and authority could do: and that 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in conſpectu eius, euen in the ſight and preſence of the Emperours: who were brought to that weakenes, & feeblenes of eſtate, that they became rather beholders of the Popes greatnes, then exerciſers of their owne: Yea and beheld it with feare and trembling: for when the Popes were growen to that greatneſſe and authoritie, that they could depoſe Emperours, as appeared in the lamentable fall of that moſt noble Emperour Henry the third: and that their practice therein by the condemnation of Vecilo Archebiſhop of Ments, of hereſie, for holding the contrarye:

was by the iudgement and decree of a counſel, as a ſounde point of doctrine eſtabliſhed in the myndes of men: no maruaile if the talleſt Ceaders of Libanus did ſhake for feare of the bramble, leaſt fyre ſhould come out from him and conſume them. From this point of doctrine that it was in the power of the Pope to depoſe the Emperour, another was inferred of no leſſe moment: that it was likewiſe in his power to make the Emperour: & for that the ceremonie of impoſing the crowne vpon the Emperours head belonged to the Pope. When they had attained their greatnes they altered this peece of ſeruice to a point of ſoueraignety: interpreting the impoſing of the crowne, to bee the diſpoſing of the crowne: Therefore Innocentius the ſecond, vpon the coronation of Lotharius the Emperour, the yeare of our Lord 1133. cauſed the whole ſolemnity therof to be drawen in picture within his Pallace of Lateran, with theſe verſes ſubſcribed.
                  
                     —Rex venit ante fores, iurans prius vrbis honores,
                     
                     
                        Poſt homo fit Papae, ſumit quo dante coronam.
                     
                     The king doth come before the gate:
                     And ſweares firſt to the Cities ſtate.
                     Him then the Pope his vaſſall makes:
                     And ſo to him the crowne betakes.
                  
                  If hereunto be added the letter of Pope Adrian to Fredericke the emperour, with the practiſe of Boniface the eight, both before recited, it may make ſome demonſtration of the power and authoritye of the Popedome in thoſe dayes.
                  And he cauſed the earth and thoſe that dwell there to worſhippe that firſt beaſt whoſe deadly wounde was healed.
                  In the thirde verſe of this Chapter it was declared that one of the heads of the Romaine Empire

was as it were wounded to death: But his deadlye wound was healed. We there expound that head to be Rome and Italie it ſelfe: ſo that the ſenſe of this place is, that the Popes ſhall cauſe the inhabitantes of the earth, to haue in great account honor and reputation Italie and Rome, which are that beaſt and head whoſe deadlye wound was healed: and ſuch eſtimation brought they it vnto, that the ſimpler ſorte worſhipped it as the chaire of Peter, as the rocke and bulwarke of chriſtian religion: and as the inuincible fortreſſe of the faith: the wiſer and diſcreeter feared it as a place of no leſſe perrill then power: and as the lyons denne which moued Rodolfe a very notable Emperour, liuing about the yeare of our Lord 1282. vnto ſuch as asked him the cauſe why he would not into Italie, to yeeld this anſwere that the lyon vpon a time had inuited all kindes of beaſtes to come vnto him: which when they came at the hower appointed, to the mountain where the lion dwelled: The fox wiſer then the reſt, finding no tracke of anyes returne, drewe backe alleaging a reaſon thus recited by Horace.
                  
                  
                     —Quia me vestigia terrent.
                     Omnia te aduerſum ſpectantia, nulla retrorſum.
                  
                  
                     13 And he did great wonders ſo that he made fire to come downe from heauen on the earth in the ſight of men.
                  In the ſight of men, that is in the opinion Iudgment and conceit of men: hee made fire to come downe from heauen, that is to come out from the church, vpon the earth, that is vpon the wicked, vpon the obſtinate, vpon the accurſed and reprobate, this fire was the flame, and thunderboultes of their excommunications: which in the opinion of men was wonderful, and terrible: and blaſted them, and made them accurſed vpō whom it lighted: But it

was not ſo in deede, it onely appeared ſo in the ſight of men, that is in the corrupt iudgement of the ignorant, for the excommunications papall, were no lawfull cenſures of the church: but were the vnlawfull and tyrannous proceedings of an vſurped power: and here it is good to note in that there is mention made of heauen and of earth: that in the courſe of theſe propheſies, as the earth is oppoſite vnto heauen, it is taken in the worſe parte: as the earth is oppoſite vnto the ſea, it is taken in the better parte, as the earth and the ſea are oppoſite to the heauens, both are taken in ill part. But to returne to the Papall excommunications, ſo wonderfull were they in operation, that by them Leo the Emperour, by Gregorie the ſecond, was cut off both from the tribute, and from the obedience due vnto him in Italie. His ſubiectes there were made to rebel againſt him: two of his exarchats were ſlaine, and the thirde had his eyes pulled out. The king of Lumbards ſeaſed vpon much of the Emperours territories: and Rome and the Romaine Dukedome were ſeaſed vpon by the Pope. By this fyre alſo Henry the third a moſt honorable perſonage, and Emperour of very great wiſedome, corage, and induſtry was vtterly conſumed & ouerthrown by Gregory the ſeuenth, by force of the ſame flame. Alexander the third made Fredericke the Emperour to come to the city of Venice to aſke him forgiuenes: to kiſſe his feete to hold his ſtirope, and to do him ſeruice, & obeiſance: the ſparkes of this fyre, were interdiction, ſuſpention, inhibition, relaxation of ſubiects from their othes of alleageance: diſpenſation with othes and ſuch like, the coales that were hereby kindled, were vprores, tumultes, diſloialties, conſpiracies, rebellions, ſeditions and turbulent commotions: For in ſighte of men, theſe

appeared to be fyres from heauen: that is to be the cenſures of the church, which euery man thought himſelfe bound vpon paine of damnation to yeelde vnto and obey, whereas in truth they proceeded from the fyre brands of hell: Who by theſe practiſes weakened, waſted, and conſumed the ſtates of Chriſtendome, and aduaunced themſelues to the type of all earthly honor.
                  
                     14 And deceaued them that dwelt vpon the earth by the ſignes which were permitted him to doo, in the ſyght of the beaſt: ſaying to them that dwell on the earth, that they ſhoulde make the Image of the beaſt which had the wounde of a ſworde and did liue.
                  Theſe ſignes of their power and authoritye, which God permitted them to ſhewe, euen in the face & feeling of the Emperours, deceiued no doubt them that dwelt on the earth: and wrought in them this perſwaſion that the power that coulde bringe ſuch wonderfull thinges to paſſe, was ſacred, heauenly, and altogether diuine: and hauing gained this authoritie, and reputation, with the inhabitants of the earth: they willed an Image of the beaſt to be made, which had the wound of a ſworde and did liue.
                  
                  The beaſt as is before declared, is the Empire of Rome. The Image that is made to repreſent it, is the church of Rome, where in wee are to conſider the dignitye, authoritye, religion, lawes and proceedings, howe proportionably they are framed, and faſhioned to the portrature and Image of the olde Romaine Empire: for the firſte and ſecond the principall inſtrument, and pencill wherby the Popes painted this Image, was the falſe and forged donation of Conſtantine wherein they faigne, imagine, and beare the worlde in hande that

the Emperour hath decreed, that as his earthly power imperiall, ſo the holy ſacred Romaine Church ſhall reuerently be honored: and that the moſt ſacred ſeate of Peter ſhall bee gloriouſly exalted more then the Empire and earthly throne: yelding vnto it power and dignity of glory: and alſo vigour and honorificence imperiall: and againe that to bleſſed Sylueſter chiefe Biſhoppe and vniuerſall Pope of the City of Rome, and to all Biſhoppes his ſucceſſours, which ſhall ſit to the ende of the world in the ſeate of bleſſed Peter: he preſently together giueth his palace of Lateran appertayninge to his Empire: and alſo his diademe, that is to ſaye the crowne that belongeth to his head: and his white miter called Prigium, with the coller that commeth ouer his ſhoulders and compaſſeth his imperiall necke, and withall his purple cloake, and ſcarlet roabe, and all other his imperiall indumentes: yea and the dignitye of hauing imperiall preſidentes, and maiſters of horſe, beſtowing alſo vpon him the imperiall Scepter together with all the enſignes, bands and ſundrye ornaments, imperiall: and all kinde of proceeding of the imperiall celſitude, and glorie of his power, and that the moſte reuerent men, they of the cleargye ſeruing the ſame holye ſacred Romaine church, in ſundrye degrees, ſhall enioye the ſame celſitude, and heyght of honour, in ſingularitye, power and excellencye, with the glorie wherof the moſte honourable Senate ſeemeth to bee adorned: that is, they ſhall bee made counſellers, and conſulles: and ſhall farther be decored with all other dignities imperiall: and that as the imperiall warfare is decked, ſo alſo the cleargie of the holy Romaine church ſhall be adorned:

and that as the imperiall poyſance is garniſhed with diuers offices, of chamberlaines, of porters, of watchmen, and garders, ſo the holye Romaine church ſhall likewiſe bee beautified, and that the pontificall brightneſſe maye ſhinne moſt amplye and largelye, hee doth ordaine that the houſes of the cleargye of the holye Romayne church, ſhall bee garniſhed with skarfes, and with lawnes: that is of bright white, and that they ſhall ſo ryde: And that as the Senate doth vſe ſhowes, with drawynges out: that is to ſay, decked with fyne whyte lynnen, ſo the cleargy in lyke ſort may vſe: And farther decreeth that Syluester and his ſucceſsors, ſhall vſe the diademe: that is to ſaye the Crowne of moſte pure golde and precious ſtones, which from his head, he had graunted vnto him. And for that the ſayde moſte bleſſed Pope, was vnwyllyng vppon the Crowne of his Prieſthoode (which he weare to the glorye of Sainct Peter) to vſe that crowne of golde: hee had put a miter ſhynynge with whyte bryghtneſſe, with his owne handes vppon his head: ordayning that euerye one of the Popes ſucceſſours, in particular ſhall vſe the ſame miter. In their proceedinges to the imitation of the Empire, which is all one, as if hee had ſayde, as an Image of the Empire, this I finde in effecte worde for worde, in the Popes decrees collected certayne hundred yeares ſynce by Gratian: and now lately with prefaces, and priuileges, recommended to the world, by Pope Gregorie the thirtenth: and printed in Paris the yeare of our Lord 1582. although this donation, bee a very falſehood and forgerie, in the opinions & iudgements, of ſundry wiſe and learned men, as Cardinall

                     Cuſanus, Hieronimus Paulus, Otho Friſingenſis, Krantzius, Platina, Laurentius Valla, Carolus Molinaeus, Andreas Alceatus, and others. Yet is it apparant to the eye, that ſith from the ſtampe of the Romayne cleargye, this counterfecte did proceede: they had hereby a good deſire, to make their Romayne Church, an Image, and repreſentation, of the olde Romayne Empire, which is the beaſt, that had the wounde of a ſworde, and did liue: neither did they onelye endeuour to reſemble it, in dignitie, authoritye, and ceremonies of honor and maieſtie: but alſo in forme and manner of religion, which is not vnknowne in the olde Romaine Empire, to haue conſiſted in the multiplicitye of goddes: they hauing a god for euerye countrie, for euerye prouince, for euery Citye, for euery place, and for euery thing: and for theſe they had alters, and Idols, and ſacrifices, and oblations, and ceremonies, in theyr honour. This the Romayne church repreſented in the multiplicitye of ſainctes, they hauing a ſainct for euery countrie, for euerye prouince, for euery pariſhe, for euerye place and for euerye thing, and for theſe they had churches, and Images, and offeringes, and prayers, and kneelinges, and what ſoeuer eſtabliſheth a diuine adoration: Hence it was that they turned the temple of Pantheon, to the church of all Sainctes: Diana, to our Ladie: Mars, into ſainct George, Aeſculapius to S. Roche, Romulus and Remus, to Peter & Paule, and euery other god of the Romayne Empire, to ſome other Sainct of the Romayne church. Laſtlye touching the lawes, and manner of gouernment, there is a verye great repreſentation betweene the one & the other, the forme of the pollicy of the romaine empire, ſeemed at the firſt ſight

to be an Araſtocracie: by reaſon of the autoritie of the Senate, but in trueth was a moſt abſolute monarchie: by reaſon of the ſupreme power of the Emperours. The forme of the policy of the Romaine church, ſeemeth likewiſe to be an ariſtocracie, by reaſon of the authoritie both of the Cardinals, and councels: but in verie deed it is a moſt abſolute monarchie, by reaſon of the moſt high and circumſpect power of the Popes. The lawes Imperiall, by the which the Romaine Empire endeuoured to appeaſe the controuerſie, that happened amongſt men, may appeare by the pandectes, collected by Tri-bonian, by the code of Iuſtinian: and by the bookes called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . The lawes Papall, by the which the Romaine church proceeded likewiſe to ende variaunces: may be ſeene in the decretall Epiſtles, writen to the verie likeneſſe and ſimilitude of the Emperiall reſcriptes: being an Imitation, repetition rehearſall, and repreſentation, of the ſelfe ſame lawes, that bare ſwaye in the Romaine Empire, and ſo confeſſed by the Canoniſtes themſelues. If any will wade farther, in the conſideration hereof: let them reade the collections of Iohannes Berthaclinus firmanus, called his repertorie: which treateth in ſeuerall great volumes, of an infinite number of things, wherein the lawes Ciuill and Canon doe accorde. And although in his ſecond to me there be inſerted the collection of one Gwalnanus (vnder the worde differentia) touching the differences in diuers pointes, betweene the Ciuill law and the Canon. Yet are they ſo fewe in number, in reſpect of the reſt: that they are nothing in compariſon: and ſuch alſo as differ rather in matter of circumſtance, then of ſubſtaunce: and ſome of them, ſuch ſort of differences as may very well be, betweene a body and his Image: As for example, the

laſt difference ſauing one by him is noted thus: Secundum ius Ciuile, in libello accuſatorio ponuntur nomina Imperatoris, & conſulum: & ſecundum ius Canonicum, loco illorum, ponuntur nomina Papae, & Epiſcopi. 2.9.4. lib. & ibi no. gl. 1. per Archi.
                  
                  According to the Ciuill lawe, in a libell of accuſation, the names are put of the Emperor, and of the Conſuls: & according to the Canon law, in ſtead of thē the names are put of the Pope & of the byſhop.
                  
                     15 And it was permitted him to giue a ſpirite vnto the Image of the beast, ſo that the Image of the beast ſhould ſpeake, and ſhould cauſe that as many as would not worſhip the Image of the beaſt ſhould be killed.
                  Euery bodie Politique, and euerie ſtate that is eſtabliſhed to continue amongeſt men, liue by their lawes and conſtitutions. Inſomuch that lawes are rightly tearmed, the life of the common wealth. And in al well ordered common wealthes theſe lawes are made, and ordained by the aſſent of the moſt parte of the inhabitants and members of the ſame. For as in the naturall bodie of lyuing creatures, out of an harmonie, and conſent of euerie part and member, there reſulteth a certaine vitall ſpirite and vigor, that giueth life and motion to the whole bodie, and ſo long continueth the ſame in good health and eſtate, as it enioyeth free and vninterrupted paſſage into euerie part and member thereof. So in the bodie politicke of common wealthes, and eſtates, out of a conſent and agreement, of the partes and members therof: there are produced lawes and ordinances, which giue life and ſtrength vnto the common wealth: and ſo long continue the good eſtate, and proſperitie thereof, as they enioye by their thorough execution, free and cleare paſſage, into euery part and member of the ſame. And as in monarchies

and abſolute gouernments, the lawes obtaine no force or vigor till they receaue the ſame, by the royall aſſent of the Prince and ſoueraigne: ſo the Romaine church being framed and faſhioned to the Image and imitation of the Romaine Empire, and thereby a monarchie: whereof the Pope is ſoueraigne and chiefe: hath no life, ſtrength or force, in her lawes and decrees, vntill ſhee receaue the ſame by the ſoueraigne aſſent of the Pope: which he yeelding, thereby giueth life and ſpirite to the image of the beaſt.
                  So that the image of the beaſt can ſpeake and cauſe that as many as will not worſhippe the Image of the beast, ſhal be killed.
                  That is, the church of Rome can by her lawes & decrees, pronounce and commande, that as manie as will not worſhippe, honour, and obey her, ſhall be killed and deſtroyed with fire and ſworde, from the face of the earth.
                  
                     
                        16 And he made all both ſmal and great, rich and poore, free and bond, to receaue a marke in their right hand, or in their foreheades.
                     
                        17 And that none might buye or ſell, ſaue he that had the marke, or the name of the beaſt, or the number of his name.
                  
                  This marke or name of the beaſt, or the number of his name, wee finde in the next verſe, to be 666. which number Ireneus in his 5. booke, and 25. chapter, noteth to be contained in this word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . For if the letters therof be numbered, which are all numerall: it containeth perfectly that account of ſixe hundred ſixtie ſixe.
                  
                     
                        
                           Λ
                           30
                        
                        
                           Α
                           1
                        
                        
                           Τ
                           300
                        
                        
                           Ε
                           5
                        
                        
                           Ι
                           10
                        
                        
                           Ν
                           50
                        
                        
                           Ο
                           70
                        
                        
                           Σ
                           200
                        
                        
                           666.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     This moſt auncient obſeruation of Ireneus who had both ſeene Policarpus, and ben ſcholer vnto Papias, who were both diſciples vnto Saint Iohn: may giue vs very great light for the vnderſtanding of this place: which ſignifieth vnto vs that in the Romaine church, which is the ſeate and kingdome of Antichriſt: neither ſmall, nor great, rich nor poore, free nor bonde, that is no kinde or ſorte of people may without this marke, buy or ſell: that is to ſay, praye vnto God, or prayſe God. For when wee pray vnto him, we doe as it were buy with our prayers, that at his hande that we would haue. Hereof it is that God councelleth the church of Laodicea, to buye of him golde tryed with the fire, that is to praye vnto him for the gift of conſtancie & ſtrength of faith: which may endure the fire of aduerſitie and perſecution. But when we prayſe God, we doe as it were, ſell vnto him for his goodnes, that which he would haue: therfore ſaith Dauid in 50. Pſalme. Offer vnto God thankeſgiuing, and againe in the perſon of God: who ſo offereth me thankes and prayſe, he honoreth me: but neither pray vnto God, nor prayſe God, that is neither buye nor ſell, might they in the Romaine church, of what nation ſoeuer they were, vnleſſe they had this marke, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : that is the latine tongue, either in their foreheade, or in their right hande: that is eyther by rule, or by rote: eyther in their minde or in their booke, either by memorie or by reading.
                  
                     18 Here is wiſedome, let him that hath wit count the number of the beaſt: for it is the number of a man, and his number is. 666.
                  
                  It is verie cleare that this number is maruelous miſticall, and therefore it requireth wiſdome before it can thoroughly be ſearched and diſsiphered. Irenaeus
                     
his obſeruation we haue aboue noted, in the word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . He alſo findeth the ſame number in the word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      whiche ſignifieth the Sunne, and that howe the former worde agreed vnto Antichriſte, we haue a little before declared.
                  
                     
                        
                           Τ
                           300
                        
                        
                           Ε
                           5
                        
                        
                           Ι
                           10
                        
                        
                           Τ
                           300
                        
                        
                           Α
                           1
                        
                        
                           Ν
                           50
                        
                        
                           666
                        
                     
                  
                  How this appertaineth vnto him Gregory the ninth in his decretals doth teach vs: in the title de Maioritate & Obedientia. in theſe wordes. Praeterea noſce debueras, quod fecit Deus duo magna luminaria in firmamento coeli: luminare maius vt praeeſſet diei, & luminare minus vt praeeſſet nocti vtrumque magnum, ſed alterum maius. Ad firmamentum igitur coeli, hoc eſt vniuerſalis Eccleſiae fecit Deus duo magna luminaria: id est duas inſtituit dignitates, quae ſunt pontificialis authoritas, & regalis poteſtas. Sed illa quae praeeſt diebus, id eſt ſpiritualibus, maior eſt: quae vero carnalibus, minor: vt quanta est inter ſolem & lunam, tanta inter Pontifices & reges differentia cognoſcatur. Heereupon the gloſe ſaith, Cum terra igitur ſit ſepties maior Luna, Sol autem octies eſt maior terra, restat vt Pontificalis dignitas quadrageſies ſepties ſit maior dignitate regali.
                  
                  
                     Haymo byſhop of Alberſtaten in an expoſition vppon the Reuelation (he liued about the yeare of our Lord 840.) beſids the words before alleadged, noteth the greeke wordes, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . The Gothick worde Genſerikos: and the latine worde Diclux, each of them contayning that number of 666. I wil not heere diſcuſſe how right Greek theſe words are: only I will laye them downe as I finde them, & ſo particularly conſider of them.
                  
                     
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſaith Haymo ſignifieth in Greke Honori contrarius, and contayneth the number of 666. So that whoſoeuer is moſt contrary to the honor of god and honor of princes, he is this 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . that is, honori contrarius.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Α
                           1
                        
                        
                           Ν
                           50
                        
                        
                           Τ
                           200
                        
                        
                           Ε
                           5
                        
                        
                           Μ
                           40
                        
                        
                           Ο
                           70
                        
                        
                           Σ
                           200
                        
                        
                           666
                        
                     
                  
                  But how is more contrary to the honor of God, then he that diminiſheth the glorye of God & he that (the ſcripture teacheth vs, the beginning of our ſaluation to bee from the grace of God: the ſubſtance of our ſaluation to conſiſt in the righteouſneſſe of Chriſt: and the ende of our ſaluation to bee referred to the glorye of God.) profeſſeth farre otherwiſe, yeelding parte of the beginning to the power of nature: parte of the ſubſtance, to the merits of man: part of the ende, to the honor of creatures.
                  This is he that permitteth himſelfe to bee called DOMINVS DEVS PAPA.
                  
                  That imparteth vnto manye the honor due vnto God alone: that treadeth vppon the neck of Emperors, that inſulteth vppon kings, that diſpoſeth of Empires and kingdomes: that iudgeth all men, and is iudged by none: That whatſoeuer he doeth, no man may ſay vnto him, Domine cur ita facis? That cō
                     taineth all lawes within the cheaſt of his breſt, That holdeth for a ſufficient reaſon of his doings
Stet pro ratione voluntas
                  
                  That taketh the Emperor for his ſteward, his bailiffe and his man: That ſaith, Omne ius Regum pendet à Papa. This is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . and this is Antichriſt Prince of the whole world.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſaith Haymo is interpreted Nego: And beeing accompted according to the greeke letters, beeing all numerall: make vppe the iuſt number of ſixe hundred

ſixtie and ſixe. the accompt falleth out euen.
                  
                     
                        
                           Α
                           1
                        
                        
                           Ρ
                           100
                        
                        
                           Ν
                           50
                        
                        
                           Ο
                           70
                        
                        
                           Υ
                           400
                        
                        
                           Μ
                           40
                        
                        
                           Ε
                           9
                        
                        
                           666
                        
                     
                  
                  But the worde thus written hardly receueth that interpretation. Wherefore I take it rather to bee the three firſt ſillabls of the word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      which ſignifieth Negans The miſterie wherof S. Iohn expoundeth vnto vs in his firſt epiſtle, the ſecond chapter the 23. verſe.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     Quis eſt mendax, niſi qui neg at Ieſum eſſe Chriſtum, hic eſt Antichristus: Who is a lyar but hee that denieth Ieſus to be Chriſt, he is Antichriſt. Our Lord Ieſus is tearmed Chriſt, that is to ſaye, the annointed, in two reſpects: the one, for that he is the chiefe prince the other, for that hee is the cheefe preiſt, and Prophet. As chiefe prince he ſitteth at the right hande of the father, till his enemies be made his footeſtoole: gouerning the godly with his ſpirit, and the wicked with a rod of iron. As chiefe preiſt, he is a preiſt for euer, after the order of Melchiſedech, hauing nether ſucceſſor nor coadiutor, who needeth not often to offer himſelfe as the highpreiſt of the Iewes, who went yeerlye to the ſanctuary with other blood: for with one oblation, hath hee conſecrated for euer, thoſe that are ſanctified, whiche ſanctification wee haue by the oblatiō of the body of Chriſt, once made which ſacrifice for ſinnes being offered, he ſitteth for euer at the right hand of God. In reſpect of which ſacrifice God promiſeth that he wil forgiue vs our ſins and put our iniquities out of his remembrance. Now where remiſsion of ſinnes is, there is no more offering for ſinnes: and ſo conſequentlye no ſacrificing preiſthoode: that function hauing bene abſolutelye performed by Chriſt Ieſus.
                  
                     But the Biſhop of Rome eſtabliſhing a ſacrificing preiſthoode, and an offering for all actual ſins, by the ſacrifice of the maſſe: denyeth Ieſus to be that annointed, and eternall preiſt, according to the order of Melchiſedech, Who by one ſacrifice vppon the aultar of the croſſe hath obtayned ſuch a perfect remiſsion of ſinnes, aſwell actuall, as originall: that there may be no farther or future oblation or ſacrifice for ſinnes.
                  
                     
                        Cap. 10. v. 13. For to repeate the ſaying of the Apoſtle in his epiſtle to the Hebrewes, the tenth chapter. Where remiſsion of ſinnes is, there may bee no more offering for ſinne. And againe, when they teache theſe two propoſitions, the one deuiſed by Pope Boniface, the other by Pope Sixtus. Deus aſsumpſit Petrum in conſortium indiuiduae trinitatis: at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ab eo tanquam a capite, dona ſua omnia in corpus tranſfundit. God hath aſſumed Peter into the fellowſhip of the indiuiſible trinitie: and from him as from a head, powreth all his giftes into the bodie: and that Diuus Petrus habitat in Pontifice Romano: Sainct Peter dwelleth in the Romain byſhop. By reaſon whereof hee is that Melchiſedech, for he is the head of all byſhops, whoſe preiſthoode none other is to compare with: from whom they all growe,Durandus as members doe grow from the heade, and of whoſe fulneſſe they all receaue.
                  And moreouer affirme: Eccleſiam eſſe vnam, non propter Christum,
                     Roffenſis 
                     ſed propter Papam, qui eam conſeruat vnam. That the church is one, not in reſpect of Chriſt but in reſpect of the Pope, that keepeth it in one. Do they not vtterly ouerthrow al that in them lyeth, the functions of Chriſts annointing: who is both the cheife preiſt and prince of his church. Being the head thereof, as of a miſticall bodie, which receaueth frō him by the influence of his grace ſpirituall life, and
vigor. His mercie wiſedome and prouidence ſpreading themſelues, both generally throughout the whole, and particulerly into euery member thereof. Wherby both the vnitie & felicity therof is wrought and eſtabliſhed.
                  But they that deny vnto him or attribut vnto any other the functions of his annointing: deny him to be Chriſt. By this therefore we may ſee who is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Who is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Who is Antichriſt.
                  
                     Genſericos, ſaith Haymo, ſignifieth in the Gothicke tongue, Gentium ſeductor, the ſeducer of the gentils: & in eo eſt Antichriſtus, chriſto contrarius, quod iſte ſeductor ille vero dicitur gentium ſaluator. And in this is antichriſt contrary vnto Chriſt: That the one is the ſeducer the other is the ſauiour of the gentils. This woorde he reconeth in Greeke letters, and ſo maketh it vp the number of 666.
                  
                     thus
                     
                        
                           Γ
                           3
                        
                        
                           Ε
                           5
                        
                        
                           Ν
                           50
                        
                        
                           Σ
                           200
                        
                        
                           Η
                           8
                        
                        
                           Π
                           100
                        
                        
                           Ι
                           10
                        
                        
                           Κ
                           20
                        
                        
                           Ο
                           70
                        
                        
                           Σ
                           200
                        
                        
                           666
                        
                     
                  
                  Who this ſeducer of the Gentiles is, wee maye well perceaue by that which is ſaid before, no doubt it is he of whom the Prophet Zachary ſpeaketh, Immediatly after the paſsion of Chriſt, when as the Gentils had receaued the faith, and the ſinagogue was diſſolued.
                  
                     Ecce ego ſuſcītabo Paſtorem in terra, ſucciſa non viſitabit, aetate tenerum non quaeret, & contritum non ſanabit,
                     
                        Zach. 11.12 
                     ſtantem non ſuſtentabit, & carnem pinguis comedet, & vn gulas eorum abrumpet. Vae paſtori vano derelictori pecoris, gladius ſuper brachium eius, & ſuper oculum dextrum eius brachium eius areſcendo areſcet, & oculus dexter eius caligando caligabit. Forlo (ſaith the Lord) I will raiſe vp a ſhepheard in the land, which ſhal not looke for the thing that is loſte, nor ſeeke the tender lambes, nor heale that that is hurt, nor ſuſtaine that that ſtandeth

vp: but he ſhall eate the fleſhe of the fatte, and teare their clawes in pieces: Oh idle ſhephearde that leaueth the flock. The ſwoord ſhal bee vppon his arme, and vppon his right eye: his arme ſhall be clean dried vp, & his right eye ſhal be vtterly darkened: This is Genſericos, gentium ſeductor, the ſeducer, an Idoll ſhepheard of the Gentiles.
                  The Latine wordes DIC LVX (that is ſay light) as it is noted by Haymo, containe alſo the ſame number of ſixe hundred ſixty and ſixe, and are not voide of eſpeciall demonſtration.
                  
                     
                        
                           D
                           500
                        
                        
                           I
                           1
                        
                        
                           C
                           100
                        
                        
                           L
                           50
                        
                        
                           V
                           5
                        
                        
                           X
                           10
                        
                        
                           666
                        
                     
                  
                  For the Pope although his kingdome and religion be nothing els then darkeneſſe and ignorance, yet wil he haue men to beleeue and profeſſe, that with him, and his is the truth: and the light.
                  And though men ſee it to bee darkeneſſe, yet ſay it to bee light. Yea and that hee is the ſunne that ſhineth in the firmament of the Churche: and the Lampe that giueth light vnto men.
                  Therefore Cornelius Byſhop of Bitonto (wel acquainted as it ſeameth with the Popes humor heerein) in an oration of his at the laſte councell of Trent vſed this ſpeach.
                  Papa lux venit in mundum, ſed dilexerunt homines tenebras, magis quam lucem.
                  The Pope beeing the light, came into the world, but men loued the darkeneſſe better then the light. It ſeameth he had learned this Leſſon DIC LVX: let him learne this withall: it is 666.
                  The later writers doe note the ſame number in ſundrie other woordes, both in Hebrewe & greek, In Hebrew in the wordes
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  In the Greeke in the words 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  Wee will conſider of euery of theſe as wee did of the former, that we may ſee how they accorde both in number and in ſenſe.
                  תרומהיה
                  In the Hebrewe tongue ſignifieth a ſacrafice and eleuation vnto God. Sanctus Pagninus in his dictionarye called Theſaurus linguae ſanctae, vnder the verbe 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : expoundeth it thus, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Eſt oblatio ſic appellata quod ſur ſum & deorſum moueatur & eleuetur.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           ת
                           400
                        
                        
                           ר
                           200
                        
                        
                           ו
                           6
                        
                        
                           מ
                           40
                        
                        
                           ה
                           5
                        
                        
                           י
                           10
                        
                        
                           ה
                           5
                        
                        
                           666
                        
                     
                  
                  It is a ſacrifice ſo called becauſe of the eleuation and motion of it vpp and downe. And this it ſeameth he obſerued out of Dauid Kimchi, one of the moſt learned Rabbins of the Hebrewes
                  This interpretation layeth downe before our eyes the very action of the ſacrifice of the Maſſe. For there is a ſacrifice vnto God.
                  For they ſay their oblation and ſacrifice conſiſteth of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt whom they offer vnto God. There is alſo an eleuation, and a motion ſurſum & deorſum vp and downe. So that this in the hebrewe expreſſeth that in the Greeke which we laſt noted 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . The Popiſh maſſe. So that the one may very well ſtand for the interpretation of the other: and both as we may ſee, the one after the numerall letters of the hebrewe: the other of the Greeke, make vp the iuſt number of ſixe hundred ſixtie and ſixe.
                  
                     
                        
                           Η
                           8
                        
                        
                           Μ
                           40
                        
                        
                           Ι
                           10
                        
                        
                           Σ
                           200
                        
                        
                           Σ
                           200
                        
                        
                           Α
                           1
                        
                        
                           Η
                           8
                        
                        
                           Π
                           80
                        
                        
                           Α
                           1
                        
                        
                           Π
                           80
                        
                        
                           Ι
                           10
                        
                        
                           Κ
                           20
                        
                        
                           Η
                           8
                        
                        
                           666
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The other Hebrew words 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      are to receaue their accompt according to the numerall letters of the Greek as the former Gothick words of Haymo likewiſe did. And as the Latine words Eccleſia Italica alſo do▪
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           Β
                           2
                        
                        
                           Ε
                           5
                        
                        
                           Ν
                           50
                        
                        
                           Η
                           8
                        
                        
                           Σ
                           200
                        
                        
                           Α
                           1
                        
                        
                           Υ
                           400
                        
                        
                           666
                        
                     
                  
                  Theſe hebrew wordes ſignifie the ſonne of Eſau, who otherwiſe was called Aedom, of whome came the Aedomyts,Gen. 36. & 35
                      ſo that the ſoone of Eſau is as muche to ſay, as a chiefe of the Edomits
                  
                     Iacob alſo was called Iſraell, and of him it is that God often calleth his faithfull and choſen, Iacob his inheritaunce, and his people Iſrael. As then Edom hated Iſrael, ſo ſhall the Edomits, the Iſraelits, that is the reprobate ſhall abhor the godly, The limbes of Antichriſt, ſhall afflict the members of Chriſt. The Papiſts which are the Aedomites, ſhall perſecute the true Chriſtians: which are the Iſraelits. Now he that is the chiefe of the Edomits, he is this 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      whoſe name containeth the number of 666: Whom together with his whole faction he ſhal deſtroy and aboliſh that is called faithfull & true: and iudgeth & fighteth righteouſly, whoſe eyes are as a flame of fire, and vppon whoſe head there are many crownes, who is clothed with a garment dipt in blood, and whoſe name is the worde of God Out of whoſe mouth, goeth out a ſharpe ſworde, that with it he may ſmite the heathen: for he ſhal rule them with a rod of iron: For he is that treadeth the winpreſſe, of the fiercenes of the wrathe of God, and vppon his garment, and vppon his thigh a name written, the King of Kings, and L. of Lords.
                  
                  If wee will knowe howe his garment is dipt in blood,Eſvy 66.
                      the Prophet Eſay will tell vs in his threeſcore and ſixt chap. that it is ſprinckled with the blood of the Edomits.
                  
                     VVho is this that commeth from Edom? VVith redde

garmentes from Boſra? He is glorious in his apparell: and walketh in his great ſtrength. I ſpeake in righteouſneſſe, and am mightie to ſaue. Wherefore is thine apparell redde, and thy garmentes like him that treadeth in the winepreſſe? I haue troden the wine preſſe alone, and of all people there was none with me. For I will tread them in mine anger: and tread them vnder foote in my wrath, and their bloud ſhall be ſprinckled on my garmentes, and I will ſtaine all my rayment: for the day of vengeance is in my heart, and the yeere of my Redeemer is come.
                  
                  Thus the Prophet intimateth the glorious comming of our Lorde & Sauiour to the laſt iudgement: to the confuſion of Edom: and comfort of Iſrael. But hereof we ſhall note more vppon the two laſt verſes of the next chapter.
                  The other wordes that containe this number of 666. as Eccleſia Italica, the Italian or Romaine Church 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      an euill prieſtly or Eccleſiaſticall gouernment or power, and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . I am God vpon the earth, accompliſh that account in this ſort.
                  
                     
                        
                            
                            
                            
                            
                           Θ
                           9
                        
                        
                           Ε
                           5
                           Ι
                           10
                           Ε
                           5
                        
                        
                           Κ
                           20
                           Ε
                           5
                           Ο
                           70
                        
                        
                           Κ
                           20
                           Π
                           100
                           Σ
                           200
                        
                        
                           Λ
                           30
                           Ο
                           70
                           Ε
                           5
                        
                        
                           Η
                           8
                           Κ
                           20
                           Ι
                           10
                        
                        
                           Σ
                           200
                           Ρ
                           100
                           Μ
                           40
                        
                        
                           Ι
                           10
                           Α
                           1
                           Ι
                           10
                        
                        
                           Α
                           1
                           Τ
                           300
                           Ε
                           5
                        
                        
                           Ι
                           10
                           Ι
                           10
                           Π
                           80
                        
                        
                           Τ
                           300
                           Α
                           1
                           Ι
                           10
                        
                        
                           Α
                           1
                           Κ
                           20
                           Γ
                           3
                        
                        
                           Λ
                           30
                           Α
                           1
                           Α
                           1
                        
                        
                           Ι
                           10
                           Κ
                           20
                           Ι
                           10
                        
                        
                           Κ
                           20
                           Η
                           8
                           Η
                           8
                        
                        
                           Α
                           1
                            
                            
                           Σ
                           200
                        
                        
                           666
                           666
                           666
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The interpretation hereof is nothing difficult. The firſt which is Eccleſia Italica, ſeu Romana, ſignifieth the Italian or Romaine church. The ſeconde expreſſeth his gouernement: that is, Pontifex maximus, the cheife Byſhoppe, & Summus Sacerdos, and higheſt prieſt, qui plenitudinem obtinet poteſtatis, who hath obtayned the fulneſſe of power: cui in ijs quae vult, eſt pro ratione voluntas, vnto whom in what him liſt, his will, ſtandeth for reaſon, as his Canoniſtes deliuer. And the thirde is a myſterie by them alſo in theſe wordes layde open, Dominus Deus Papa, the Lorde God the Pope.
                  Thus in this charecter of 666. wee ſee contayned, the countrie, the language, the pryde, the tyrannie, the doctrine, the gouernment, the function, the impiety, and the blaſphemie of Antichriſt, which are euerie of them ſpeciallie: and all of them onely appliable to the Byſhops of Rome.
                  It reſteth that we further conſider in what ſort it is tearmed the number of a man: for ſo it is layde downe in the text.
                  
                     It is the number of a man, and his number is ſixe hundred ſixtie ſixe.
                  
                  For the better vnderſtanding hereof, we are to obſerue two thinges. Firſt, the matter handled in theſe three chapters, the 12. 13. and 14. Secondly the methode vſed and obſerued therein: the matter is the eſtate of the church of God from the byrth of Chriſt, to the end of the world: the byrth of Chriſt, the comfort that the church thereby had: Chriſtes conqueſtes, by his paſsion: his glorious aſcention, the malice and endeuour of Sathan: firſt againſt Chriſt himſelfe, ſecondly againſt his church: thirdly againſt the members thereof, the perſecutions, and afflictions of the faithfull: the reſtauration

of the trueth: the decaye of falſhoode, and laſtly the glorification of the godly, and condemnation of the wicked, at the finall iudgement. The methode is firſt a deſcription of the church of God, in the forme of a woman: out of whoſe wombe, Chriſt is borne. Sathan is deſcribed in the forme of a dragon: ſeeking to deuour this childe, which the church had brought foorth. Thirdly the aſcention of Chriſt is declared: and the perſecutions raiſed againſt the Churche, after Chriſtes aſcention. Fourthly Gods prouidence is layde downe, in preſeruing the vniuerſall church from ruyne: which was doone by three meanes: by the generall diſperſing of the church: by the two Teſtamentes, which preſerued the trueth of the doctrine: and by the mortalitie of the perſecutors. Fiftly Sathans endeuours are manifeſted againſt the members of the Church: when as hee ſawe that hee coulde not preuaile againſte the whole bodie, that hee might the more violentlye afflicte the members, hee vſeth principally two inſtrumentes: the firſt the Romaine Empire, the ſeconde the Popedome. The Romaine Empire is deſcribed in the forme of a beaſt moſt vglye, and cruell. The pryde and proceedinges thereof are layde downe: and alſo the decaye, which was wrought by another beaſt, that hadde two hornes like the Lambe: but ſpake like the Dragon. Which by the iuſt iudgement of God, partly by fraude, partly by force inuaded the greatneſſe, and authoritie of the former, and ſo brought it to ruine, which other beaſt is the Popedome, whoſe pride and tyranny, is likewiſe declared: and finally the fall thereof, which is wrought by the reſtauration of the puritie of the doctrine: by the woorde of God, and ſhall

throughly be accompliſhed by Chriſtes comming in iudgement. And this is it that Saint Paule teacheth vs,Paul. 2. Theſ. 2.3.8.
                      that the man of ſinne the ſonne of perdition, ſhall bee conſumed by the ſpirite of the Lordes mouth: and aboliſhed by the brightneſſe of his comming. Nowe the next verſe which is the firſt of the next chapter, beginneth to expreſſe the reſtauration of the doctrine. Chriſt manifeſting himſelfe in his Church in mount Sion, accompaned with thoſe whome the former perſecutions of the Romaine Empire and Popedome, had conſecrated as martyres vnto him, and ſendeth an Angell with an euerlaſting Goſpell, to preach vnto them that dwell vppon the earth: to euerie nation, and kindred, and tongue and people: which verſe beginneth thus:
                  
                     Then I looked and loe a Lambe ſtoode on mount Sion, &c. Which intimateth this muche vnto vs: that when that man ſhall come whoſe name ſhall be ſixe hundred ſixtie and ſixe. If it be wittily accounted: that then Chriſt ſhall manifeſt himſelfe: that then the euerlaſting Goſpel ſhalbe preached to them that dwell vppon the earth: that then the puritie of doctrine ſhalbe reſtored: that then the will, and word of God,Re. cap. 14. verſ. 7.8.
                      ſhall be publiſhed: by the which Babylon ſhall fall, and the popedome bee waſted and conſumed.
                  Theſe circumſtances do leade vs to Paulus tertius, whoſe name being well accompted, contayneth this number of ſixe hundred ſixtie ſixe, if wee alter the numerall letters to Arithmeticall figures, and reacon it thereafter, thus:
                  PAVLVS. III. 555 111.
                  
                     For Paulus containeth three numerall letters. vz. VLV. the firſte V is 5. the L and V is 55. which layd downe arithmeticallye thus 555. is fiue hundred fifty and fiue: then III which in numerall letters ſignifieth the thid in arithmeticall account is one hundred and eleuen. And both theſe numbers, holde an equall proportion, as one, ten, a hundred, fiue, fifty, fiue hundred: which both ſummes being added together, do make vp a third number of the ſame proportion, which is 666.
                  In the time of this Pope, the Goſpell began to take roote: in many countries ſundry learned men, both by wordes and writinges, preaching and profeſsing the ſinceritie and truth of the doctrine. For the ſuppreſsing wherof, in this Popes tyme the councell of Trent was aſſembled, and no practiſe omitted by confederacies, leagues, and complattes to withſtand the progreſſe of the truth, and to perſecute the profeſſors thereof: but ſo had Gods goodnes ordayned thinges, that now the riuer of Euphrates was dryed vp: that the way of the kinges of the Eaſt might be prepared, Euphrates the glory, & ſtrength of Babylon: the power and authoritye of Rome, was ſo decayed, by the euil opinion, that many princes and potentates iuſtly conceiued of it, that the way of the kinges of the Eaſt was thereby prepared.
                  So that as at the birth of Chriſt there came wyſe men out of the Eaſt vnto Hieruſalem to worſhippe him: falling downe before him, and preſentinge vnto him their giftes, of golde, incenſe, and myrhe. Euen ſo at the ſecond birth (as it were) of Chriſt by the reſtitution of the true doctrine, manye noble, wiſe and learned men (who by alluſion to the former ſtorie) are tearmed kinges of the Eaſte: embraſed the Goſpell, fell downe and worſhipped Chriſt,

and beſtowed the talents, of their power, learninge wiſedome, iudgement, and induſtrie, vnto his glorye and aduauncement of his truth.
                  In this Popes time the ſocietie of the Ieſuits, was conſtituted, and ordayned: hauing added to their vowes of ſingle lyfe and pouertie, the vowe of obeydience to a chiefe head, and principall preſident, cui omnes in terris tanquam Chriſto parerent: cuius in verba iurarent, & cuius ſibi nutum, & voluntatem, instar diuini cuiuſdam oraculi ducerent. This gouernour was as it were their chiefe prophet: and they as the children of the prophets. To theſe three vowes, they ioyned a fourth: which is, that whether ſo euer the Biſhop of Rome ſhall pleaſe to ſend them: thether without any gayneſaying, without any rewarde, or allowance ſought towardes their iorney, they muſt immediately go. Whereupon this Pope enlarged their ſocietye with his priueledges, firſte to the number of threeſcore, and afterwardes vpon experience of their faithfull ſeruice vnto him, he made it ſans number.
                  Theſe Ieſuites are the three or threeſcore or many folde ſpirites or frogges, that come out of the mouth of the Dragon, that is by the direction of the deuill, out of the mouth of the beaſt, that is by the direction of the Pope, and out of the mouth of the falſe Prophet, that is by the direction of their prepoſite, or preſident: For they are the ſpirites of deuils, that is to ſay, deuilliſh voyde of all trueth and charitie, which worke miracles, by their hypocriſy illuſions and oſtentation of learning, and go to the kinges of the earth, and of the whole worlde, whether ſoeuer it pleaſeth the Pope to ſende them, to gather them to the battaile of the great day of god almightye: that is to moue them to the affliction, and perſecution

of the true chriſtians: in the which they ſhall confederate, band, & combine themſelues by theſe mens perſwaſions, but ſhall be deſtroyed, vanquiſhed, and ouerthrowne, in the middeſt of their miſchiuous enterpriſes, by the omnipotent power of God.
                  Thus hauing declared by theſe premiſes how this miſticall number, is the number of a man whoſe number is 666. we will here impoſe an ende, to the interpretation of this thirtenth chapter: onelye adding this much, that Paulus tertius, in whoſe name this accompt, and number is contained, was a man, euen in his owne time charged, with extortion & ſacriledge, with adulterie and inceſt, with murther and parricide: with negromancie and coniuration. The particularities whereof are plainely expreſſed, in the xxi. booke of Sleidans commentaries, towardes the ende of the yeare 1549. whereby hee ſeemeth a man not vnmeete in whoſe name this miſticall number and periode of Papall proſperitye ſhould be accompliſhed. As for the meanes of the Popedomes farther fall, and finally of the vtter ſubuerſion thereof: the next chapter which is the fourtenth, will moſt manifeſtlye laye it open vnto vs.
               
               
                  CHAP. 14.
                  
                     
                        
                           1 Then I looked, and lo, a lambe ſtoode on mount Sion, and with him, an hundreth, fortie and foure thouſand, hauing his fathers name written on their foreheads.
                        
                           2 And I heard a voyce from heauen, as the ſounde of manye waters, and as the ſounde of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers, harping with their harpes.
                        
                           
                           3 And they ſung as it were a newe ſong before the throne, and before the foure beaſtes, and the elders, and no man could learne that ſong, but the hundreth forty & foure thouſand which were bought from the earth.
                        
                           4 Theſe are they, which are not defiled with women: for they are virgins: theſe follow the lambe whether ſo euer he goeth: theſe are bought from men, being the firſt fruites vnto God and vnto the lambe.
                        
                           5 And in their mouthes was found no guyle, for they are without ſpot before the throne of God.
                        
                           6 Then I ſaw an other Angell flye in the middeſt of heauen, hauing an euerlaſting Goſpell, to preach vnto them, that dwell on the earth, and to euery nation, and kinred, & tongue, and people.
                        
                           7 Saying with a loude voyce feare God, and giue glorie to him: for the houre of his iudgements is come: and worſhip him that made heauen and the earth, and the ſea, and the fountaines of waters.
                        
                           8 And there followed an other Angel, ſaying it is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great City: for ſhee made all nations to drinke of the wine, of the wrath of her fornication.
                        
                           9 And the third Angell followed them, ſaying with a loude voyce, if any man worſhip the beaſt and his Image, and receaue his marke in his forehead or on his hand.
                        
                           10 The ſame ſhall drinke, of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure wine, which is poured into the cuppe of his wrath, and he ſhall be tormented in fire and brimſtone before the holy Angels, and before the lambe.
                        
                           11 And the ſmoke of their torment ſhall aſcend euermore: and they ſhall haue no reſt day nor night, which worſhip the beaſt and his Image, and whoſoeuer receaueth the print of his name.
                        
                           12 Here is the patience of Sainctes: here are they that keepe the Commandements of God, and the faith of Ieſus.
                        
                           
                           13 Then I heard a voyce from heauen ſaying vnto me, write, Bleſſed are the dead, which hereafter dye in the Lord: Euen ſo ſaith the ſpirite for they reſt from their labours, & their workes follow them.
                        
                           14 And I looked, and behold, a white cloud, & vpon the cloude, one ſitting like vnto the ſonne of man, hauing on his head a golden crowne, and in his hand a ſharpe ſickle.
                        
                           15 And another Angell came out of the temple crying with a loud voyce, to him that ſat on the Cloude, thruſt in thy ſickle, and reape: for the time is come to reape: for the harueſt of the earth is ripe.
                        
                           16 And he that ſate on the Cloude, thruſt in his ſickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped.
                        
                           17 Then another Angell came out of the Temple, which is in heauen, hauing alſo a ſharpe ſickle.
                        
                           18 And another angel came out frō the altar, which had power ouer fire, & cryed with a loude crie to him that had the ſharpe ſickle, & ſaid, thruſt in thy ſharpe ſickle, & gather the cluſters of the vineyarde of the earth, for her grapes are ripe.
                        
                           19 And the angel thruſt in his ſharpe ſickle on the earth & cut downe the vines of the vineyard of earth and caſt them into the great winepreſſe of the wrath of God.
                        
                           20 And the winepreſſe was troden without the citie and bloud came out of the winepreſſe, vnto the horſe bridles by the ſpace of a thouſand & ſixe hundred furlonges.
                     
                  
                  
                     O Thou lambe of God that takeſt away the ſinnes of the world, thou lamb that ſtandeſt on mount Sion in the heauenly Ieruſalem, the Church triumphant, with an hundred, forty, and foure thouſand, twelue times twelue thouſand, hauing thy fathers name written in their foreheads, euen with all thy faithfull and elect whom thou haſt taken out of the miſerie of this world out of error and ignorance, and eſpeciallye

thoſe whom thou haſt deliuered out of the thraldome and oppreſsion of the olde Romaine empire, and the Image thereof the new Romaine Church, and haſt bleſſed with thy Fathers name with eternall glorye and felicitye, whom with thy precious bloud thou haſt bought from the earth, from ſinne and corruption, and haſt ſo endued with thy ſpirite and grace that they were not defiled with women, with the errors and ſuperſtitions of particular churches, but kept the virginitye of their doctryne and fayth within thy catholycke church pure and ſincere, and haſte aduaunced to euerlaſtyng bliſſe, and made the fyrſte fruites vnto GOD, faythfull and ſpotleſſe before the throne of his Maieſtye, wee yeelde thee moſte humble hartye, and duetifull thankes, that it hath pleaſed thee to ſend thy meſſengers, miniſters and preachers into the militant church, to preach & publiſh thy euerlaſting Goſpell, which the might & miſtes of Babylon had longe Concealed and obſcured, vnto them that dwell on the earth, and to euery nation and kinred, and tongue, and people, teaching vs to feare God, and geue glory vnto him, and not to feare the power and might of Antichriſt nor his fyerce and furious thunderboltes of curſes and excommunications, nor to glorify and magnifie that man of ſinne and childe of perdition, but to glorifye God, the honour of whoſe iudgement is come to conſume the kingdome of Antichriſt, with the ſpirit of his mouth, and to worſhip thy heauenly father and thee his eternall worde and wiſedome which haſt made heauen and earth and the ſea, and the fountaynes of waters, and not to worſhippe ſtockes and ſtones, Images and Idols the babes and abhominations of Babylon. We yeeld the alſo moſt

humble and feruent thankes, that with this thy heauenlye doctrine and ſpirite of thy mouth, thou haſt ouerthrowne the towres of Babell, the might and maieſtye of the Romiſh Sinagoge, that wee maye truelye, and reioycinglye ſay, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great Cittie that made all nations drunken with Idolatrye and ſuperſtition euen with the name of her falſe doctrine wherin God in his wrath ſuffered her to ſolace her ſelfe, and to commit idolatrie, which is ſpirituall fornication. We beſeech thee good Lord more and more, to conſume her, and ſhortlye to aboliſh her with thy moſte glorious comming, and in the meane tyme O Lord thunder into the innermoſte eare of the deafe papiſtes, the threatninges of thy thirde Aungell, that if any man worſhip Antichriſt, & his romiſh church made to the Image and repreſentation of the olde Romayne Empire and receaue his Character or doctrine in his forehead and in his hande, that is in his fayth and practiſe, in his conceite and conuerſation to be both beleeued and boulſtered with his counſel and execution, the ſame ſhall drinke of the Wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure wine which is powred into the Cup of his wrath, and ſhal bee tormented in fire and brimſtone before the holy angels and before thee, and the ſmoke of their tormentes ſhall aſcende for euermore: That with the conſideration hereof they may be ſtrooken in conſcience, & harken vnto thy voyce: go out of her my people, that you be not partakers in her ſinnes, & that you receaue not of her plagues, and for that O Lorde, a tyme and ſpace is required for the vtter conſuming, of this hideous body of antichriſt, during the which he and his adherentes repining at thy trueth and iudgementes, with all rage and rancor, maligne

and perſecute thy choſen and faythfull: Indue vs O Lord with patience in all troubles and afflictions giue vs grace to keepe thy Commaundementes, and make vs feruent and fruitefull in thy fayth and what ſo euer euent, thou ſhalte giue vnto our troubles in this worlde, yea though it bee thy will, that the force, or furie of Antichriſt preuayle agaynſt the mortall bodyes and worldelye eſtate of our ſelues, or of our brethren, yet let that thy heauenlye voyce ſtyll recomforte our ſoules: Bleſſed are the dead which hereafter dye in the Lorde, euen ſo ſayth the Spirite, for they reſte from theyr laboures, and theyr workes followe them. Wee knowe and acknowledge O Lambe of eternall light, that with thee is true reſt voyde of labour, true life voyde of death, true felicitie voyde of all trouble and miſerie.
                  Wee knowe alſo that our workes, which thorow thy grace, we do according to thy wil go not before vs to make our way and paſſage into heauen, which thy bloud and merites only haue done, but that thither by thy great goodnes, and fauour they followe vs to receiue reward at thy bounteous and liberall hand.
                  Laſtlye, for that the tyme of thy fynall iudgement doth approach, and thy Aungels are ſhortly to be ſent to reape the harueſt of the earth and to cut downe the vynes of the vyneyarde thereof, endue vs O Lorde, with thy grace, inſtruct vs in thy trueth that as pure Corne wee maye bee gathered into the Barnes of thy euerlaſting bliſſe, and neither as tares, or wicked weedes bee throwne into the furnace of eternall fyre, nor as the vngratious grapes full of vyleneſſe, and vanytye, bee caſt into the Wnepreſſe of thy wrath, which ſhal be trode

without the citie, that is executed without thy kingdome: for without ſhalbe doggs and enchanters and whoremongers, and murtherers, and Idolaters, and whoſoeuer loueth or maketh lyes, & the bloud ſhall come euen to the horſe bridles, the tortures and tormentes, ſhall reach from the meaneſt man to the mightieſt monarch, & that for the ſpace of a 1600 furlonges, which is for euer and euer, for rightlye may that ſquare number of foure times foure intimate vnto vs eternitie. And ſyth O thou ſecond Adam, and reſtorer of mankind, thy church hath ſince thy natiuitie walked here on earth nowe neere ſixtene hundred yeres as it were 1600 furlongs, which is in hundreds of yeres proportionable to the time, that was betweene the firſt Adam, and the floud of Noe: ſtrike into our heartes with thy remembring ſpirite, a deepe impreſsion of thy comming, that it be not with vs, as in the days before the floud, wherin they did eate, and drinke, and marrie, and gaue in marriage, and knewe nothing till the flould came, and tooke them all away: but that caſting away all careleſnes and ſecuritie we may like wiſe and faithfull ſeruantes be founde watchfull, readie, and diligent in fulfilling of thy will, and doing of our duties, earneſtly praying and dayly expecting for thy comming, that thou our Lorde and maſter ſo finding vs, being the author and fountaine of all bleſſedneſſe mayſt truely make vs bleſſed. Come Lord Ieſus.
                  Let thy mightie hande and out ſtretched arme, O Lorde be ſtill our defence, thy mercy & louing kindnes in Ieſus Chriſt the deare ſonne our ſaluatiō, thy true and holy worde our inſtruction, thy grace and holy ſpirite our comfort and conſolation, vnto the ende and in the end.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Annotations.
            
               WHereas in the tenth verſe of the xiij Chapter, mention is made of a beast ryſing vppe out of the earth hauing two hornes like the Lambe, but ſpeaking like the Dragon, wee expounded the earth to be the Church militant, ſo taking it in the better part, as conferred and layde oppoſite to the ſea from whence the former beaſt did proceede, taking the ſea for gentiliſme and the earth for Chriſtianiſme. Jf it ſhall better pleaſe any to take the earth in that place in the worſer part, then doth it ſignifie corruption, ſuperſtition, terreſtriall appetites, and earthly conceiptes of heauenly matters, and in whether ſoeuer part the worde be interpreted, the deſignation of the perſon there expreſſed is the ſame and receiueth no alteration.
            Whereas in the thirde verſe of the xiij Chapter, there beeing mention made, that one of the ſeauen heades of the Romaine Empire was as it were wounded to death but the deadly wounde thereof was healed, we there expounde that heade to be Rome and Jtalie, and the wounde to bee ciuill warres, which interpretation is iuſtified by truth of hiſtorie, yet conſidering the courſe of this propheſie and the expoſition of the Angell in the xvij chapter in theſe wordes, the ſeauen heades are ſeauen hilles whereon the woman ſitteth, they are alſo ſeauen Kinges, fiue are fallen, one is, another is not yet come, and when hee commeth he ſhall continue but a ſhort time, and the beast that was, and is not, is the eight, and one of the ſeauen.
            We incline rather to this interpretation that followeth, and one of his heades was as it were wounded to death, and his deadlie wounde was healed. The ſeauen heades ſignified ſeauen Kinges, or ſoueraigne gouernours, that haue ruled, and borne chiefe authoritie within the citie of Rome. The first were Kinges, the ſeconde Conſulles, the thirde Dictators, the fourth decem viri, the fift were Tribunes Militare, the ſixt Romaine Emperours, the ſeuenth French Emperours, the head that had the deadly wound but was healed, was the ſixt: which receiued that wounde in the death of Iulius Caeſar and which wounde was twelue yeares after cured by Auguſtus for in Iulius Caeſar the Emperours beganne: and in him that heade had like to haue ended, but that the deadly wounde thereof was cured by Auguſtus as for the triumuirate it was no heade, but a 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                hauing iust in the deadly wound of the ſixt head, of theſe ſeauen heads, when Saint Iohn wrote this propheſie, fiue were fallen, that is the Kinges, Conſulles, Dictators, Decem viri, and Tribunes militare, one was which was the Romaine Emperours, an other was not yet come, that is the French Emperours. And when he came he was to continue but a ſhort time, it continued not the eight part of the time of the former, and the beaſt that was, that is the Popedome, which was prefigured in Aegypt and Babylon and is not, that is had not yet attayned to that power and authoritie, Is the eight, that

is the eight ſoueraigne, gouernour of Rome, and is one of the ſeauen that is to ſaye, Romaine Emperour, This Pope Boniface the eight well declared, when as in a great Iubilie at Rome, he went one day in his pontificall attire, as Romaine Byſhoppe, and the next day in his robes Jmperiall as Romayne Emperour in the one he ſhewed himſelfe as the eight, in the other as one of the ſeauen.
            They that miſlike this interpretation will affirme that there were either fewer ſoueraigne gouernours of Rome or more if they ſaye there were fewer they will be conuinced by the auncient hiſtories of Rome by the which wee ſhall proue the firſt fiue ſo preciſely as the occaſion of their beginning, the time of their continuance, the cauſe of their ceaſing, the perticular perſons that gouerned in euerie of them ſhall manifeſtly appeare. Jf farther to leſſer the number, they ſhall confounde the ſixth and ſeauenth heade, that is the Romaine and the French Emperours, they ſhal attribute more to the French then euer themſelues claimed or had either in power or dignitie for Charles the great first founder of that Empire, claimed but the Empire of the Weſt, and in his time the Romaine Emperours dwelling in Conſtantinople and gouerning Rome and Italie by an exarchant, partly by the treacherous practiſes of Rome and Italie, partly by the forces and armes of the Kinges of Lumburdie, was depriued first of his tributes and after of his territories in Italie, ſo that the King of Lumbardes poſſeſſing, and inuading all the Byſhoppe of Rome for his owne benefite imployed the ayde of Charles the great: who accordingly came into Italie: ouerthrew the Lumbardes was made Emperour of the West, and gaue Rome to the Pope, not to bee ſaueraigne of it, but to hold it of him and his heires in fee.
            
               But after the line of Charles the great was extinguiſhed, which continued not aboue a hundred yeeres, a ſhorte time inreſpect of the former, the Popes attained the ſuffraintie of Rome both as Byſhoppes and Emperours, ſo became they the eight and one of the ſeauen, as Boniface the eight manifeſtlie declared.
         
         
            
            A prayer and that 
                  〈◊〉
                giuing for the deliuerie of her moſt excellent Maieſtie, from the pernitious practiſes of Antichriſt, and his counterfeit Catholickes.
            
            
               O Eternall God and heauenly Father, whoſe might is ineffable, whoſe mercies ineſtimable, we thy poore creatures & moſt vnprofitable ſeruants in all humblenes of minde, do proſtrate our ſelues before the throne of thy maieſtie, yelding vnto thee with moſt feruent harts and faith vnfained, the Sacrifice of prayſe & thankſgiuing. Thy might did make vs when we were nothing, our lewdneſſe loſt vs when we were made, thy mercie ſaued vs, when we were loſt, thy grace preſerueth vs nowe we are ſaued, thou art our God and great is thy goodnes, we are thy people, but great is our weakenes, thou in thy giftes art gratious and bountifull, Lord let thy grace make vs as thankefull. Thou openeſt our eyes whereby we may ſee, thou enlightneſt our mindes, whereby we may iudge, thou feedeſt our ſoules, wherby we may liue, thou giueſt vs peace whereby we may reſt, the light of thy goſpell thou makeſt to ſhine, a gratious Queene thou giueſt vs to raigne, thou ruleſt in her, ſhe raigneth in thee, by theſe thinges thou comforteſt our bodies and ſoules: Lord herein the wicked do enuy our bliſſe, the roaring lyon would faine vs deuour, and Antichriſt ſeeketh to cut off our head, that then he may tread vs vnder his feete, but thou of thy mercies haſt bridled his rage, his ſhame is diſcouered, his purpoſe diſcloſed: this is the worke of thy mighty hand, his nets are broken, and we are eſcaped, preſerue thine annoynted O Lorde of thy grace: confounde thou thy foes and comfort thy flocke, let Antichriſt, waſte with the worde of thy mouth, Illumine mens mindes that al nowe may ſee, that murther is counted religious at Rome. Thy name be prayſed with hymnes of our heartes, the notes of obedience moſt pleaſing to thee: In thoughtes, wordes, and deedes, let vs ſtill reſounde for this thy great goodnes ſo gratiouſly ſhewed. Defende O moſt mercifull father, thy ſeruant our Soueraigne, from all ſuch wicked and pernitious attemptes. Turne the Counſailes of all Achitophels to fooliſhnes: ſuſtaine her with thy mightie hande in her Royall eſtate, enrich her dayly more and more, with the treaſures of thy heauenly wiſedome. Indue her aboundantly with thy moſt holy ſpirite, and to thy glorie and our gladneſſe make her an olde mother in Iſraell. Graunt theſe thinges O Lorde for Ieſus Chriſt his ſake, thy only ſonne our onely Sauiour: to whom with thee & the holy Ghoſt, three perſons and one God be all honor, glory, prayſe, and power, world without end. Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   