
      
         
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
            MY free-borne Muſe no Patronage doth begge,
            Nor doth ſhee ſeeke to temper hand and legge
            To pleaſe ſome Great-one: what ſhee here doth write,
            Not flattry but affection doth indite.
            
               W. H.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  portrait of King James I
                  IACOBVS DEI GRATIA MAGNA BRITANNIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE REX etc:
                  
                  
                     Cernere magnanimum REGIS caput os
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         requiris.
                     Magnanimum REGIS cernere pictus amas!
                     Tale caput ſimul os et pectus tale miniſtras
                     Ipſe IACOBE, Tibi REX gravis, amplus opas.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            THE PLVRISIE OF SORROVV, LET BLOOD IN THE EYE-VEINE: OR, The Muſes teares for the Death of our late Soueraigne, IAMES King of England, &c.
            By WILL. HODOSON Mag: in Art: Cantab.
            LONDON, 
                  〈…〉
               , and are to be ſold at the 
                  •…
               nd in Paules Church-yard. 1
                  ••
               5.
         
         
            
            
               
                  deathbed scene
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  Thanks to the Chemist
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE PLVRISIE OF SORROVV, LET BLOOD IN THE EYE-VAINE: OR, The Muſes teares for the death of our late Soueraigne IAMES, &c.
            
               LOue makes a Poet: and the ſweeteſt Straine
               
               Fals like the Dew from a diſclouded Braine.
               Vpon the two-topt Mountaine none doth ſing,
               But whom the Paphian Dame doth thither bring.
               How many a Lad touch'd but with Cupids Fiers,
               Mounted aboue his wonted thoughts, aſpires
               In a Hand-Language (complementall French)
               To court and ſport, and dally with his Wench?
               
                  Hath Loue this Power? and cannot Sorrow lend
               A voyce vnto her Sighes? cannot Shee ſend
               Abroad hir Cares in aiery Garments dreſt?
               And ſpeak the Thoughts that houſe within hir breſt.
               No: though her eares be ope, her eies doe ſee;
               Wordes to interpret Teares ſtill wanting bee.
               
                  Plebeian-Greifes they be, that make their tongues
               
                  Embaſſadors; while Ingentes ſtupent. Great-Ones!
               When pious Princes die, when Great-men fall
               As faſt as Fruit in Autumne; when the tall
               
                  Cedars of kingdomes ſhaken are by death;
               When the too-enuious Fates doe ſtop the Breath
               Of Maieſty: how can our Ile but flow,
               And circled be with briniſh Waues of Woo?
               As when the The Maſter Bee. prety little Maister dyes,
               That raignes as Soueraigne o're the Hony-Flies,
               
               The Subiects from the waxen Tents doe beare
               His tender Corps imbalm'd in many a Teare:
               And when at Hibla (Flora's choyce and prime
               Garden of Pleaſure) in a Bed of thime
               They doe intomb him; from their watry Eies
               They drop downe Teares, and buzz forth Elegies:
               
               
                  Thus are the Sonnes of Europes cheifeſt Queene
               (Peace-bleſſed Albions Children) to bee ſeene.
               One with a Ground-fixt look doth mask his face;
               Another, with a ſolemne-funerall Pace,
               Walkes to his Kings deceaſed-royall vrne
               And melts to Teares, ſpying his Marble mourne;
               He through the Ayre doth ſeeke to ſpread his greife,
               And weepes his Epicedium in a Breife,
               But paſſage is deni'd to's funerall ſong,
               Througth' corrall Gates which doe iniayle the toung;
               One which hath ſlept vpon the Laureat Hill,
               And many an Heros with his nimble quill
               Hath canoniz'd already, now doth think
               To lymne his muſes ſaddeſt Thought with ink,
               But his Lamp-ſmelling Labor's all in vaine,
               For what Loue dictates, greife blot's out againe;
               When ſuch a black and kingdome-couering Hand,
               Like an Aegyptian Cloud, oreſpreads a Land;
               When kings are lodg'd in clay vpon their Herſe,
               
               Each Poetaster blubburs forth a verſe:
               And as the loſſe is Epidemicall
               
               So ſhould the Mourners be in generall,
               
                  From the rich Purple-clad, to th' meaneſt Swayne,
               Whom but a coate of thatch doth houſe from rayne.
               Me thinkes each riuer betwixt Rhene and Thames
               
               Meets to condole the death of Royall IAMES;
               And tenant ſtreamlings from their humid caues
               Are ſummon'd to attend their Lordly waues:
               While that the Trident-bearers ſcaly Traine
               Downe from their pearly Eye-globes teares do raine.
               How could I comment many tedious houres
               Vpon thoſe Texts, thoſe blacke and diſmall ſhowres,
               Which from the Criſtall caſements oft doe ſpin,
               While Veſta opes her lap to lodge them in.
               My thoughts thus gloſſe on't: Earth and heauen beares
               Their parts both in our ſorrowes and our teares.
               
                  Denmarke Houſe.As often as I walke vnto * that place,
               O how I gaze my Caeſar in that face!
               O how my rauiſht ſoule doth reuerence
               In that ſame curious worke Art's Excellence!
               Wonder it is ſuch colours ſhould grace Death,
               Pitty it is ſuch Beauty ſhould want breath.
               And here our humble Muſe from Court departs
               Vnto her Cambridge, the rich Mine of Arts:
               
                  And from the Pallace vnto Pallas bowers
               Where ſprings a laſting Aprill of choyce flowers.
               When firſt this learning-Louer came to ſee
               His Gowned Subiects in his Royalty;
               (Whoſe Preſence was more glorious to behold,
               Than Ioue, deſcending in a Shower of Gold
               To Danae,) wee, as in open Book,
               Might read contentment written in his Look.
               So deere our Nurſe was to him, that's Deſire,
               Like to a glaſſe-houſe, kept continuall Fire
               Of loue to her, that neuer age could ſhow
               Such an Arts-Maiſter that did grace her ſo.
               If in his life ſuch Honour hee Thee gaue,
               Let him not paſſe vnto the ſilent Graue
               Without a Monument, vpon his Tombe
               Fix thou this Epitaph (which from the doome
               Of Enuy and Obliuion ſhall bee free
               And ſtill ſuruiue vntill there ceaſe to be
               Sand in the Glaſſe of Time).
            
            
               
                  PEace on the 
                  Sabbath. 
                  Day of Reſt to Reſt did bring
               
               
                  This, 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  great Kings, Scholler; and the ſchollars King.
               
            
         
         
            
            On the learned and Pious workes of King IAMES. Authorem commendat opus.
            
            
               IF bookes the children of the Braine be nam'd,
               Whoſe paper-tongues may ſpeak their fathers worth;
               Then by no Graecian Bard needs He be fam'd,
               But his owne Iſſue may his praiſe ſet forth:
               Whoſe loftie lines haue in a curious loome
               To his owne glory rear'd an honoured tombe.
            
            
               Yet little Oſiars gaze on mightie Woods,
               Yet little ſhrubs ſit at the Cedars roote,
               Yet little Caskets view our richeſt goods,
               Yet little vallies lye atth' Mountaines foote.
               Then our earth-groueling Muſe may well aſpire
               To reade his learned Workes, and ſo admire.
            
         
         
            
            ILLVSTRISSIMO REGI FAELIX FAVSTVMQVE DIADEMA, PRECATVR 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            GReat King, whoſe eie ſpeaks common loue to all,
            In whom our greife hath found a buriall.
            Thou riſing Sun of our declining State,
            Whoſe Luſtre makes thee, England, fortunate:
            When as thy Royall Father, Plenus ditrum. full of Howers,
            Yielded to Natures Peace his vitall Powers:
            Thou the Prime Top-branch of that noble Stem
            Wert fitly Maturus Regno. ripened for a Diadem.
            
            Far be't from mee dread Soueraign to ſet forth,
            Or in ſome oyly Colours paynt, thy worth:
            For what I write, Heauen knowes, is all ſo true
            That what ſeemes Flatt, ry, is moſt true in you.
            But moſt I feare, leaſt that my mudling Muſe
            (Like an ill Painter that doth onely vſe
            
               To Folks of his owne Rank to giue Delight,
            O▪ draw ſome rude and vulgar-pleaſing ſight
            With vnskill'd pencill; being neuer able
            To counterfeit ought in Apelles Table)
            May wrong her ſelfe, while that ſhee dares to ſing
            In her harſh notes the prayſes of a king.
            Who'll vndertake ſo great a Task, who can;
            But a true Poet, but a Buchanan?
            
            Yet where wee cannot praiſe ſufficiently,
            wee'll pray; and our vnited Pray'rs, on high,
            Send vp to heau'ns-Starchamber; for to bring
            
               Myriades of bleſſings on our Royall king.
            May louely Peace her ſiluer Feathers prune
            Vnder thy oliue ſcepter; may ſhee tune
            Such Notes, as may be found (among the Peeres)
            That Harmony, which the wel-ordered Spheares
            (Yf wee beleeue Pythagoras) doe keepe:
            May thy good deedes caſt in eternall ſleepe
            Foule-mouth'd deſtruction, and ſtill ſtrike her dumbe,
            When nigh the Pallace-gates ſhee dare to come:
            And (to ſum vp an lliade in a Shell)
            Thy happy raigne may future ages tell.
         
         
            
            
               The New Coines.
               
                  
                     
                        Gold
                        Fine,
                        30. s.
                        
                        
                           Amor ciuium Regis Praeſidium.
                        
                     
                     
                         
                        15. s.
                        
                     
                     
                         
                        10. s.
                        
                     
                     
                        Crowne,
                        20. s.
                        
                        
                           Florent concordia Regna.
                        
                     
                     
                         
                        10. s.
                        
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        15. s.
                        
                        
                           Cultores ſui deus protegit.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Siluer
                        5. s.
                        
                        
                           Chriſto auſpice regno.
                        
                     
                     
                        1. s.
                        
                     
                     
                        6. d.
                        
                     
                     
                        2. d.
                        
                           Iuſtitia thronum firmat.
                        
                     
                     
                        1. d.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Diſtichs on the Coines.
               
                  
                     
                        Ad mei Coaetaneum, famae ſpem,
                        Angliae famam, Sereniſsimum
                        Regem Carolum
                     
                  
                  PArdon, dread Soueraigne, that I dare to Print,
                  And ſtamp thy praiſes in a new found Mint:
                  Nor doe I clip, nor counterfeit herein,
                  If ought's amiſſe make it a veniall ſin.
               
               
                  Amor ciuium Regis Praeſidium.
                  SAfetie attends on Loue, this is the Ring
                  Which weds the Citizens vnto the King.
               
               
                  Florent concordia Regna.
                  COncord's the Iemme, the breath, the euery thing;
                  Which makes our Kingdome flouriſh, & our King.
               
               
                  
                  Cultores ſui Deus Protegit.
                  HE that glorifies his God in Loue,
                  Shall glorified be, by Him aboue.
               
               
                  Christo auſpice regno.
                  HE that begins his Raigne with Chriſt on earth,
                  Shall raigne in Heauen at his ſecond birth.
               
               
                  Iuſtitia Thronum firmat.
                  THe prop of Thrones is Iuſtice, in her hand
                  She holds the Ball and Scepter of our Land.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   