
      
         
            
            
            THE Third and laſt part of Conny-catching.
            With the new deuiſed knauiſh arte of Foole-taking.
            The like cooſnages and villanies neuer before diſcouered.
            By R. G.
            
            Printed by T. Scarlet for C. Burby, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop vnder S. Mildreds Church in the Poultrie. 1592.
         
         
            
            
            TO ALL SVCH AS HAVE receiued either pleaſure or profite by the two former publiſhed bookes of this Argument: And to all beſide, that deſire to know the wonderfull ſlie deuiſes of this helliſh crew of Conny-catchers.
            
               IN the time of king Henrie the fourth, as our Engliſh Chronicles haue kept in remembrance, liued diuerſe ſturdie and looſe companions in ſundrie places about the Citie of London, who gaue themſelues to no good courſe of life, but becauſe the time was ſomewhat troubleſome, watched diligently, when by the leaſt occaſion of mutinie offered, they might praie vppon the goods of honeſt Citizens, and ſo by their ſpoyle inrich themſelues. At that time liued likewiſe a worthie Gentleman, whoſe many verie famous deeds (wherof I

am ſorie I may here make no rehearſal, becauſe neither time nor occaſion will permitte me) renowne his name to all enſuing poſterities: he, being called ſir Richard Whittington, the founder of Whittington Colledge in London, and one that bare the office of Lord Maior of this Citie three ſeuerall times. This worthie man wel noting the dangerous diſpoſition of that idle kinde of people, tooke ſuch good and diſcreete order (after hee had ſent diuers of them to ſerue in the kings warres, and they loath to doe ſo well returned to their former vomite) that in no place of or about London they might haue lodging, or entertainment, except they applied themſelues to ſuch honeſt trades and exerciſes, as might witneſſe their maintaining was by true and honeſt meanes. If any to the contrarie were founde, they were in iuſtice ſo ſharply proceeded againſt, as the most hurtfull and dangerous enemies to the commonwealth.
            In this quiet and moſt bliſſefull time of peace, when all men (in courſe of life) ſhould ſhew themſelues moſt thankfull for ſo great a benefit, this famous citie is peſtered with the like, or rather worſe kinde of people, that beare outward ſhew of ciuill, honeſt, and gentleman like diſpoſition, but in very deed their behauiour is moſt infamous to be ſpoken of. And as now by their cloſe villanies they cheate, coſen, prig, lift, nippe, and ſuch like tricks now vſed in their Conie-catching Trade, to the hurt and vndoing of many an honeſt Citizen, and other: So if God ſhould in iuſtice be angrie with vs, as our wickedneſſe hath well deſerued, and (as the Lorde forfend) our peace ſhould be moleſted as in former time,

euen as they did, ſo will theſe be the firſt in ſeeking domeſticall ſpoile and ruine: yea ſo they may haue it, it skilles not how they come by it. God raiſe ſuch another as was worthie Whittington, that in time may bridle the headſtrong courſe of this helliſh crew, and force them liue as becommeth honeſt ſubiects, or els to abide the rewarde of their looſeneſſe.
            By reading this little tratiſe enſuing, you ſhall ſee to what marueilous ſubtil pollicies theſe deceiuers haue atteyned, and how daylie they practiſe ſtrange driftes for their purpoſe. I ſay no more, but if all theſe forewarnings may be regarded, to the benefit of the well minded, and iust controll of theſe careleſſe wretches, it is all I deſire, and no more then I hope to ſee.
            
               Yours in all he may R. G.
            
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The third and laſt part of Conny-catching with the new deuiſed knauiſh Arte of Fooletaking.
            BEing by chance inuited to ſupper, where were preſent diuers, both of worſhip and good accompt, as occaſion ſerued for entercourſe of talke, the preſent treacheries and wicked deuiſes of the world was called in queſtion. Amongſt other moſt hatefull and wel worthie reprehenſion, the woondrous villanies of looſe and lewde perſons, that beare the ſhape of men, yet are monſters in condition, was ſpecially remembred, and not onely they, but their complices, their confederates, their baſe natured women and cloſe compacters were noted: Namely, ſuch as tearme themſelues Conny-catchers, Croſſe-biters, with their appertaining names to their ſeuerall cooſening qualities, as already is made knowne to the world, by two ſeuerall imprinted books, by meanes wherof, the preſent kinde of conference was occaſioned. Quoth a Gentleman ſitting at the Table, whoſe déepe ſtep into age deciphered his experience, and whoſe grauitie in ſpéeche reported his diſcretion, quoth hee, by the two publiſhed bookes of Cony-catching: I haue ſeene diuers thinges whereof I was before ignorant, notwithſtanding had I béene acquainted with 
                  •
               he author: I could haue giuen him ſuch notes of notorious matters that way intending, as in neither of the pamphlets are the like ſet downe. Beſide, they are ſo neceſſarie to be knowne, as they will both forearme any man againſt ſuch trecherous vipers, and forewarne the ſimpler ſort from conuerſing with them. The Gentleman being knowne to be within commiſſion of the peace, and that what he ſpake of either came to him by examinations,

or by riding in the circuits as other like officers do: was intreated by one man aboue the reſt (as his leiſure ſerued him) to acquaint him with thoſe notes, and he would ſo bring it to paſſe, as the writer of the other two bookes, ſhould haue the ſight of them, and if theyr quantitie would ſerue, that he ſhould publiſh them as a third, and more neceſſary part then the former were. The Gentleman replied al ſuch notes as I ſpeake, are not of mine owne knowledge, yet from ſuch men haue I receiued them, as I dare aſſure their truth: and but that by naming men wronged by ſuch mates, more diſpleaſure would enſue then were expedient, I could ſet downe both time, place, and parties. But the certaintie ſhal ſuffice without any ſuch offence. As for ſuch as ſhal ſée their iniuries diſcouered, and (biting the lip) ſay to themſelues, thus was I made a Conny: their names being ſhadowed, they haue no cauſe of anger, in that the example of their honeſt ſimplicitie beguiled, may ſhield a number more endangered from taſting the like. And ſéeing you haue promiſed to make them knowne to the author of the former two Bookes, you ſhall the ſooner obtaine your requeſt: aſſuring him thus much vpon my credit & honeſtie, that no one vntrueth is in the notes, but euerie one credible, and to be iuſtified if néed ſerue. Within a fortnight or thereabout afterward, the Gentleman performed his promiſe, in ſeuerall papers ſent the notes, which here are in our book compiled together when thou haſt read, ſay, if euer thou heardeſt more notable villanies diſcouered. And if thou or thy friends receiue any good by thē, as it cannot be but they wil make a number more carefull of themſelues: thanke the honeſt Gentleman for his notes, and the writer that publiſhed both the other and theſe, for generall example.
            
               
               A pleaſant tale howe an honeſt ſubſtantiall Citizen was made a Connie, and ſimplie entertained a knaue that carried awaie his goods verie politickly.
               WHat laws are vſed among this heliſh crew, what words and termes they giue themſelues and their copeſmates, are at large ſet downe in the former two Bookes: let it ſuffiſe yee then in this, to read the ſimple true diſcourſes of ſuch as haue by extraordinary cunning and treachery béene deceiued, and remembring their ſubtle meanes there, and ſlye practiſes here, be prepared againſt the reaches of any ſuch companions.
               Not long ſince, a crew of Conny-catchers méeting togither, and in conference laying downe ſuch courſes as they ſeuerally ſhould take, to ſhunne ſuſpect, and returne a common benefit among them: the Carders receiued their charge, the Dicers theirs, the hangers about the court theirs, the followers of Sermons theirs and ſo the reſt to their offices. But one of them eſpeciallie, who at their woonted méetings, when reporte was made howe euery purchaſe was gotten, and by what pollycie each one preuailed: this fellowe in a kinde of priding ſcorne, would vſually ſay.
               In faithe Maiſters theſe thinges are prettily done, common ſleyghts, expreſſing no deepe reache of witte, and I woonder men are ſo ſimple to bee ſo beguiled. I would fayne ſee ſome rare and artificiall feate indeede, that ſome admiration and fame might inſue the dooing thereof: I promiſe yee, I diſdayne theſe baſe and pettie paltries, and may my fortune iumpe with my reſolution, yee ſhall heare my boyes with

in a day or two, that I will accompliſh a rare ſtratagem indéed, of more value then fortie of yours, and when it is done ſhall carry ſome credit with it. They wondring at this wordes, deſired to ſée the ſucceſſe of them, & ſo diſperſing themſelues as they were accuſtomed, left this frollicke fellow pondering on his affaires. A Cittizens houſe in London, which hee had diligently eyed & aymed at for a fortnights ſpace, was the place wherein he muſt performe this exploit, and hauing learned one of the ſeruant maides name of the houſe, as alſo where ſhee was borne and her kindred. Vpon a ſonday in the afternone, when it was her turne to attend on her maiſter and miſtres to the garden in Finſbury fields, to regard the children while they ſported about, this craftie mate hauing dulie watched their comming forth, and ſéeing that they intended to goe downe S. Laurence lane, ſtepped before them, euer caſting an eye back, leaſt they ſhould turne ſome contrarie way: but their following ſtill fitting his owne deſire, néere vnto the Conduit in Aldermanbury, he croſſed the way and came vnto the maid, and kiſſing her ſayd. Cooſen Margeret, I am verye glad to ſée you well, my vnckle your father, and all your friends in the Countrey are in good health God be praiſed. The Maide hearing herſelfe named, and not knowing the man, modeſtly bluſhed, which hee perceiuing, held way on with her amongſt her fellow apprentiſes, and thus began againe. I ſée Cooſen you knowe mee not, and I doe not greatlie blame you, it is ſo long ſince you came foorth of the Countrey, but I am ſuch a ones ſonne, naming her Vncle right, and his ſonnes name, which ſhe very well remembred, but had not ſeene him in eleuen yeares. Then taking foorth a bowed groat, and an olde pennie bowed, he gaue it her as being ſent from her Vncle and

Aunt, whome hee tearmed to bee his Father and Mother: Withall (quoth he) I haue a Gammon of bacon and a Chéeſe from my Vncle your Father, which are ſent to your Maiſter and Miſtreſſe, which I receiued of the Carrier, becauſe my Vncle enioynde me to deliuer them, when I muſt intreat your miſtres, that at Whitſontide next ſhée will giue you leaue to come downe into the Countrey. The Maide thinking ſimplie all hee ſaid was true, and as they ſo farre from their parents, are not onely glad to heare of their welfare, but alſo reioyce to ſée any of their kindred: ſo this poore Maid, wel knowing her Vncle had a ſonne ſo named as he called himſelf, and thinking from a boy (as he was at her leauing the Countrey) he was now growne ſuch a proper handſome young man, was not a little ioyful to ſée him: beſide, ſhée ſéemed proud, that her kinſman was ſo neat a youth, and ſo ſhee held on queſtioning with him about her friends: hee ſoothing each matter ſo cunningly, as the maide was confidently perſwaded of him. In this time, one of the children ſtepped to her mother and ſaid, Our Marget (mother) hath a fine cooſen come out of the Country, and he hath a Chéeſe for my Father and you: whereon ſhée looking backe, ſaid: Maide, is that your kinſman? yes forſooth miſtreſſe quoth ſhee, my Vncles ſonne, whome I left a little one when I came foorth of the countrey.
               The wilye Treacher, béeing maiſter of his trade, would not let ſlippe this opportunitie, but courteouſlie ſtepping to the Miſtreſſe (who louing her maid wel, becauſe indéed ſhée had been a very good ſeruant, and from her firſt comming to London had dwelt with her, tould her huſband therof) coyned ſuch a ſmooth tale vnto them both, fronting it with the Gammon of Bacon and the

Chéeſe ſent from their maides Father, and hoping they would giue her leaue at Whitſontide to viſit the countrey, as they with verie kinde words entertained him, inuiting him the next night to ſupper, when he promiſed to bring with him the Gammon of Bacon and the Chéeſe. Then framing an excuſe of certaine buſines in the town, for that time he tooke his leaue of the Maiſter and Miſtreſſe, and his new Coſen Margaret, who gaue many a looke after him (poore wench) as he went▪ ioying in her thoughts to haue ſuch a kinſman.
               On the morrow hee prepared a good Gammon of bacon, which he cloſed vp in a ſoiled linnen cloth, and ſewed an old card vpon it, whereon he wrote a ſuperſcription vnto the Maiſter of the Maide, and at what ſigne it was to be deliuered, and afterward ſcraped ſome of the letters halfe out, that it might ſéeme they had bin rubd out in the carriage. A good Chéeſe he prepared likewiſe, with inſcription accordingly on it, that it could not be diſcerned, but that ſome vnſkilfull writer in the country had done it, both by the groſſe proportion of the letters, as alſo the bad ortographie which amongſt plaine huſbandmen is verie common, in that they haue no better inſtruction. So hiring à Porter to carrie them betwéene fiue and ſixe in the euening he comes to the cittizens houſe, and entring the ſhop, receiues them of the Porter, whome the honeſt meaning Cittizen would haue paid for his pains, but this his maids new-found Coſen ſayd hee was ſatiſfied alreadie, and ſo ſtraining courteſie would not permit him: well, vp are carried the Bacon and the Chéeſe, where God knowes, Margaret was not a little buſie, to haue al things fine and neat againſt her Coſens comming vp, her miſtreſſe likewiſe, (as one well affecting her ſeruant) had prouided verie

good chéere, ſet all her plate on the Cubboorde for ſhewe, and beautified the houſe with Cuſheons, carpets, ſtooles and other deuiſes of néedle worke, as at ſuch times diuers wil do, to haue the better report made of their credite amongſt their ſeruants friends in the Country, albeit at this time (God wot) it turned to theyr owne after-ſorrowing. The maiſter of the houſe, to delay the time while Supper was readye, hee likewiſe ſhewes this diſſembler his ſhop, who ſéeing things fadge ſo pat to his purpoſe, could queſtion of this ſort, and that well enough I warrant you, to diſcern the beſt frō the worſt and their appointed places, purpoſing a further reache then the honeſt Cittizen dreamed of: and to bee plaine with ye, ſuch was this occupiers trade, as though I may not name it, yet thus much I dare vtter, that the worſt thing he could carry away, was aboue twentie nobles, becauſe hee dealt altogeather in whole and great ſale, which made this companion forge this kindred and acquaintance, for an hundred pound or twaine was the very leaſt hee aimed at. At length the miſtreſſe ſendes word ſupper is on the Table, where vpon vp hee conducts his gueſt, and after diuers welcomes, as alſo thankes for the Chéeſe and Bacon: To the Table they ſit, where let it ſuffice, hée wanted no ordinarie good fare, wine and other knackes, beſide much talke of the Countrey, how much his friends were beholding for his Coſen Margaret, to whome by her miſtreſſe leaue hée dranke twiſe or thriſe, and ſhée poore ſoule dooing the like againe to him with remembrance of her father and other kindred, which he ſtil ſmoothed very cunningly. Countenance of talke made them careles of the time which ſlipped from thē faſter then they were aware of, nor did the deceiuer haſten his departing, becauſe he expected

what indéed followed, which was, that being paſt tenne of the clocke, and he feigning his lodging to be at Saint Gyles in the field, was intreated both by the goodman and his wife to take a bed there for that night, for faſhion ſake (though very glad of this offer) hee ſaid he would not troble them, but giuing thē many thanks, would to his lodging though it were further. But wonderfull it was to ſee how earneſt the honeſt Citizen and his wife laboured to perſwade him, that was more willing to ſtaye then they could bee to bid him, and what diſſembled willingneſſe of departure hee vſed on the other ſide, to couer the ſecret villanie intended. Well, at the length with much ado, he is contented to ſtay, when Margaret and her Miſtreſſe preſently ſtirred ſo make ready his bed, which the more to the honeſt mans hard hap, but all the better for this artificial Conny-catcher, was in the ſame roome where they ſupped, being commonly called their hall, and there indeed ſtood a verie faire bed, as in ſuch ſightly roumes it may eaſily bee thought, Citizens vſe not to haue any thing meane or ſimple. The miſtreſſe, leaſt her gueſt ſhould imagine ſhe diſturbed him, ſuffered all the plate to ſtand ſtill on the cupbord: and when ſhe perceiued his bed was warmed, and euery thing els according to her mind, ſhe and her huſband bidding him good night: tooke themſelues to their chamber, which was on the ſame floore but inward, hauing another chamber betwéene them and the hall, where the maides and children had their lodging. So deſiring him to call for any thing hee wanted, and charging Margaret to looke it ſhould bee ſo, to bed are they gone: when the Apprentiſes hauing brought vp the keyes of the ſtréet dore, & left them in their maiſters chamber as they were woont to do, after they had ſaid

praiers, their euening exerciſe, to bed go they likewiſe, which was in a Garret backward ouer their maiſters chamber. None are nowe vp but poore Margaret and her counterfeit cooſen, whō ſhe loth to offend with long talke, becauſe it waxed late: after ſome few more ſpeeches, about their parents and friends in the countrey, ſhe ſéeing him laid in bed, and all ſuch thinges by him as ſhe déemed needfull, with a low courteſie I warrant ye, commits him to his quiet, and ſo went to bed to her fellowes the maidſeruants. Well did this hypocrite perceiue the keyes of the doores carried into the good mans chamber, wherof he being not a litle glad, thoght now they would imagine all things ſure, and therfore doutleſſe ſleep the ſounder: as for the keyes, he needed no helpe of them, becauſe ſuch as hee go neuer vnprouided of inſtruments fitting their trade, & ſo at this time was this notable trecher. In the dead time of the night when ſound ſleepe makes the eare vnapt to heare the verie leaſt noyſe, he forſaketh his bed, & hauing gotten al the plate bound vp togither in his cloke, goeth down into the ſhop, where well remembring both the place & percels, maketh vp his pack with ſome twenty poūds worth of goods more. Then ſetling to his engin, he getteth the doore off the hindges, and being foorth, lifteth cloſe to againe, and ſo departs, méeting with in a doozen paces, thrée or foure of his cōpanions that lurked therabouts for the purpoſe. Their word for knowing each other, as is ſaid, was Queſt, and this villains comfortable newes to them, was Twag, ſignifiyng hee had ſped: ech takes a fleece for eaſier carriage, and ſo away to Belbrow, which as I haue heard is as they interpret it, the houſe of a théefe receiuer, without which they can do nothing, and this houſe with an apt porter to it, ſtandes

ready for them al houres of the night: too many ſuch are there in London, the maiſters whereof beare countenance of honeſt ſubſtantiall men, but all their liuing is gotten in this order, the end of ſuch (though they ſcape awhile) will be ſailing weſtward in a Cart to Tiborn. Imagine theſe villanies there in their iollitie, the one porting point by point his cunning deceipt, and the other (fitting his humour) extolling the déede with no meane commendations. But returning to the honeſt Citizen, who finding in the morning how déerly he paid for a gammon of bacon, and a chéeſe, and how his kinde courteſie was thus trecherouſlye requited: blames the poore maide, as innocent herein as himſelfe, and impriſoning her, thinking ſo to regaine his owne: griefe with ill cheriſhing there ſhortens her life: And thus enſueth one hard hap vpon another, to the great griefe both of maiſter and miſtreſſe, when the trueth was knowne, that they ſo wronged their honeſt ſeruant: how it may forewarne others, I leaue to your owne opinions, that ſée what extraordinarie deuiſes are now adayes, to beguile the ſimple and honeſt liberall minded.
            
            
               Of a notable knaue, who for his cunning deceiuing a gentleman of his purſe: ſcorned the name of a Conny-catcher, and would needs be termed a Foole-taker, as maiſter and beginner of that new found Arte.
               A Crew of theſe wicked companions, being one day met togither in Pauls Church (as that is a vſual place of their aſſemblie, both to determin on their drifts, as alſo to ſpéed of many a bootie) ſéeing no likelihood of a good afternoone, ſo they tearme it either forenoone or after, when ought is to be done: ſome diſperſed themſelues to the plaies, other to the bowling allies

and not paſt two or thrée ſtayed in the Church. Quoth on of them, I haue vowed not to depart, but ſomething or other Ile haue before I go: my minde giues me, that this place yet will yéelde vs all our ſuppers this night, the other holding like opinion with him, there likewiſe walked vp and downe, looking when occaſion would ſerue for ſome Caſh. At length they eſpyed a Gentleman towarde the lawe entring in at the little North doore, and a countrey Clyent going with him in verye hard talke, the Gentleman holding his gowne open with his armes on eyther ſide as very manie doe, gaue ſight of a faire purple veluet purſe, which was halfe put vnder his girdle: which I warrant you the reſolute fellow that would not depart without ſome thing, had quicklye eſpyed. A game, quoth hee to his fellows, marke the ſtand, and ſo ſeparating themſelues walked aloofe, the Gentleman going to the nether ſteppe of the ſtaires that aſcend vp into the Quire, and there he walked ſtill with his client. Oft this crew of mates met together, and ſaid there was no hope of nipping the bong becauſe he held open his gowne ſo wide, and walked in ſuch an open place. Baſe knaues, quoth the frolick fellowe, if I ſay I will haue it, I muſt haue it, though hee that owes it had ſworne the contrarie. Then looking aſide, hee ſpyed his trugge or queane comming vppe the Church: away, quoth hee to the other, go looke you for ſome other purchaſe, this wench and I are ſuffient for this. They goe, he leſſons the drab in this ſort, that ſhée ſhould to the Gentleman, whoſe name ſhee verye well knew, in that ſhee had holpe to cooſen him once before, & pretending to be ſent to him from one he was well acquainted with for his councell ſhould giue him his ſee for auoiding ſuſpition, & ſo frame ſome wrong done hir

as well inough ſhe could: when her mate (taking occaſion as it ſerued) would woorke the meane, ſhee ſhould ſtrike, & ſo they both preuaile. The queane well inured with ſuch courſes, becauſe ſhe was one of ye moſt ſkilful in that profeſſion, walked vp and downe alone in the Gentlemans ſight, that he might diſcerne ſhee ſtayed to ſpeake with him, and as he turned toward her, hee ſaw her take money out of her purſe, whereby hee gathered ſome benefite was toward him: which made him the ſooner diſpatch his other clyent, when ſhee ſtepping to him, told ſuch a tale of commendations from his verie friend, that had ſent her to him as ſhe ſaid, that hee entertained her very kindly, and giuing him his fée, whch before her face he put vp into his purſe, and thruſt vnder his girdle againe: ſhe procéeded to a very ſound diſcourſe, whereto he liſtened with no litle attention. The time ſeruing fit for the fellows purpoſe, he came behind the Gentleman, and as many times one friend wil familiarly with another, clap his hands ouer his eyes to make him gueſſe who he is, ſo did this companion, holding his hands faſt ouer the Gentlemans eyes, ſayde: who am I? twiſe or thriſe, in which time the drab had gotten the purſe and put it vp. The Gentleman thinking it had been ſome merrie friend of his, reckoned the names of thrée or foure, when letting him go, the crafty knaue diſſembling a baſhful ſhame of what he had don, ſaid: By my troth ſir I crie ye mercy, as I came in at the Church doore, I tooke ye for ſuch a one (naming a man) a verie friend of mine, whome you very much reſemble: I beſéech ye be not angrie, it was verie boldlye done of me, but in penance of my fault, ſo pleaſe yee to accept it, I will beſtow a gallon or two of wine on yee, and ſo laboured him earneſtly to go with him to the tauerne,

ſtil alledging his ſorow for miſtaking him. The Gentleman litle ſuſpecting how who am I had handled him, ſéeing how ſorie he was, and ſéeming to be a man of no ſuch baſe condition: tooke all in good part, ſaying: No harme ſir, to take one for another, a fault wherein any man may eaſily erre, and ſo excuſing the acceptation of his wine, becauſe he was buſie there with a gentlewoman his friend: the trecher with courteſie departed, & the drab (hauing what ſhee would) ſhortning her tale, hee deſiring her to come to his Chamber the next morning, went to the place where her copeſ-mate and ſhe met, and not long after, diuers other of the crue, who hearing in what manner this act was performed, ſmiled a good therat, that ſhe had both got the Gentlemans purſe, her owne money againe, and his aduiſe for iuſt nothing. He that had done this tall exploit, in a place ſo open in view, ſo hardly to be come by, & on a man that made no meane eſtéeme of his wit: bids his fellowes kéepe the worthles name of a Conny-catcher to themſelues: for he hence-foorth would bee termed a Foole-taker, and ſuch as could imitate this quaint example of his, (which he would ſet down as an entrance into that art) ſhould not thinke ſcorne to become his ſchollers.
               Night drawing on apace, the Gentleman returned home, not al this while miſſing his purſe, but being ſet at ſupper, his wife intreated a pint of Sack, which hee minding to ſend for: drewe to his purſe, and ſéeing it gone, what ſtrange lookes (beſide ſighs) were betwéene him and his wife. I leaue to your ſuppoſing, and blame them not: for as I haue heard, there was ſeuen pound in gold, beſide thirtie ſhillings and od white money in the purſe. But in the middeſt of his griefe, hee remembred him that ſaid, who am I? Wherewith hee brake

foorth into a great laughter, the cauſe whereof his wife béeing deſirous to know, he declared all that paſſed betwéen him and the deceiuer, as alſo how ſone afterward the queane abreuiated her diſcourſe and followed: ſo in troth wife (quoth he) betwéene who am I and the drab, my purſe is gone: let his loſſe teach others to looke better to theirs.
            
            
               An other Tale of a cooſening companion, who would needs trie his cunning in this new inuented arte, and how by his knauerie (at one inſtant) he beguiled halfe a dozen and more.
               OF late time there hath a certaine baſe kinde of trade béene vſed, who though diuers poore men, and doubtles honeſt, apply themſelues onely to relieue their néed: yet are there ſome notorious varlets do the ſame, being compacted with ſuch kinde of people, as this preſent treatiſe manifeſteth to the world, and what with outward ſimplicity on the one ſide, and cunning cloſe treachery on the other, diuers honeſt Cittizens and day-labouring men, that reſort to ſuch places as I am to ſpeake of, onely for recreation as opportunitie ſerueth, haue beene of late ſundry times deceyued of their purſes. This trade, or rather vnſufferable loytring qualitie, in ſinging of Ballets, and ſongs at the doores of ſuch houſes where playes are vſed, as alſo in open markets and other places of this Cittie, where is moſt reſort: which is nothing els but a ſlie fetch to draw many together, who liſtning vnto an harmeleſſe dittie, afterwarde walke home to their houſes with heauie hearts: from ſuch as are héereof true witneſſes to their coſt, doo I deliuer this example. A ſubtill fellow, belike imboldned by acquaintance with the former deceit, or

els being but a beginner to practiſe the ſame, calling certain of his companions together, would try whether he could attaine to be maiſter of his art or no, by taking a great many of fools with one traine: but let his intent and what els beſide, remaine to abide the cenſure after the mater is heard, and come to Gratious ſtreet, where this villanous pranke was performed. A roging mate, & ſuch another with thē were there got vpon a ſtal ſinging of balets, which belike was ſome prety toy, for very many gathered about to heare it, & diuers buying, as their affections ſerued, drew to their purſes, & paid the ſingers for them. The ſlie mate and his fellowes, who were diſperſed among them that ſtood to hear the ſongs well noted where euerie man that bought, put vp his purſe againe, and to ſuch as would not buy, counterfeit warning was ſundrie times giuen by the roge and his aſſociate, to beware of the cut-purſe, & looke to their purſes, which made thē often féel where their purſes were, either in ſléeue, hoſe, or at girdle, to know whether they were ſafe or no. Thus the crafty copeſmates were acquainted with what they moſt deſired, and as they were ſcatred by ſhouldring, thruſting, feining to let fall ſomthing, and other wilie tricks fit for their purpoſe: héere one loſt his purſe, there another had his pocket pickt, & to ſay all in briefe, at one inſtant, vpon the complaint of one or two that ſaw their purſes were gone, eight more in the ſame companie, found themſelues in like predicament. Some angrie, others ſorrowfull, and all greatly diſcontented, looking about them, knewe not who to ſuſpect or challenge, in that the villaines themſelues that had thus beguiled them, made ſhew that they had ſuſtained like loſſe. But one angry fellow, more impacient then all the reſt, he fals vpon the ballad ſinger, and

beating him with his fiſts well fauouredly, ſayes, if he had not liſtned his ſinging, he had not loſt his purſe, and therefore would not be otherwiſe perſwaded, but that they two and the cutpurſes were compacted together. The reſt that had loſt their purſes likewiſe, & ſaw that ſo many complaine togither: they iump in opinion with the other fellow, & begin to tug & hale the ballad ſingers when one after one, the falſe knaues began to ſhrink away with the purſes, by means of ſome officer then being there preſent, the two Roges were had before a iuſtice, and vpon his diſcréete examination made, it was found, that they and the cut-purſes were compacted together, and that by this vnſuſpected villanie, they had deceiued many. The 
                     ••
                  ne Foole-taker himſelf, with one or two more of that companie, was not long after apprehended: when I doubt not but they had their reward anſwerable to their deſeruing: for I heare of their iorney weſtward, but not of their returne: let this forewarne thoſe that liſten ſinging in the ſtréets.
            
            
               Of a craftie mate, that brought two young men vnto a Tauerne, where departing with a Cup, hee left them to pay both for the wine and Cup.
               
                  A Friend of mine ſent mee this note, and aſſuring me the truth thereof, I thought neceſſary to ſet it downe amongſt the reſt: both for the honeſt ſimplicitie on the one ſide and moſt cunning knauery vſed on the other, and thus it was. Two young men of familiar acquaintance, who delighted much in muſicke, becauſe themſelues therein were ſomwhat expert, as on the virginals, bandora, lute and ſuch like: were one euening at a cōmon inne of this town (as I haue heard) where the one of them ſhewed his ſkil on the virginals

to the no little contentment of the hearers. Now as diuers gueſts of the houſe came into the roome to liſten, ſo among the reſt entred an artificial Cony-catcher, who as occaſion ſerued, in the time of ceaſing betwéen the ſeuerall toies and fancies he plaied: very much commended his cunning, quick hand, and ſuch qualities praiſeworthy in ſuch a profeſſor. The time being come, when theſe young men craued leaue to depart, this politique varlet ſtepping to them, deſired that they would accept a quarte of Wine at his hande, which hee would moſt gladlie beſtow vpon them: beſides, if it liked him that played on the Virginals to inſtruct, hee would helpe him to ſo good a place, as happily might aduantage him for euer. Theſe kind words, deliuered with ſuch honeſt outward ſhewe, cauſed the yoong men, whoſe thoughts were frée from any other opinion, than to bee as truely and plainly dealt withall as themſelues▪ meant, accepted his offer, becauſe hee that played on the Virginals was deſirous to haue ſome good place of ſeruice: & herevpon to the Tauerne they goe, and being ſet, the wily companion calleth for two pintes of wine, a pinte of white, and a pinte of claret, caſting his cloake vpon the table, and ſalling to his former communication of preferring the yoong man. The wine is brought, and two cuppes withall, as is the vſuall manner: when drinking to them of the one pinte, they pledge him, not vnthankfull for his gentleneſſe. After ſome time ſpent in talke, and as he perceiued fit for his purpoſe, hee takes the other cup, and taſtes the other pinte of wine▪ wherewith he finding fault, that it dranke ſomewhat harde, ſayd, that Roſe-water and Sugar would do no harme: whereupon he leaues his ſeate, ſaying he was well acquainted with one of the ſeruāts of the houſe, of whom

he could haue two pennyworth of Roſe-water for a peny, and ſo of Sugar likewiſe, wherefore he would ſtep to the barre vnto him, ſo taking the cup in his hand, hee did: the yoong men neuer thinking on any ſuch treacherie as enſued, in that he ſéemed an honeſt man, and beſide left his cloake lying on the table by them. No more returnes the yonker with Roſe-water and Sugar, but ſtepping out of doores, vnſéene of any, goes away roundly with the cup. The yoong men not a little wondering at his long tarrying, by the comming of the ſeruants to ſée what they wanted, who tooke no regarde of his ſudden departure, finde themſelues there left, not onely to pay for the wine, but for the Cuppe alſo, being raſhlye ſuppoſed by the maiſter and his ſeruants to be copartners with the treacherous villaine: but their honeſt behauiour well knowne, as alſo their ſimplicity too much abuſed, well witneſſed their innocencie: notwithſtanding they were faine to pay for the cup, as afterwarde they did, hauing nothing towardes their charge but a thred bare cloake not worth two ſhillings. Take héede how you drinke wine with any ſuch companions.
            
            
               Of an honeſt houſholder which was cunningly deceyued by a ſubtill companion, that came to hire a Chamber for his Maiſter.
               NOt farre from Charing Croſſe dwelleth an honeſt yoong man, who being not long ſince married, and hauing more roomes in his houſe than himſelfe occupyeth, either for terme time, or the Court lying ſo néere, as diuers do, to make a reaſonable commoditie, and to eaſe houſe-rent, which (as the worlde goeth now is none of the cheapeſt) letteth foorth a chamber or two, according as it may be ſpared. In an euening

but a while ſince, came one in the manner of a Seruing man to this man and his wife, and he muſt néedes haue a Chamber for his Maiſter, offering ſo largely, as the bargaine was ſoone concluded betwéene them. His intent was to haue fingered ſome bootie in the houſe, as by the ſequele it may bee likelieſt gathered: but be like no fit thing lying abroad, or hee better regarded then happily he would be, his expectation that way was fruſtrate▪ yet as a reſolute Conny-catcher indéed, that ſcorneth to attempt without ſome ſucceſſe, and rather will pray vpon ſmall commoditye, then returne to his fellows diſgraced with a loſt labor: he ſummons his wits together, & by a ſmooth tale ouer-reached both the man and his wife. He tels them, that his Maiſter was a captaine late come from the Sea, and had coſtly apparel to bring thither, which for more eaſie carriage, he entreats them lend him a ſhéet to bind it vp in, they ſuſpecting no ill, becauſe he required their boy ſhould goe with him to helpe him cary the ſtuffe, the good wife ſteppes vnto her Cheſt, where her linnen lay finelie ſwéetned with Roſe leaues and Lauender, and lends him a very good ſhéete in déed.
               This ſucceſſe made him bolde to venter a little further, and then he tels them, his maiſter had a great deale of broken Sugar, and fine ſpices that lay negligently abroad in his lodging as it was brought from the Ship, all which hee was aſſured his Maiſter would beſtow on them, ſo he could deuiſe how to get it brought thither.
               Theſe liberall promiſes, preuailing with them that lightlie beléeued, and withall were ſomewhat couetous of the Sugar and ſpices: The woman demanded if a couple of pillow-béeres would not ſerue to bring the ſugar and ſpices in? yes marry (quoth hee) ſo the Sugar

may beſt be kept by it ſelf, and the ſpices by themſelues. And (quoth hee) becauſe there are many craftie knaues abroad▪ (gréeuing that any ſhould be craftier then himſelfe) and in the euening the linnen might quicklie bee ſnatched from the boy: For the more ſafety, he would carry the ſheet and pillow-béeres himſelfe, & within an hower or little more, returne with the boy againe, becauſe he would haue all things redy before his maiſter came, who (as he ſaid) was attending on the Councell at the court. The man and his wife crediting his ſmooth ſpéeches, ſends their boy with him, and ſo along toward Iuie-bridge go they. The Conny-catcher ſéeing himſelfe at frée libertie, that he had gotten a very good ſhéet, and two fine pillow-béeres: ſteps to the wall, as though he would make water, bidding the boye goe faire and ſoftly on before. The boy doubting nothing, did as hee willed him, whē preſently he ſtept into ſome houſe hard by fit to entertaine him: and neuer ſince was hee, his Maiſter, the Sugar, ſpices, or the linnen heard off. Manie haue beene in this manner deceiued, as I heare, let this then giue them warning to beware of any ſuch vnprofitable gueſts.
            
            
               Of one that came to buy a knife, and made firſt proofe of his trade on him that ſolde it.
               ONe of the cunning Nippes about the towne, came vnto a poore Cutler to haue a Cuttle made according to his owne minde, and not aboue three inches would he haue both the knife and the haft in length: yet of ſuch pure mettall, as poſſibly may bee. Albeit the poore man neuer made the like before, yet being promiſed foure times the value of his ſtuffe and paines, he was contented to doe this, and the day being

come that hee ſhould deliuer it, the partie came, who liking it excéedingly, gaue him the money promiſed, which the poore man gladly put vp into his purſe, that hung at a button hole of his waſcoate before his breſt, ſmiling that he was ſo well paid for ſo ſmall a trifle: the partie perceiuing his merry countenance, and imagining he geſt for what purpoſe the knife was, ſayde, honeſt man, whereat ſmile you? By my troth ſir (quoth the Cutler) I ſmile at your knife, becauſe I neuer made one ſo litle before: and were it not offenſiue vnto you, I would requeſt to know to what vſe you will put it too? Wilt thou kéepe my counſaile (quoth the Nip?) yea on mine honeſtie (quoth the Cutler.) Then hearken in thy eare ſaid the Nip, and ſo rounding with him, cut the poore mans purſe that houng at his boſom, he neuer féeling when he did it: with this knife (quoth the Nippe) meane I to cut a purſe, marry GOD forbid (quoth the Cutler) I cannot thinke you to be ſuch a kind of man, I ſée you loue to ieſt, and ſo they parted.
               The poore man, not ſo wiſe as to remember his owne purſe, when by ſuch a warning hee might haue taken the offendour dooing the déede, but rather proud (as it were) that his money was ſo eaſily earned: walkes to the Alehouſe, which was within a houſe or two of his owne, and finding there thrée or foure of his neighbors with whom he began to ieſt very pleaſantly: ſweares by cocke and pie hee would ſpend a whole groat vppon them, for hee had gotten it and more, cléerely by a good bargaine that morning.
               Though it was no maruell to ſée him ſo liberall, becauſe indéede he was a good companion: yet they were loth to put him to ſuch coſt, nothwithſtanding he would néeds doe it, and ſo farre as promiſe ſtretcht, was preſently

fild in and ſet vpō the boord. In the drinking time often he wiſht to méet with more ſuch cuſtomers as he had done that morning, and commended him for a very honeſt Gentleman I warrant you. At length, when the reckoning was to be paide, hee drawes to his purſe, where finding nothing left but a péece of the ſtring in the button hole, I leaue to your iudgement, whether he was now as ſorrie as he was merrie before.
               Blanck and all amort fits the poore Cutler, and with ſuch a pittifull countenance, as his neighbours did not a little admire his ſolemne alteration, and deſirous to know the cauſe thereof, from point to point he diſcourſeth the whole manner of the tragedie, neuer naming his new cuſtomer, but with ſuch a farre fetcht ſigh, as ſoule and body would haue parted in ſunder. And in midſt of all his griefe, he brake forth into theſe termes. Ile beléeue a man the better by his word while I know him, the knife was bought to cut a purſe indéed, and I thanke him for it, hee made the firſt proofe of the edge with mee. The neighbours gréeuing for his loſſe, yet ſmiling at his folly to be ſo ouerreached, were faine to pay the groate the Cutler called in, becauſe he had no other money about him, and ſpent as much more beſide to driue away his heauineſſe.
               This tale, becauſe it was ſomewhat miſreported before, vpon talke had with the poore Cutler himſelfe, is ſet downe now in true forme and manner how it was done, therefore is there no offence offered, when by better conſideration, a thing may be enlarged or amended, or at leaſt the note be better confirmed. Let the poore Cutlers miſhap example others, that they brag not ouer haſtily of gaine eaſily gotten, leaſt they chance to pay as deerely for it, as he did.
            
            
               
               Of a yoong Nip that cunningly beguiled an antient profeſſor of that trade, and his queane with him, at a play.
               
                  A Good fellow that was newly entered into the nipping craft, and had not as yet attained to any acquaintance with the chiefe and cunning maiſters of that trade: In the Chriſtmas holy-dayes laſt, came to ſee a playe at the Bull within Biſhops gate, there to take his benefit as time and place would permit him. Not long had hee ſtayed in the preaſe, but hee had gotten a yoong mans purſe out of his pocket, which when he had, hee ſtepped into the ſtable to take out the money, and to conuey away the purſe. But looking on his commoditie, hee founde nothing therein but white counters, a thimble and a broken three pence, which belike the fellowe that ought it, had doone of purpoſe to deceiue the cutpurſe withall, or elſe had plaide at the Cardes for counters, and ſo carried his winnings about him till his next ſitting to playe. Somewhat diſpleaſed to be ſo ouertaken, he looked aſide, and ſpied a luſtie youth entring at the doore, and his drab with him: this fellow he had heard to bee one of the fineſt Nippers about the towne, and euer caried his queane with him, for conueiance when the ſtratagem was performed: he puts vp the counters into the purſe againe, and follows cloſe to ſee ſome peece of their ſeruice. Among a companie of ſeemely men was this luſtie companion and his minion gotten, where both they might beſt beholde the playe, and worke for aduantage, and euer this young Nip was next to him, to marke when he ſhould attempt any exployte, ſtanding as it were more then halfe betweene the cunning Nip and his drab, onely to learne

ſome part of their ſkill. In ſhort time the deed was performed, but how, the yoong Nip could not eaſily diſcern, only he felt him ſhift his hand toward his trug, to conney the purſe to her, but ſhe being ſomwhat mindful of the play, becauſe a merriment was then on the ſtage, gaue no regarde: whereby thinking he had puld her by the coat, hee twicht the yoong Nip by the cloke, who taking aduantage of this offer, put downe his hand and receiued the purſe of him: then counting it diſcourteſie to let him looſe al his labour, he ſoftly pluckt the queane by the coate, which ſhée féeling, and imagining it had beene her companions hand: receiued of him the firſt purſe with the white counters in it. Then fearing leaſt his ſtay ſhould hinder him, and ſéeing the other intended to haue more purſes ere he departed: away goes the yoong Nip with the purſe he got ſo eaſily, wherin (as I haue heard) was xxvii. ſhillings and odde mony, which did ſo much content him, as that he had beguiled ſo ancient a ſtāder in that profeſſion: what the other thought when he found the purſe, and could not geſſe howe hée was cooſened: I leaue to your cenſures, onely this makes me ſmile, that one falſe knaue can beguile another, which biddes honeſt men looke the better to their purſſes.
            
            
               How a Gentleman was craftily deceiued of a Chayne of Golde and his purſſe, in Paules Church in London.
               
                  A Gentleman of the countrey, who (as I haue herd ſince the time of his miſhap, whereof I am now to ſpeake) had about halfe a yeere before buryed his wife, and belike thinking wel of ſome other Gentlewoman, whom hee ment to make account of as his ſecond choiſe: vpon good hope or otherwiſe perſwaded,

he came vp to London to prouide himſelfe of ſuch neceſſaries as the Countrey is not vſually ſtored withall. Beſides, ſilkes, veluets, cambrickes and ſuch like, he bought a Chaine of Golde that coſt him fiftie and ſeauen pounds and odde money, whereof becauſe he would haue the mayden head or firſt wearing himſelfe, hee preſently put it on in the Goldſmiths ſhop, and ſo walked therewith about London, as his occaſions ſerued. But let not the Gentleman bee offended, who if this Booke come to his handes, can beſt auouch the trueth of this diſcourſe, if heere by the waye I blame his raſh pride, or ſimple credulitie: for betwéene the one and other, the Chaine hee paide ſo déere for about ten of the clock in the morning, the Cunny catchers the ſame day ere night ſhared amongſt them, a matter whereat hee may well gréeue, and I be ſorie, in reſpect hee is my very good friend: but to the purpoſe. This Gentleman walking in Paules, with his Chaine faire glittering about his necke, talking with his man about ſome buſineſſe: was well viewed and regarded by a crewe of Conny-catchers, whoſe téeth watred at his goodly Chaine, yet knew not how to come by it hanging as it did, and therfore entred into ſecret conſpiration among themſelues, if they could not come by all the Chaine, yet how they might make it lighter by halfe a ſcore poundes at the leaſt. Still had they their eyes on the honeſt Gentleman, who little doubted any ſuch treaſon intended againſt his ſo late bought bargaine: and they hauing laid their plot, ech one to be aſſiſtant in this enterpriſe, ſaw when the Gentleman diſmiſſed his ſeruant, to go about ſuch affaires as hee had appointed him, himſelfe ſtill walking there vp and downe the middle Iſle. One of theſe mates, that ſtood moſt on his cunning in theſe

exploytes, folowed the ſeruing man foorth of the Church calling him by diuers names, as Iohn, Thomas, William, &c. as though he had knowne his right name, but could not hit on it: which whether he did or no I know not, but wel I wot the ſeruing man turned back again, and ſeeing him that called him ſéemed a Gentleman, booted and cloaked after the neweſt faſhion, came with his hat in his hand to him, ſaying: Sir, do ye call me? Marie doe I my fréend quoth the other, dooſt not thou ſerue ſuch a Gentleman? and named one as himſelfe pleaſed. No truely Sir, anſwered the ſeruingman, I know not any ſuch Gentleman as you ſpeake of. By my troth replyed thr Conny-catcher, I am aſſured I knew thée and thy Maiſter, though now I cannot ſuddenly remember my ſelfe. The ſeruingman fearing no harme, yet fitting the humour of this trecherous companion, tolde right his Maſters name whome he ſerued, and that his Maſter was euen then walking in Paules. O Gods will (quoth the Cony-catcher, repeating his maſters name) a very honeſt Gentleman, of ſuch a place is he not? naming a ſhire of the Country: for hee muſt knowe both name, Country and ſomtimes what Gentlemen dwell neere the partie that is to bee ouer reached, ere hee can procéed. No in deede Sir (anſwered the ſeruingman, with ſuch reuerence as it had béene to an honeſt Gentleman indéed) my Maſter is of ſuch a place, a mile from ſuch a Towne, and heard by ſuch a knights houſe: by which report the deceiuer was halfe inſtructed, becauſe though he was ignorant of the fellows Maſter, yet wel he knew the Country, and the knight named. So crauing pardon that he had miſtaken him, he returnes againe into the Church, and the ſeruingman trudgeth about his aſſigned buſines. Being come to the reſt of

the crew, he appointes one of them (whome he knew to be expert in deed) to take this matter in hand, for him ſelf might not do it, leaſt the ſeruingman ſhould return and know him, he ſchooled the reſt likewiſe what euery man ſhould do when the pinch came, and changing his cloke with one of his fellowes, walked by himſelfe attending the feate: and euery one being as ready, the apointed fellow makes his ſally foorth, and comming to the Gentleman, calling him by his name, giues him the courteſie and embrace, likewiſe thanking him for good chéere he had at his houſe, which he did with ſuch ſéemly behauiour & proteſtation, as the Gentleman (thinking the other to be no leſſe) vſed like action of kindeneſſe to him. Now as Country Gentlemen haue many viſiters both with neere dwelling neighbours, and freends that iourney from farre, whom they can hardly remember, but ſome principall one that ſerues as countenance to the other: ſo hee not diſcrediting the cunning mates words, who ſtill at euery point alleaged his kinred to the knight neighbor to the Gentleman, which the poore ſeruing man had (doubting no ill) reuealed before, and that both there and at his owne houſe in hawking time with that knight and other Gentlemen of the countrey he had liberally taſted his kindnes: deſiring pardon that he had forgotten him, and offered him the curteſie of the citie. The Conny-catcher excuſed himſelfe for that time, ſaying, at their next meeting hee would beſtow it on him. Then ſeeming to haue eſpyed his chaine, and commending the fairenes and woorkemanſhip thereof: ſaies, I pray ye ſir take a litle counſel of a friend, it may be you will returne thankes for it. I wonder quoth he, you dare weare ſuch a coſtly Iewell ſo open in ſight, which is euen but a baite to entire bad men to aduenture

time and place for it, and no where ſooner then in this cittie, where (I may ſay to you) are ſuch a number of Connycatchers, Coſſoners and ſuch like, that a man can ſcarcely keepe any thing from them, they haue ſo many reaches and ſleights to beguile withall: which a very eſpeciall freend of mine found too true not manye dayes ſince. Heerevpon he tolde a very ſolemne tale, of villanies and knaueries in his own profeſſion, wherby he reported his fréend had loſt a watch of gold: ſhewing how cloſely his friend wore it in his boſome, and howe ſtraungely it was gotten from him, that the gentleman by that diſc
                     •
                  urſe waxed halfe affraid of his chaine. And giuing him many thankes for his good warning, preſently takes the Chaine from about his necke, and tying it vp faſt in a handkercher▪ put it vp into his ſléeue ſaying. If the Conny-catcher get it héere, let him not ſpare it. Not a little did the tretcher ſmile in his ſléeue, hearing the raſhe ſecuritie, but in deede ſimplicitie of the Gentleman, and no ſooner ſawe he it put vp, but preſently he counted it ſure his owne, by the aſſiſtance of his complices, that lay in an ambuſcado for the purpoſe: with embraces and courteſies on either ſide, the Conny-catcher departs, leauing the gentleman walking there ſtill: whereat the crewe were not a little offended, that he ſtill kept in the Church, and would not goe abroad. Well, at length (belike remembring ſome buſineſſe) the Gentleman taking leaue of an other that talked with him, haſted to go forth at the furtheſt weſt doore of Paules, which he that had talked with him, and gaue him ſuch counſell perceiuing, hied out of the other doore, and got to the entrance ere hee came foorth, the reſt following the gentleman at an inche. As hee was ſtepping out, the other ſtept in, and let fall a key, hauing

his hat ſo low ouer his eyes, that he could not well diſcerne his face, and ſtooping to take vp the keye, kept the Gentleman from going backward or forward, by reaſon his legge was ouer the threſhold. The formoſt Conny-catcher behind, pretending a quarrell vnto him that ſtooped, rapping out an oth, and drawing his dagger, ſaide: Doe I meete the villaine? Nay, he ſhall not ſcape me now, and ſo made offer to ſtrike him.
               The gentleman at his ſtanding vp, ſeeing it was he that gaue him ſuch good counſaile, and pretended himſelfe his verie friend, but neuer imagining this traine was made for him: ſtept in his defence, when the other following tript vp his heeles: ſo that hee and his counſellour were downe together, and two more vppon them, ſtriking with their daggers verie eagerly, marry indeed the gentleman had moſt of the blowes, and both his handkercher with the chaine, and alſo his pu
                     •
                  ſſe with three and fiftie ſhillings in it, were taken out of his pocket in this ſtrugling, euen by the man that himſelfe defended.
               It was maruellous to behold, howe not regarding the Villaines wordes vttered before in the Church, nor thinking vppon the charge about him (which after hee had thus treacherouſlye loſt vnwittingly): he ſtands pacifiyng them that were not diſcontented, but onely to beguile him. But they vowing that they would preſently go for their weapons, and ſo to the field, told the Gentleman he labourd but in vaine, for fight they muſt and would, and ſo going downe by Paules Chaine, left the gentleman made a Conny going vp toward Fléetſtreet, ſorry for his new Counſeller and freend, and wiſhing him good lucke in the fight: which in deede was with nothing but wine pots, for ioy of their late gotten

bootie. Neere to Saint Dunſtones church the Gentleman remembred himſelf, and feeling his pocket ſo light had ſuddenly more greefe at his hart, then euer happen to him or any man againe. Backe he comes to ſee if hee could eſpye anye of them, but they were farre inoughe from him: God ſend him better hap when he goes next a wooing, and that this his loſſe may bee a warning to others.
            
            
               How a cunning knaue got a Truncke well ſtuffed with linnen and certaine parcels of plate out of a Cittizens houſe, and how the Maſter of the houſe holpe the deceiuer to carry away his owne goods.
               WIthin the Cittie of London, dwelleth a worldly man, who hath very great dealing in his trade, and his ſhoppe very well frequented with cuſtomers: had ſuch a ſhrewd miſchance of late by a Conny-catcher, as may well ſerue for an example to others leaſt they haue the like. A cunning villaine, that had long time haunted this Cittizens houſe, and gotten many a cheat which he carryed away ſafely: made it his cuſtome when hee wanted money, to helpe him ſelfe euer where hee had ſo often, diuers things he had which were neuer miſt, eſpecially ſuch as appertained to the Cittizens trade, but when anye were found wanting, they could not deuiſe which way they were gone, ſo pollitiquely this fellow alwayes behaued himſelfe, well knew hee what times of greateſt buſineſſe this Cittizen had in his trade, and when the ſhop is moſt ſtored with Chapmen: then would he ſtep vp the ſtares (for there was and is another doore to the houſe beſides that which entreth into the ſhoppe) and what was next hand came euer away with. One time

aboue the reſt, in an euening about Candlemas, when day light ſhuts in about ſixe of the clocke, hee watched to doe ſome feate in the houſe, and ſéeing the miſtreſſe goe foorth with her maide, the goodman and his folkes very buſie in the ſhop: vp the ſtaires he goes as he was wonte to doo, and lifting vp the latch of the hall portall doore, ſaw no body néere to trouble him, when ſtepping into the next chamber, where the Cittizen and his wife vſually lay, at the beds féete there ſtood a handſome truncke, wherein was verye good linnen, a faire gilte Salte, two ſiluer French bowles for Wine, two ſiluer drinking pots, a ſtone Iugge couered with ſiluer, and a dooſen of ſiluer ſpoones. This truncke hee brings to the ſtayres head, and making faſt the doore, againe, drawes it downe the ſteppes ſo ſoftlye as hee could, for it was ſo bigge and heauy, as he could not eaſilie carry it, hauing it out at the doore, vnſéene of anye neighbour or any body elſe, he ſtood ſtrugling with it to lift it vp on the ſtall, which by reaſon of the weight trobled him very much. The goodman comming foorth of his ſhop, to bid a cuſtomer or two farwell, made the fellowe affraide he ſhould now bee taken for all togither: but calling his wittes together to eſcape if he could, he ſtoode gazing vp at the ſigne belonging to the houſe, as though hee were deſirous to know what ſigne it was: which the Cittizen perceiuing, came to him and aſked him what he ſought for? I looke for the ſigne of the blew bell ſir, quoth the fellowe, where a gentleman hauing taken a chamber for this tearme time, hath ſent me hether with this his Troncke of apparrell: quoth the Citizen I know no ſuch ſigne in this ſtréet, but in the next (naming it) there is ſuch a one indéed, and there dwelleth one that letteth foorth Chambers to Gentlemen.

Truely ſir quoth the fellowe, thats the houſe I ſhould goe to, I pray you ſir lend me your hand, but to help the Trunck on my back, for I thinking to eaſe me a while vpon your ſtall, ſet it ſhorte, and now I can hardly get it vp againe. The Cittizen not knowing his owne Trunke, but indeede neuer thinking on any ſuch notable deceite: helpes him vp with the Trunke, and ſo ſends him away roundly with his owne goods. When the Truncke was miſt, I leaue to your conceits what houſholde greefe there was on all ſides, eſpecially the goodman himſelfe, who remembring how he helpt the fellow vp with a Trunke, perceiued that heereby hee had beguiled himſelfe, and loſte more then in haſte hee ſhould recouer againe. Howe this may admoniſh others, I leaue to the iudgement of the indifferent opinion, that ſee when honeſt meaning is ſo craftily beleagerd, as good foreſight muſt bee vſed to preuent ſuch daungers.
            
            
               How a Broker was cunningly ouer-reached by as craftie a knaue as himſelfe, and brought in danger of the Gallowes.
               IT hath beene vſed as a common by-word, a craftie knaue néedeth no Broker, whereby it ſhould appeare that there can hardlie bee a craftier knaue then a Broker. Suſpend your iudgements till you haue heard this Diſcourſe enſuing, and then as you pleaſe, cenſure both the one and the other.
               A Ladie of the Countrie ſent vp a ſeruant whome ſhe might well put in truſt, to prouide hir of a gowne anſwerable to ſuch directions as ſhe had giuen him, which was of good price, as may appeare by the outſide and

lace, whereto doubtleſſe was euerie other thing agreeable: for the Tayler had ſeuentéen yards of the beſt black ſatten could be got for monie, and ſo much golde lace, beſide ſpangles, as valued thirtéene pound, what elſe was beſide I know not▪ but let it ſuffice, thus much was loſt▪ and therefore let vs to the manner how.
               The ſatten and the lace being brought to the Tayler that ſhould make the gowne, and ſpread abroade on the ſhop boord to be meaſured, certaine good fellowes of the Conny-catching profeſſion chanced to go by, who ſéeing ſo rich lace, and ſo excellent good ſatten, began to commune with themſelues how they might make ſome purchaſe of what they had ſéene: and quickly it was to bée done or not at al. As euer in a crew of this quality, there is ſome one more ingenious and politique then the reſt, or at leaſt wiſe that couets to make himſelfe more famous then the reſt: ſo this inſtant was there one in this companie that did ſweare his cunning ſhould deepelie deceiue him, but he would haue both the lace and ſatten, When hauing laid the plot with his companions, how and which waie their helpe might ſtand them in ſtead, this they procéeded.
               Well noted they the ſeruing-man that ſtood in the ſhoppe with the Tailer, and gathered by his diligent attendance, that he had ſome charge of he gowne there to be made, wherefore by him muſt they worke their trecherie intended, and vſe him as an inſtrument to beguile himſelfe. One of them ſitting in a ſeate nere vnto the Tailers ſtall, could eaſily heare the talke that paſſed betweene the ſeruing-man and the Tayler, where among other communication, it was concluded that the gowne ſhould be made of the ſelfe ſame faſhion 
                     〈◊〉
                   euery point, as another Ladies was who then lay in the citie,

and that meaſure being taken by her, the ſame would fitlie ſerue the Lady for whome the gowne was to bee made: now the ſeruingman intended to go ſpeake with the Ladie, and vppon a token agreed betweene them (which he careleſlie ſpake ſo lowd, that the Conny-catcher heard it) he would as her leiſure ſerued, certifie the Tailer, and he ſhould bring the ſtuffe with him, to haue the Ladies opinion both of the one and the other.
               The ſeruingman being gone about his affaires, the ſubtill mate that had liſtned to all their talke, acquaints his fellows both with the determination and token appointed for the Tailers comming to the Lady. The guide and leader to all the reſt for villany, though there was no one but was better ſkilde in ſuch matters then honeſtie: he appoints that one of them ſhould go to the tauerne, which was not farre off, & laying two fagots on the fire in a roome by himſelfe, and a quarte of wine filled for countenance of the treacherie: another of that crue ſhould giue attendance on him, as if hee were his maiſter, being bare headed, and ſir humblie anſwering at euery word. To the tauern goes this counterfet gentleman, and his ſeruant waiting on him, where euery thing was performed as is before rehearſed. When the maſter knaue calling the drawer, demanded if there dwelt neere at hand a ſkilfull Tailer, that could make a ſuite of veluet for himſelfe, marry it was to be doone with very great ſpeed.
               The Drawer named the Tailer that we now ſpeake of, & vpon the drawers commending his cunning, the man in all haſt was ſent for to a gentleman, for whō he muſt make a ſute of veluet foorthwith. Vpon talke had of the ſtuffe, how much was to be bought of euery thing appertayning thereto: he muſt immediatly take meaſure

of this counterfet gentleman▪ becauſe he knew not when to returne that waye againe, afterward they would go to the Mercers. As the Tailer was taking meaſure on him bare headed, as if he had bin a ſubſtantiall gentleman indéed, the craftie mate had cunningly gotten his purſſe out of his pocket, at the one ſtring whereof was faſtened a little key, and at the other his ſignet ring: This bootie he was ſure of all readie, whether he ſhould get any thing els or no of the miſchiefe intended, ſtepping to the window he cuts the ring from the purſſe, and by his ſuppoſed man (rounding him in the eare) ſendes it to the plot-layer of this knauerie, minding to traine the tailer along with him, as it were to the mercers, while he the meane time tooke order for the other matter. Afterward ſpeaking alowde to his man, ſirrha, quoth hee, diſpatch what I bad you, and about foure of the clock méet me in Paules, by that time I hope the tailer and I ſhall haue diſpacht. To Cheapſide goeth the honeſt Tailer with this notorious diſſembler, not miſſing his purſſe for the ſpace of two houres after, in leſſe then halfe which time the ſatten and golde lace was gotten likewiſe by the other villain from the Taylers houſe in this order.
               Being ſure the Tayler ſhould bee kept abſent, hee ſends another mate home to his houſe, who abuſed his ſeruants with this deuiſe: that the ladies man had met their maſter abroad, and had him to the other Ladie to take meaſure of her, and leaſt they ſhould delaye the time too long, hee was ſent for the ſatten and lace, declaring the token appointed, and withall giuing their maſters ſignet ring for better confirmation of his meſſage, The ſeruants could doe no leſſe then deliuer it, being commanded (as they ſuppoſed) by ſo credible teſtimony:

neither did the leaſu
                     ••
                   of anie one ſerue to goe with the the meſſenger, who ſéemed an honeſt young Gentleman and carried no cauſe of diſtruſt in his countenaunce: wherefore they deliuered him the lace and ſatten folded vp together as it was, and deſired him to will their maſter to make ſome ſpéede home, both for cutting out of worke, and other occaſions.
               To a Broker fit for their purpoſe, goes this deceiuer with the ſatten lace, who knowing well they could not come honeſtly by it, nor anie thing elſe hee bought of that crew, as often before he had dealt much with them: either gaue them not ſo much as they would haue, or at leaſt as they iudged they coulde haue in another place, for which the ring-leader of this cooſnage, vowed in his mind to be reuenged on the Broker. The maſter knaue who had ſpent two houres and more in vaine with the Tailer, and would not like of anie veluet he ſaw, when he perceiued that he miſt his purſe, and could not deuiſe how or where he had loſt it, ſhewed himſelfe verie forrie for his miſhap, and ſayd in the morning he woulde ſend the veluet home to his houſe, for he knew where to ſpéed of better then anie he had ſeene in the ſhops. Home goes the Tailer verie ſadly, where he was entertained with a greater miſchance, for there was the Ladies ſeruingman ſwearing and ſtamping, that he had not ſéen their maſter ſince the morning they parted, neither had hee ſent for the ſatten and lace, but when the ſeruantes iuſtified their innocencie, beguiled both with the true token rehearſed, and their maſters ring, it excéedeth my cunning to ſet downe anſwerable wordes to this excéeding griefe and amazement on their part, but moſt of al the honeſt Tailer, who ſped the better by the Brokers wilfulnes, as afterward it happened, which made him

the better brooke the loſſe of his purſe. That night all meanes were vſed that coulde bee, both to the Mercers, brokers, goldſmiths, goldſiners, & ſuch like, where happily ſuch thinges doe come to bee ſolde: but all was in vaine, the onely helpe came by the inuenter of this villanie, who ſcant ſléeping all night, in regard of the brokers extreme gaining, both by him and thoſe of his profeſſion: the next morning he came to the Tailers houſe, at what time hee eſpied him with the Ladies ſeruingman, comming forth of the doores, and into the tauern he went to report what a miſhap hee had vpon the ſending for him thether the daie before.
               As he was but newly entered his ſadde diſcourſe, in comes the partie offended with the broker, and hauing heard all (whereof none could make better report than himſelfe) he takes the tailer and ſeruing-man aſide, and pretending great griefe for both their cauſes, demands what they would thinke him worthy of that could help them to their good againe. On condition to méete with ſuch a friend, offer was made of fiue pound, and after ſundrie ſpéeches paſſing betwéen them alone, he ſeeming that he would worke the recouerie thereof by arte, and they promiſing not to diſcloſe the man that did thē good, he drew forth a little booke out of his boſome, whether it was latine or engliſh it ſkilled not, for hee coulde not reade a word on it, then deſiring them to ſpare him alone a while, they ſhoulde perceiue what hee woulde doe for them. Their heartes encouraged with ſome good hope, kept all his wordes ſecret to themſelues: and not long had they ſitten abſent out of the roome, but he called thē in againe, and ſéeming as though he had bene a ſcholler in déed, ſayd he found by his figure that a broker in ſuch a place had their goods loſt, and in ſuch a place of the

houſe they ſhould finde it, bidding them go thether with all ſpéed, and as they found his wordes, ſo (with reſeruing to themſelues how they came to knowledge therof) to méet him there againe in the euening, and reward him as he had deſerued.
               Awaie in haſt goes the Tailer and the ſeruing-man, and entering the houſe with the Conſtable, found them in the place where hee that reueald it, knew the broker alwaie laid ſuch gotten goods. Of their ioy againe, I leaue you to coniecture, and thinke you ſée the broker with a good paire of bolts on his héeles, readie to take his farewell of the worlde in a halter, when time ſhall ſerue. The counterfet cunning man, and artificial conny-catcher, as I heard, was paide his fiue poundes that night. Thus one craftie knaue beguiled another, let each take héed of dealing with anie ſuch kind of people.
            
            
               FINIS.
               
            
            
         
      
   