
      
         
            
            
            HIS MAIESTIES GRACIOVS LETTER TO THE EARLE OF SOVTH-HAMPTON, Treaſurer, and to the Councell and Company of Virginia heere: commanding the preſent ſetting vp of Silke works, and planting of Vines in Virginia.
            And the Letter of the Treaſurer, Councell, and Company, to the Gouernour and Councell of State there, for the ſtrict execution of his Maieſties Royall Commands herein.
            Alſo a Treatiſe of the Art of making Silke: OR, Directions for the making of lodgings, and the breeding, nouriſhing, and ordering of Silkewormes, and for the planting of Mulbery trees, and all other things belonging to the Silke Art.
            Together with inſtructions how to plant and dreſſe Vines, and to make Wine, and how to dry Raiſins, Figs, and other fruits, and to ſet Oliues, Oranges, Lemons, Pomegranates, Almonds, and many other fruits, &c.
            And in the end, a Concluſion, with ſundry profitable remonſtrances to the Colonies.
            Set foorth for the benefit of the two renowned and moſt hopefull Siſters, Virginia, and the Summer-Ilands.
            
            By Iohn Bonoeil Frenchman, ſeruant in theſe imployments to his moſt Excellent Maieſty of Great Brittaine, France, Ireland, Virginia, and the Summer-Ilands.
            Publiſhed by Authority.
            
               London Printed by Felix Kyngston. 1622.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  royal seal
                  BRITAINIAE ❀ FRANCIAE ❀ ET ❀ HIBERNIAE ❀ SIGILVM ❀ REGIS ❀ MAGNAE ❀
               
            
         
         
            
            JAMES R.
            
               RIght truſty and welbeloued, We greet you well: Whereas We vnderſtand, that the Soyle in Virginia naturally yeeldeth ſtore of excellent Mulbery trees, We haue taken into Our Princely conſideration, the great benefit that may grow to the Aduenturers and Planters, by the breed of Silkewormes, and ſetting vp of Silkewormes in thoſe parts. And therefore of Our gracious Inclination to a deſigne of ſo much honour and aduantage to the publike, Wee haue

thought good, as at ſundry other times, ſo now more particularly to recommend it to your ſpeciall care, hereby charging and requiring you to take ſpeedy order, that our people there, vſe all poſsible diligence in breeding Silkewormes, and erecting Silkeworkes, and that they rather beſtow their trauell in compaſſing this rich and ſolid Commodity, then in that of Tobacco; which beſides much vnneceſſary expence, brings with it many diſorders and inconueniences. And for as much as Our ſeruant, Iohn Bonoeil hath taken paines in ſetting downe the true vſe of the Silkeworme, together with the Art of Silkemaking, and of planting Vines, and that his experience and abilities may much conduce to the aduancemēt of this buſines; We doe hereby likewiſe require you to cauſe his directions, both for the ſaid

Silkeworkes and Ʋineyards, to bee carefully put in practice thorowout our Plantations there, that ſo the worke may goe on cheerfully, and receiue no more interruptions nor delayes.
            
               
                  Giuen vnder Our Signet, at our Palace of Weſtminſter,
                  
                     the ninth day of Iuly, in the twentieth yeere of our Raigne of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the fiue and fiftieth.
                  
               
               To Our right truſty and right welbeloued Couſin and Councellour, HENRY, Earle of South-hampton, Treaſurer of our Plantation in Virginia, and to Our truſty and welbeloued, the Deputy, and others of Our ſaid Plantation.
               Virginia.
            
         
         
            
            May it pleaſe the Reader to amend the faults in Printing thus.
            
               
                  
                     
                        Pag.
                     
                     
                        line
                     
                      
                     
                        Amend.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        17.
                     
                     
                        17.
                     
                     ſeuen or eight weekes
                     ſixe or ſeuen weekes
                  
                  
                     
                        66.
                     
                     
                        20.
                     
                     in ſtore of Beares
                     in ſtore of Beuers
                  
                  
                     
                        69.
                     
                     
                        19.
                     
                     millions of Mulberie trees
                     millions of Mulbery ſeeds
                  
                  
                     
                        70.
                     
                     
                        11.
                     
                     to this Silkeworme
                     to this Silke worke
                  
                  
                     ibid.
                     
                        21.
                     
                     of the Silkewormes breede
                     of the Silkewormes bredde
                  
                  
                     ibid.
                     
                        30.
                     
                     the Silkewormes ſpinning
                     the Silkewormes comming
                  
                  
                     
                        76.
                     
                     
                        4.
                     
                     ſtrest rule
                     ſtrest rules
                  
                  
                     ibid.
                     
                        18.
                     
                     onely Spaine
                     onely in Spaine
                  
                  
                     
                        82.
                     
                     
                        4.
                     
                     and a
                           •
                        ngentle them
                     and engentle them
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT NOBLE COMPANY OF VIRGINIA, health.
            
               My Lords and others,
            
            
               I Haue been induced to preſent this ſmall Tract vnto you from the ſuperaboundant deſire I haue to further and aduance the good ſucceſſe of that noble Plantation: This diſcourſe is therfore touching the feeding and intertainement of your Silkewormes: it ſhews how Mulbery trees muſt bee planted, and their leaues gathered, how to ſowe the ſeeds of Mulbery trees for him that will ſet vp a Seminary or Orchard of the beſt trees of that nature: alſo how to erect, ſet vp, and build houſes for the Silkewormes: withall, this giues direction how to plant and ſet the Vine, how to dreſſe and till it, of ſundry ſorts and faſhions. Likewiſe it ſhewes when the grapes are fit to be gathered, and how they are to make Wine. Furthermore,

how to plant and ſet Peach trees and Figge trees, which in hot countries are commonly ſet amongſt Vines, in Vineyards in the open fields: Alſo, how to ſet the ſtones of diuers kindes of fruites, and how to dry both Rayſins, Figges and Peaches, to keepe and preſerue long. I haue a ſeruant of mine, who hath dwelt in Virginia theſe ſixe yeeres, beſides others of my friends and acquaintance, of the Countrey of Languedock in France (which now dwell in Virginia alſo, being ſent thither at the great charge of the Company, to make ſilke and dreſſe Vines) all which haue certified me by their letters, which I haue receiued from thence, that the Woods in Virginia are full of Mulbery trees, of the talleſt and broadeſt that euer they ſaw in any Country, and great numbers there are of ſundry ſizes and bignes: and namely, that they haue ſeene there ſome ſpeciall trees, of which one alone is able to bring forth as many leaues as will feede ſo many Silkewormes, as ſhall yeeld fiue pound of ſilke per annum. Alſo, they informe me, that there is great aboundance of Vines in Virginia, and many of them well loaden with Grapes: but becauſe that young growing wood, buſhes and weeds, ſo much choake and couer them, they cannot come to their full ripeneſſe: and the vermine, by reaſon the grapes grow in the woods, eate many of them vp before they come to maturity: moreouer, they auouch that Virginia is a better Country then Languedock, which is one of the fruitefulleſt Prouinces in all France, by reaſon of the heate

thereof and the richnes of the ſoyle, which notwithſtanding, if ſo be Virginia be once well inhabited and peopled, it muſt needs exceed it; namely for this reaſon, becauſe the Mulbery trees, and the Vines doe both grow naturally in Virginia, with many other good things, which come only by force and labor in the beſt parts of France: and none may doubt hereof, to wit, that the Vine being choſen of the beſt plants there, and well dreſſed▪ but that it will aſſuredly bring forth very good fruite. Alſo, other Vine plants may be ſent thither from other Countries, to try which of them will proue beſt: and of that which wee haue formerly ſaid, that the Mulbery trees grow in aboundance naturally in Virginia, it muſt needs thence follow, that the Wormes will feed much better, and with leſſe labour of men, then thoſe in other Countries doe, where Mulbery trees grow onely, with maine labour and toyle, and the ſilke alſo of them will be farre better: and ſuch quantity of ſilke may eaſily be made in Virginia (if there were ſtore of hands) as in a very ſhort time it would ſerue all Chriſtendome. What an honour and wealth it would be to this Kingdome of England, all men may iudge.
            
               
               
                  2. The manner how to prepare the places, wherein Silkewormes are to be nouriſhed.
               
                  CErtaine, yea and many Authors haue written, that ſuch places are neither to be too neere the earth, nor too neere the tiles; neither too low nor too high: to whom I confeſſe, this is good for ſuch men as haue choyce of places; but there are many poore folkes, that are not able to get houſing with all commodities and fitnes: and I haue ſeene by experience in the Countrey of Languedock, Prouence, and in Seuenes, and in the Countrey of Auignon, and in ſome part of Italy, certaine poore folkes which dwell out of Townes, which haue but one houſe vpon an earthen floore, and in it but one roome, where at one end they haue their bed, and at the other they dreſſe their meate, which notwithſtanding nouriſh Silkewormes in it, in the ſeaſon of the yeere, at which time they prepare and ſet forth a corner of the ſaid cottage to the ſame effect, according to the quantity of the leaues which they haue: And oftentimes they pay for the leaues of a great Mulbery tree, ſixe or eyght ſhillings the yeere, yea and many times the Wormes thriue better in them, then in great Chambers with other men, I meane, for the little quantity of Wormes which ſuch poore people haue.
               Moreouer I haue obſerued, that the Silkewormes doe loue and affect the ayre that comes

from the dry ſweet earth: prouided that care be had when the weather is cold, or moiſt, to make ſome fire in ſuch roomes, either of wood or of coales, that are not of any ſtrong ſmell.
            
            
               
                  3. Of the building of houſes to nouriſh Silkewormes in.
               
                  THoſe that will build with ſmall charges houſes in Virginia, wherein to feed Wormes after the manner as is practiſed in Meſsina in Sicilie (in which countrey there is ſome ſtore of Mulbery trees within the Woods) it is a thing which may eaſily bee done alſo in Virginia, becauſe there are likewiſe great numbers of Mulbery trees there within the Woods, and the Countrey hot, and all things for this purpoſe moſt fitting. This to doe then, they muſt chuſe a place in a good ayre, and neere the Mulbery trees, and there build a long houſe, in forme of a Bowling Alley, couered ouer; but a little higher and ſomewhat larger. They muſt couer it well, either with tiles, plankes, or other things, againſt the heate and raine, for the preſeruation of the Wormes. And the ſides of the walles muſt be well cloſed either with plaſter, plankes or other matter. In theſe walles, make many windowes on both the ſides of the houſe; let the windowes be of wood, to open and ſhut, and to giue ayre to the Wormes, whenſoeuer they need it; and for as much as the South winde is hurtfull to the Wormes, thoſe windowes muſt

be ſhut carefully on that ſide, when the winde blowes there; theſe windowes may be couered with paper, which windowes may be ſet on and taken off the hinges when neede is. Furthermore, ſome muſt watch, that neither Rats, Mice, Birds, nor Poultry come there; for they will eate vp the Wormes. Likewiſe the Piſſemires ſometimes hurt them much, and therefore care muſt bee had, to marke the places on which ſide they come, and there ſowe ſaw-duſt of Oake wood, Aſhes, or Lyme, or elſe rub the walles whereby they paſſe, with chalke, or with the oyle of Iuniper, or any other kinde of oyle, on the outſide of the houſe onely: for on the inſide of the houſe, oyle would be hurtfull to the Wormes; beware alſo, that the paper of the windowes bee not oyled.
            
            
               
                  4. Touching the erecting and building vp of Hot-houſes or Ouens.
               
                  SVch men as are prouided of fit houſes as aforeſaid for the ſaid Wormes, may build in them Hot-houſes, as they make in ſuch countries, wherein they nouriſh great numbers of Silkewormes. They muſt build of theſe Hot-houſes, at both the ends of the houſe, if it bee great and ſpacious; but if the houſe be little, one will bee enough. And it muſt bee built in this forme following. Firſt, a hole muſt be made in the houſe wall, wherein you will build your

Hot-houſe or Ouen, and therein build vp, as it were an Ouen, after the manner of the Countrey Ouens. The Ouens mouth muſt be at the outſide of the houſe, with a little Chimney to it, and the backe of the Ouen, within the inſide of the houſe. Then muſt you haue earthen pots, like Flower pots, without holes in the bottomes, and ſcarce ſo big as they, which muſt be made purpoſely, ſo as they may be able to abide the fire▪ Theſe pots muſt be placed with a diſtant proportion of ſpace, betweene pot and pot, and ſo build them in, within the vault of the ſaid Ouen, with bricke and clay; the mouth of the ſaid pots muſt ſtand out at the backe of the Ouen, and looke into the inſide of the houſe, but the bottomes of the pots muſt ſtand and looke towards the fire, within the inſide of the Ouen: and in this manner muſt the pots be incorporate within the Ouen. After this done, you may make fire in the Ouen when neede ſhall bee; for the pots being hot, will thereby caſt a heate out, and warme all the houſe, and the ſmoke gets out at the chimney of the Ouens mouth, at the outſide of the houſe. Item, it will be good to put into theſe pots, certaine branches of Roſemary, or Tyme, Roſes, or other ſweet ſmels, for that is a meane to keepe the houſe in a temperate and reaſonable heate, as need and occaſion requireth. Beſides, thoſe ſweet ſmels are very agreeable and pleaſing to the Wormes. Theſe Ouens or Stoues will bee very vſefull in Virginia, principally in thoſe Silkeworme-houſes which ſhall be built amongſt the

Woods, where ſtore of Mulbery trees grow: for theſe places being more cold, ſhady, and moiſt then others, where the ſunne comes freely: by this meanes they may heate, dry, temper, and well qualifie the ayre there as they pleaſe, and make the place thereby euery way well agreeing to the Silkewormes.
               In theſe wooddy places alſo, you ſhall do well to cut downe all other trees that grow neere to the Mulbery trees, and ouer-ſhade them, and alſo to prune off the boughs of the Mulbery trees that grow too thicke, that ſo the Sun may come fairely to the trees and leaues, for the bettering of the food for the Silkewormes.
            
            
               
                  5. Of the greatneſſe of the Houſes.
               
                  MEn may build them as great, or as little as they pleaſe, albeit the larger, ſtill the more commodious: howſoeuer, it will be well, to make a partition in one end of the houſe, and to boord that corner ſo parted with boords, to coole the leaues in it, as ſoone as they are gathered, and to make a dore on the outſide, to goe in thereat to lay in the leaues, and the other dore on the inſide, to take out and giue meate to the Wormes. Item, it will bee conuenient to make either in the midſt of the houſe, or againſt the walles, as they ſhall iudge the fitteſt, a certaine frame of wood, with boords or little Tables, one ſtage or ſtory ſtill aboue another, euery one of

which ſtages of tables or ſhelues, muſt be diſtant from another, one foote and a halfe, or thereabouts, and in euery frame, there may bee fiue or ſixe ſtories or roomes of ſhelues, according to the height of the roofe of the houſe, all of one diſtance one from the other; And as touching the breadth of the ſaid tables or ſhelues of theſe frames, they muſt be foure foote broad, thoſe ſhall be ſet in the middle of the houſe: But ſuch as ſhall bee ſet againſt the wall, muſt haue but three foote breadth, becauſe they cannot ſerue & reach leaues to the Wormes, that ſhall be laid vpon them, but on the one ſide. It is to be noted, that the bords or ſhelues that are to be put in ſuch frames, are to be of Firre, or of other wood that hath no ſtrong and ill ſmell, or elſe let them bee made of Reeds, or beſt of all of Indian Mats, to ſerue in ſtead of ſhelues of wood: for theſe are the fitteſt of all other, becauſe they keepe the Wormes more dry and freſh in hot weather, by reaſon of the wind that blowes thorow them. Theſe Mats may haue croſſe Ioices of boord to ſupport them, or elſe Cord put thorow the bored holes of the ſides of the frame, as bedcords in a bedſted; but if the Tables or Stages be made of boords, then they are to be very thinne, to the end they may not receiue too much moyſtneſſe from the Wormes. The frame muſt be made very firme and ſtrong, leſt if it fall, it kill all your Wormes, and you loſe your labour, which hath happened to ſome.
               Touching the length of the ſaid Frames, they

may bee according to the length of the boords you haue: but if the boords happen to bee very long, then they muſt be vnderpropt with ſome piece of wood in the middle. Men mayſet vp ſuch Frames in little houſes, as well as in great houſes, but leſſe, according to the bigneſſe of the houſe; Alſo they may take away ſuch Frames once a yeere, namely, after that the Wormes haue ſpun their ſilke, and ſo for that time the houſe may ſerue for ſome other vſe: prouided alwaies, they dreſſe, nor take no Tobacco there; for it is exceeding contrary and mortall to the Wormes; euen the very breath of one that hath taken it, breathing vpon them, will certainely kill them. Likewiſe care muſt be had, once euery yeere when you ſet vp the ſaid Frames and Tables, to waſh them well, and to rub them with ſweete ſmelling hearbes, as with Roſemary, Time, Fennell or ſuch like.
            
            
               
                  6. The time when Silke-wormes are to be hatched out of their ſeeds or egges.
               FIrſt of all, when the Spring time is come, and you ſee that the Mulbery trees thruſt forth great buds, and their leaues begin to ſhew forth themſel
                     ••
                  s, then muſt you take the Silk-wormes ſeede, according to the quantity of leaues, and the roome of the houſe that you haue to feede them in, and put the ſaid ſeed within a new box, or in a cleane linnen cloth, and keepe the ſeede reaſonable warme, either within

your pocket or otherwiſe. After foure or fiue daies, you ſhall viſit it very often, and as ſoone as you ſee ſome Wormes hatched, then muſt you put the ſeed in a bigger box, if the former be too little, but let it be very cleane: and care muſt be had, that the ſaid ſeede be no thicker in the box, then halfe an inch thick. After that, you muſt take a piece of cleane paper, of the roundneſſe or compaſſe of the box, and fill it with holes, as big as the tag of a point can make, and lay that round paper ouer the ſeed in the box; then ſet Mulbery leaues, the yongeſt and tendreſt leaues you can get, ouer the ſaid paper, that the Wormes may paſſe thorow the holes, and feede on the leaues.
               Alſo care muſt be had, that when you ſhall ſee the leaues couered with little and blackiſh Wormes, you muſt draw them out of the boxe, with the whole leaues, with the poynt of a pin or ſuch like thing, and lay them in ſheetes of great and ſtrong paper, turning vp all the edges of the ſaid paper about an inch or more, for the better containing of the Wormes, and eaſier remoouing them, or in a bigger boxe, the leaues with the Wormes vpon it, cloſe by one another: and aſſoone as you haue taken away both leaues and Wormes, put in new freſh leaues, the youngeſt and tendereſt vpon the ſaid ſeed, and ſo doe ſtill, till all the Wormes be hatched: for ſometimes it will be ſeuen or eyght dayes till they all can be hatched.
               Then put together all ſuch as were hatched in

two or three dayes, without mingling them with thoſe that are bigger or leſſer, and giue them freſh leaues once a day. Alſo care muſt be had, that while the Wormes come forth of the ſeed, to keepe it in reaſonable warmth, either neere the fire or betweene two pillowes, which are for that end to be warmed often, yet in a meane, leſt you ſpoile all with too much heate.
               
                  
                  
                     depiction of scaffold with leaves
                     By this figure is ſhewed the order, to ranke the tables on the scaffolds, for to lay the leaues on, to feede the wormes there.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     depiction of scaffold with rods
                     By this figure is ſhewed the manner to place the rods betweene the tables for the Wormes to clime vp
                           〈…〉
                        d ſpinne their ſilke.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     depiction of silk weaving engine
                     By this figure is ſhewed the faſhion of the Engine, how to wind oft the silke from the cods, with the furnaces and cawtherns for that purpoſe.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     depiction of cocoons and butterflies
                     By this figure is ſhewed the portraits of the cods, and the Butterflies comne forth of them, to engender and lay their egs vpon blacke Serge, Chamblet, Tammey or ſuch like ſtuffes as hath been ſaid.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  7. How to enlarge the Silkewormes, and cleanſe them from ordure as they grow.
               WHen you perceiue the Wormes begin to wax in bigneſſe, and therefore preſſe one another too much, about a quarter of an houre or thereabouts, after that you haue giuen them freſh leaues, you ſhall take out the ſaid leaues againe, together with all the Wormes from the ſaid paper or box, and ſhall ſet them in a larger place; and if there remaine any Wormes vpon the old leaues, then muſt you ſet freſh leaues in a ſmal quantity, to the end the Wormes may gather themſelues vpon them, to be taken out as we haue ſaid: which when they haue done, you may caſt out the old leaues and their ordure; and this muſt be done twice a weeke or thereabouts.
               It is to bee noted, that in hot countries, the Wormes doe eate but ſeuen or eight weekes at moſt, in a whole yeere, and the foure firſt weekes after they bee hatched, they require but very ſmall attendance.
               Alſo it is to be noted, that the Wormes, before they come to their perfection, haue foure ſickneſſes, naturall to them, as wee will ſhew.
            
            
               
               
                  8. Touching their firſt ſickneſſe.
               EIght or ten daies after that you ſhall ſee the Wormes heads growne bigge and white, it is a ſigne that they enter into their firſt ſickneſſe, and mewing or changing their firſt skin. Then ſhall you ſee them hide themſelues vnder the leaues, without eating of them. Then muſt you giue them but a few leaues, namely, to feed theſe among them that be not ſicke, and thoſe onely▪ for you are to know, that their ſickneſſe comes not to them all and euerie one at once and the ſame time. Two or three daies after that, you ſhall ſee them come from vnder the leaues of a grayiſh colour, and creeping vpon the leaues that are freſhly ſet on. Then muſt you ſhift them to another place, and cleanſe them as we haue ſaid.
               Alſo you are to note, that vntill ſuch time as the Wormes haue paſſed their third ſickneſſe, you are to lay vnder them, vpon the tables or ſhelues, leaues of broad, coorſe, cleane paper, and twice a day giue them new and freſh greene leaues to feed on, laying the ſmooth ſides of the leaues vpward, and that ſide of the leafe which is full of veines and ſtrings downe-ward, for the Worme comes vp to the vpper part of the leafe alwaies to feed, and it feeds beſt, and with moſt eaſe, vpon the ſmootheſt ſide of the leafe, being the tendereſt. You muſt alſo teare the leafe in the middle, or in more pieces, that the Worme

may the more readily and eaſily creepe thorow it, to get vpon the top of it, which will be more needfull in Virginia, becauſe of the broadneſſe of the leaues there.
            
            
               
                  9. Their ſecond Sickneſſe.
               EIght daies after, or thereabouts, the ſaid Wormes being waxen whiter, and bigger by the one halfe, they begin to enter into their ſecond ſickneſſe naturall to them. Then may you ſee them againe hidden vnder the leaues: Then are you to gouerne them as we haue ſaid before, and as they grow bigger, to ſhift them from time to time, into new, cleane, freſh, and more ſpacious places.
            
            
               
                  10. The third naturall ſickneſſe of Silke-wormes.
               EIght or ten daies more after that, you ſhall ſee them waxe bigger yet by the one halfe, remayning vnder the leaues as aforeſaid; then enter they into their ſickneſſe, and alteration of their skin. Then muſt you giue them but a few leaues, as we ſaid before, and keepe the roome where they are, reaſonably warme, during their ſaid ſickneſſe; for it is the moſt dangerous of all the reſt, for there ſomtimes ſome of the Wormes grow very yellow, and yeeld a watriſh matter out from them, which is a certaine ſigne of their death, and they are ſo contagious

then vnto others, that if then they be not picked from the reſt, and throwne away, they will likewiſe infect them. Then muſt you change their place as afore, into a larger and more ſpacious, according as they increaſe in number and bigneſſe of body. Then may you take them very gingerly & ſoftly, with all the leaues with your fingers ends, very cleane. But haue ſpeciall care, that you haue touched no Tobacco; and if you haue taken any, beware you breathe not neere vpon them: for this and other ſtrong ſents are a peſt vnto the Wormes.
               After their third ſickneſſe, giue them freſh leaues three times a day: And you muſt firſt let the ſaid leaues be cooled an houre or more, for that is better, before you giue them to the Silke-wormes. When the leaues are too freſh, they ſurfet, and feed ſo greedily as to burſt themſelues. Beware you gather the leaues not wet, that is to ſay, after the raine, or after the dew, but you muſt gather them drie: take heed you giue them not wet to the Wormes; for that will ſpoile them: therefore you ſhall doe well, if you feare a Raynie ſeaſon, to gather in faire w
                     •
                  ather as many leaues as may ſerue you a day or two: for being kept in a coole place, not moiſt, as in a drie Soller or ſuch like, and the leaues ſomething ſpred abroad, and often turned that they heate not, after this ſickneſſe, you may ſet your Wormes vpon the ſhelues without paper, if you will.
            
            
               
               
                  11. Their fourth naturall ſickneſſe.
               EIght or ten daies more, after that, more or leſſe, the Wormes enter into their fourth ſickneſſe: Now are they waxen far bigger of body, then euer before; Then muſt you gouerne, and attend them as we haue before deſcribed.
               And then you muſt prouide more places, according to the quantity of the Wormes you haue; And from time to time ſhift them into freſh and neate places, more ample and large, yet ſo, as they may be reaſonably neere one to another; And then giue them as many leaues as they will eate, tearing them in the middle.
            
            
               
                  12. What prouiſion of branches muſt be made, to cauſe. Silkewormes to ſpin their ſilke.
               SEuen or eight daies before the Wormes be readie to ſpin, you muſt make prouiſion of branches of trees, of the ſmalleſt & firmeſt that can be gotten, as Birchin boughes, Heath or Hather, Broome, cuttings of Vines, or any flexible and bending tough branches: they muſt not be vſed greene, but drie, for feare the moiſtneſſe of the greene branches hurt the Wormes; And mingle with theſe boughes certaine ſweet hearbes, as Roſemary, Time, or Lauender, becauſe the Silkewormes loue greatly aromaticall

ſmels, but not ſents that are ſtrong and vnpleaſant.
            
            
               
                  13. The time when to cauſe Wormes to ſpinne; and how you are to ſet and dreſſe vp boughes.
               TEn or twelue dayes, after the Wormes ſhall haue attayned to their full bigneſſe of body, according to their courſe of nature; then ſhall you ſee ſome of them runne vpon the greene freſh Mulbery leaues, without eating any of them. If then you perceiue them to be very bright and cleere in their belly and necke, that is a ſigne and token they are ready to ſpinne.
               Then are you to prepare and ſet vp your boughs and branches, and ſet them in rancks, vpon the ſtories of ſhelues or tables, vpright ſtanding, the bigger end reſting vpon the loweſt ſhelfe, and the ſmall end of the ſaid boughes, reſting againſt the next vpper ſhelfe or boord to that, and ſpread them about, arching at large what you can, to the end the Wormes may haue more roome and ſcope, to make their balls or bottoms of Silke, leauing a foot and a quarter diſtance, betweene the ſaid boughes one from another, at the bigger, and lower end of them. And between the two ſides or arches of theſe ſaid boughes, vpon the ſhelfe you are to ſet your Wormes, and giue them freſh, greene, and tender leaues, as much as they will eate. And as you ſhall perceiue them to be ready to make their Silke, they will be clyming vp, vpon the ſaid boughes. And if

you ſee any of them not to get vp, but wander heere and there from the ſaid branches, not finding them, you muſt take him, or them with your fingers, cleanely, and nicely, and ſet it at the foot of the bough: for then, if he be ready to ſpin, hee will get vpon it.
               At that time, you muſt clenſe them very often, becauſe they dung much; and then you may handle them with the hand, for that reioyces them, ſo you haue a care not to cruſh or preſſe them. And when you ſhall ſee that there remaine but a few to ſpin, take the reſt, and put them with others of the ſame forwardneſſe. Let care bee had alwayes, as well of thoſe that gather the leaues, as thoſe that handle the Wormes, that their hands be very neat and cleane, as we haue remembred.
               Likewiſe you muſt haue care, when the weather is cold, or moiſt, to haue ſome fire in the roome. If you caſt a little Vineger vpon the coales, or ſome ſweet ſmelling herbes, or flowers, into the pots built in the Ouens to that end, it comforts the Wormes. And as for ſuch men as haue no ſuch Ouens, they may make ſome fire in the Chimney of the roomes, or in a pan with wood-coales well kindled firſt.
            
            
               
               
                  14. When you muſt draw the Silke balls, b
                     ••
                  
                  tomes, or cods, after that the Wormes haue made them.
               TEn dayes after, or thereabouts, that the Silkewormes haue made their ſilke balls, or bottoms vpon the boughes; then are you to take away the branches with the balls, and to take the cods off from the ſaid boughes or branches. Then alſo muſt you chuſe out the very beſt Silke balls, to make as much ſeed, as you will preſerue for the next yeere. There goes two hundred Silke cods, or bottoms, to make one ounce of ſeed: But if they bee double, that is to ſay, if there bee found two or three Wormes in one Silke ball or bottome, as it often falleth out, we are to iudge and eſtimate then, that one hundred couple of Wormes will make one ounce of ſeed, or thereabouts. And one ounce of ſeed bringeth foorth ſixe, eight, and ten pounds of Silke by the yeere, more or leſſe, according as the ſeaſon is fitting. In Valencia, in Granada, and in ſundry other places, they keepe ordinarily for ſeed, thoſe bottoms of Silke, wherein are two or three Wormes a piece: becauſe their Silke is neither ſo fine, nor ſo eaſie to bee ſpun, as the others. They may bee knowne by the handling of them, for they are ſtronger, rounder, and bigger then the reſt: But ſometimes it falleth out, that the Wormes cannot breake thorow their Silke bottoms; in ſuch caſe, they muſt be clipped at the ſmaller end with the point of a paire of Siſers, without

cutting the piece cleane off from the bottome, in which you muſt haue a care not to offend the Wormes: Then with a needle and a thred, muſt you thred them together, not thruſting the needle thorow the body of the bottome, but at one ſide; onely paſſing the needle thorow the firſt coorſe downe or ſleaue.
               Note alſo, that ſuch ſilke bottomes as haue but one Worme, you need not to cut them. Then hang them vpon nailes, or woodden pinnes, where Vermine cannot come. And when the Wormes ſhall come forth and be Butterflies, you are to take them by the wings, and ſet them vpon certaine ſhelues; to the end that the male and the female may couple together. Alſo then muſt you be prouided of ſome ſtuffe, old or new, that hath no wooll vpon it (but vſe no linnen or paper) and hang vp the ſaid ſtuffe in ſome part of the houſe; then take the Butterflies all coupled together as they are, by their wings, and ſet them vpon the ſaid ſtuffe, be it Say, Piropus, the backſide of old Veluet, or ſuch like ſtuffe as hath no wooll on it, ſo hang'd vp againſt the walles, as we haue ſaid; but in any caſe, ſet not them thereon, till they be coupled and ioyned together; for otherwiſe the ſeed would prooue worth nothing. And if any be ſo poore, that they cannot get ſuch ſtuffe, let them take Walnut-tree leaues, one handfull, or more, and tye them together by doozens, the backe of the leaues on the backſide, and hang them at a naile, or pinne, and ſet the coupled Butterflies vpon them, as we haue ſaid.
               
                  Note that the Butterflies come not out of the Cod commonly but in the morning, about eight a clocke.
               You ſhall know the ſeed by the colour thereof, the good from the bad, to wit, that of coupled Wormes which is good, becommeth blackiſh within eight or ten dayes after; the other remaineth yellowiſh, and that is worth nothing.
               When you ſee that all the Butterflies be dead, and the ſeed become grayiſh, you ſhall take it vp with a knife, very gingerly, and that which remaineth vpon the leaues, you may take vp eaſily with your fingers. And if by chance ſome ſeed ſhould be laid vpon paper or linnen, it cleaueth ſo faſt, that you cannot get it off, without ſpoyling it; in ſuch caſe you muſt keepe it, paper and all, to the next yeere; and in the due ſeaſon, the Wormes will come foorth thereout of themſelues. But the other ſeed gathered from the ſtuffe or leaues aforeſaid, you muſt put in a boxe, very cleane, the ſides cloſe paſted with paper, that no aire nor duſt get in, and keepe it in a cheſt, in a dry temperate place, till the next yeere: but take heed you keepe it neither in too cold, nor in too warme a place; for then the heate would hatch the Wormes, though it were in Winter; and then being no leaues to feed them, they ſtarue and dye, and ſo all your labour is loſt.
            
            
               
               
                  15. How you may diſcerne the male Worme, from the female, the ſilk bottomes of the males, and females, and alſo the male Butterfly, from the female.
               NOw to know the male Worme from the female, (which cannot be well diſcerned till the Wormes bee growne great) you ſhall diſtinguiſh them by their heads, becauſe the male Worme hath his head more wrinkled, hauing eyes, as a man would thinke: whereas the female hath her head round, with ſmall appearance of eyes. As for the bottomes, you may know the male, by the forme of his ſilke bottome: for the male maketh his bottome leſſer, and very ſharpe at one end, and but halfe ſo ſharp at the other end. Whereas the ſilke bottomes of the females, are bigger, and ſofter, round at one end, and halfe poynted at the other.
               As concerning the Butterflies, the male is leſſer of body then the female, and ſtirs the wings oftener then the female, and more ſtrongly.
            
            
               
                  16. How you muſt mannage and handle the ſilke bottomes, to draw their ſilke out of them, before the Wormes turne to be Butterflies.
               AS ſoone as you haue taken the bottomes of ſilke from the branches abouenamed, before they turne to bee Butterflies, it is beſt to ſpinne the ſilke from off the bottomes, becauſe

after the bottomes haue bin once pearced, they cannot yeeld ſo fine ſilke, but onely a coorſe ſilk or ſleaue. And he that ſhall not be able to get his ſilke to be ſpunne, before the bottome may be pierced, which will be about a fortnight, or three weekes, after the Wormes haue ſpun, then aforehand you may kill the Wormes thus with the heate of the Sunne.
               To this end then, you muſt ſpread the ſilke bottomes in the Sun, at noone-day, when it is in the greateſt heate, vpon plankes, or ſuch like, for the ſpace of one houre, turning them often. After that, gather them all into a heape, in a linnen cloth, and therewith couer them, to ſmother the Wormes within their bottomes, and continue in ſo doing two or three dayes. And in caſe the Sun ſhould bee wanting in light and heate, to kill the Wormes; then after you haue drawn your bread from out the Ouen, or elſe hauing heated it, to the ſame meaſure and proportion of heate, all the embers of the fire firſt taken out, you may put the bottomes into the Ouen, vpon woodden boords, or ſome ſuch like thing, and ſtirre them often, as wee haue already ſaid: But remember that you leaue not the bottoms aboue an houre in the Ouen, leſt the ſilke burne, or being too much dryed vp, become vnfit to be ſpunne afterwards. Beware alſo the Ouen be not too hot. And if the Wormes be not dead at the firſt time, put them in againe till they bee dead. After that, you muſt keepe the ſilke bottomes in a place where they may not be preſſed together too hard, and where

Vermine cannot come. And ſo you may keepe them till you haue time conuenient to ſpinne the ſilke. Yet if you can ſpinne the ſilke before you kill the Wormes, the ſilke will prooue much better, and more eaſie to be ſpunne.
               There is another way, and better, to kill the Wormes within their bottomes, for ſuch as can doe it; and this they practiſe at Meſsina. They haue furnaces, and great Cauldrons or Coppers, ſuch as Diers vſe, thoſe they fill halfe full with water; then they make a fire in the furnace, to heate the water. Then they lay a round lid or couer of planke or boord within the Cauldron or Copper, but ſo borne vp by the Copper, that it touch not the water, though it lye neere to it, within three or foure fingers bredth of it, which round lid or couer muſt be bored as full of holes as a Siue: vpon this couer they lay a thin Carpet of Darnix, or the like, and vpon the Carpet, the ſilke bottomes are laid, which muſt be ſtirred often, and the Cauldron or Copper muſt bee couered aboue the lid, that the heate may ſmother the Wormes within the bottomes. When the Wormes be dead, take vp the bottomes, and lay them in ſome roome where there is ayre, to draw out and dry their moyſtneſſe. By this meanes the ſilke loſeth not the colour, and is as good, and as eaſie to be ſpunne, as if it had been ſpun aſſoone as the Wormes had made it.
            
            
               
               
                  17. The manner how to prepare the ſilke bottomes that be pierced, which were kept for ſeed, how to make of them courſe ſilke, and of the beſt and fineſt of that kind.
               AS concerning ſuch bottomes of ſilke as are pierced, they cannot ſerue to make fine ſilke, but coorſe, yet of that you ſhall make the beſt of that ſort, namely, when they be rightly mannaged in this manner:
               Take the ſaid pierced bottomes, and waſh them in freſh water, hauing by you a Cauldron with cleere water in it, which being ſet on the fire, and ready to boyle, put ſope in it, and when that it boyleth, and the ſope is molten, put the ſilke bottomes in it, and let them boyle one quarter of an houre, or thereabouts, and ſtirre them. After that, take them out, and waſh them in clean water, and dry them. When they are dryed, then muſt you beate them with a round ſtaffe of a good bigneſſe, vpon a ſtone, or other thing, and then they will become white, and ſmooth as wooll: After that, women may ſpin them, in this manner as followeth:
               Firſt of all, they muſt pull them with their fingers one after another, and open them very wide as they doe wooll when they ſpin it. Then muſt they put the ſilke vpon the Diſtatfe, and ſpin it as ſmall and fine as they can, or will. Others doe card it with cards made for the purpoſe, but then it cannot be ſpunne ſo euen.
               
                  As touching the refuſe or droſſe, that muſt bee carded, for to ſpin it. He that will haue his ſaid coorſe ſilke yellow, be muſt put the pierced bottomes in freſh water foure or fiue dayes, and change the water euery day, and preſſe the bottomes with his hands; after that, hee muſt dry them and ſo they may be ſpunne, as though they had been ſodden; and this, without loſing their colour.
            
            
               
                  18. How you are to gather the Mulbery leaues, ſo as the trees may beſt thriue thereby, and the leaues be the better.
               IT is good for him that hath Mulbery trees, that hee gather his leaues but once in two yeeres; viz. if he haue 500. trees, to gather the leaues of 250. one yeere, keeping the other halfe for the next yeere; neuertheleſſe, ſuch as cannot ſpare the leaues, may gather them in this manner that followeth:
               Of all the principall boughes and branches of the trees, you are to gather leafe after leafe, leauing the ſtalkes behind, and the ends or tips of the branches together with the younger leaues, to the end that the ſaid boughes or branches may grow ſo much the better. And as for the little ſprigs, that grow within the trees, if they bee in too great number, and thicke or ranke, you may plucke them off with their leaues. As touching young Mulbery trees, you are to gather the leaues onely of the principall branches, as wee

haue ſaid. Care muſt be had to keepe the leaues of the older trees, till the Wormes haue paſſed their third and fourth ſickneſſe; for then it is, that they beget their ſilke; and the leaues of ſuch old Trees beget more ſilke then the yong ones. And the Wormes eate more leaues in three or foure dayes after they are growne to their bigneſſe, then euer they did in all their time before.
               Now, foraſmuch as it ſometimes falleth out in the Spring time, that it raines two or three dayes together, ſo as the leaues cannot dry by the weather; In ſuch a caſe, while the Wormes are yet little, you may cut off ſome branches of the Mulbery Trees, and hang them vp in houſes, where the ayre may come to dry them, and as ſoone as the leaues be dry, you muſt plucke them; for otherwiſe the branches would draw the ſappe and iuyce of the leaues to them. Otherwiſe, if you gather the leaues wet, you may dry them, by ſpreading them vpon a cleane linnen cloth, ſtirring them often, and wiping them with another cleane linnen cloth, till they be dry.
            
            
               
                  19. Touching the Husbanding of Mulbery Trees.
               IT is to be noted, that Mulbery trees are to bee husbanded, opened, digged, and dunged at the foote, as the Oliue tree, namely, in ſuch places where they grow, with mayne labour of men. But in ſuch places where they grow naturally, where the nature of the ſoyle is ſuch, that it bringeth them

foorth without ſo much handy labour, there their fruit is better. And thoſe men that will haue ſome trees planted vpon their land, they are to make good choice of them in Summer, and marke them ſo, as they may know them in Winter, to remooue them in the due ſeaſon fit to plant them in. And to chuſe the very beſt of them, you are to cull out ſuch as haue round leaues, and not forked, for both the fruit, and the leaues of them are better then thoſe of the other Trees. Theſe fiue and twenty yeeres I haue ſeene diuers Countreys, where they began (and afterwards found it very profitable) to plant Mulbery trees about their grounds, in ſtead of hedges, where they grow ſo ſpeedily, that the ſecond yeere they may begin to gather ſome leaues, during the time that the Wormes are ſmall: foraſmuch as the leaues of little trees grow ſooner, then they of big Trees. To plant Mulbery trees in forme of a thicke hedge, for to haue the firſt yong leaues, for the Wormes new hatched, you muſt make a ditch of a foote and a halfe deepe, and as broad, and therein plant your yong trees, then fill the ditch with earth almoſt full: then cut off the branches of the trees that you haue ſet; for that will make them grow the better; and place them two foot neere one another. And whoſoeuer will haue a double hedge of them, let him make another ditch three or foure foote neere that, and plant it as in the other: Their Wood, when they are plaſhed, is as good to burne, as any other; and their Aſhes better.
            
            
               
               
                  20. How to prepare the ſeed of Mulbery trees to make a Nurcery.
               WHoſoeuer will make a Nurcery of the ſeed of Mulbery trees, when the fruit is ripe, let him obſerue that Tree, that beares the faireſt and roundeſt leafe; and of that tree let him gather ſo many Mulberies, as will fit him for his ſeed, which muſt be thus vſed.
               Firſt, waſh the Mulberyes in two or three waters, preſſing them with your hands, and then take vp the ſeed that remaineth in the bottome of the water. After that, dry your ſeed in the houſe, and keepe it till the moneth of March next comming. Such men as will gaine one yeere, ſow it aſſoone as they haue gathered it, without drying it; And other men ſow the Mulberies whole as they are, in that manner that we will ſay.
            
            
               
                  21. In what manner you are to ſow the ſeed of Mulbery trees for a Nurcery.
               FIrſt, you muſt dig, husband, and make beds of fat earth, the mold being made ſmall, and wel dunged with good old dung, thorowly rotten, and you muſt make your beds foure foot, or foure and a halfe broad: And within the ſaid beds, you muſt make foure or fiue ſtraight lines of rayes or furrowes, all halfe a foot equally diſtant one from another, and euery furrow muſt bee two inches deepe, and foure broad; And betweene euery bed you muſt leaue little Allies, or ſpaces halfe a foot

broad, which will ſerue you to goe to weed or water them, without treading vpon them. Then are you to ſowe the ſeed in the ſaid furrowes, and couer it an inch deepe or thereabout, of the fineſt mould.
               The firſt yeere you muſt take care to water it often, if the weather bee dry, and the earth muſt bee kept cleane from weeds. A yeere after that, you may pull vp, and tranſplant your Mulbery trees into another ground more at large, viz. two foot one from the other, as ordinarily other trees are diſpoſed of: and there let them grow till they bee as bigge as a mans arme at his wreſt, or thereabouts. And then you may tranſplant them, into the place, or ground, where you will haue them continue for euer: Leauing a diſtance the one from the other, of fifteene or ſixteene foote, namely, ſo as the boughes of one tree grow not within another. Care muſt bee had, that in hot Countreys theſe trees be ſet deeper into the earth, then in a cold ſoyle, for feare of burning the Rootes.
            
            
               
               
                  1. Another Diſcourſe how to plant the Vine, how to dreſſe and husband it ſundry wayes, how to chuſe the ground and the ſeate to that effect.
               
                  FIrſt, ſuch as will plant Vines, they are to chuſe a ſoyle proper and conuenient for that vſe. If you plant it in a low ground, and moyſt, there the Vine growes well, and beares ſtore of fruit, but the Grapes neuer ripen well, and therefore the wine is not good, nor can it be kept long. You muſt then make choice of a dry ſoyle, whoſe aſpect is toward the full South Sunne, and couered or ſheltered from the Noth wind, if it bee poſſible. And if you meete with riſing ground, as the ſides of hills hanging downe, they are moſt proper, and though they bee full of little ſtones, and grauell, they are alſo the better for them, and not the worſe; the wine of ſuch places being better able to be kept long, and fitter alſo to be carried farre.
               Firſt, you muſt open the earth, and dig it one foot and a halfe deepe, or thereabouts. And after you haue digged as much earth as you haue plants to ſet, you muſt make ditches in the ſaid ground looking towards the full South, one foot and a halfe deepe, and as broad, and of the length that the place is of.
               The ditches muſt bee three or foure foot diſtant one from another: ſo after you haue ſelected your

plants, whether with roots, or without, as of ſlips or cuttings (for the Vine growes aſwell without root, as with, and that which is ſet without root, is of the longer indurance and laſting; though true it is, that the firſt yere it will not grow ſo much as that which hath rootes) Theſe plants I ſay, muſt bee planted three or foure foot one from another, in as much diſtance as the ditches are one from another. And the Vine plants muſt be planted in a ſtraight line, in forme of a Checker, quadrangle-wiſe.
               Heere obſerue, that if the plants bee without rootes, you muſt cauſe them to ſoke in freſh water, twelue or fifteene dayes ere you plant them, putting the big end of the plant in the water a foot deepe. But if they haue roots, you muſt cut them off (vnleſſe they were pluckt vp one day or two at moſt before you plant them) and put them in water two or three dayes. He that ſhall plant the Vine, muſt haue one to helpe him, who ſhall lay the Vine in the ditch, all along the ſaid ditch, of what diſtance he will, one from the other. And in planting, he ſhall tread in the ditch, letting ſome of the digged earth fall into the place where hee is to plant or ſet his Vine; then ſhall hee take his plant, and bow it one foot in the earth of the ditch, or thereabouts, according to the length of the plant, putting the biggeſt end within the ditch, towards the plumpe, South of the Sunne-riſing, and with the hand, raiſing vp the point, end, or top of it, ſetting his foot on the root, and caſting ſome mould on it, halfe a foot deepe or more, and treading on it, that it may bee firme. And hee muſt doe ſo, all along the

ditch, vſing a line, to plant them with an equall diſtance, doing the like in, and thorow all the ditches.
               When your Vine ſhall bee thus planted, then let fall more mould within the ditch all along, yet you muſt not fill it vp the firſt yeere. Alſo bee ſure that you make that earth that is betweene two ditches, ſlaunt on both ſides. And husbanding the ſaid Vine from time to time, the earth of it ſelfe will fall into the ditches, and fill them. The Vine is no ſooner planted, but it muſt bee cut, not leauing vpon each branch aboue three knobs or knots, which wee call eyes: But the old Vine that is planted about houſes, to make long Vines, that muſt not bee cut as yet; for you muſt leaue it all the old wood or branches, and one part of the laſt yeeres branches; both muſt bee cut the firſt yeere, in the beginning of the new Moone: The ſecond yeere it muſt bee cut at the full Moone, and then leaue it but one branch, the loweſt and ſtrongeſt, leauing vpon the ſaid branch, but foure knobs or knots, or thereabouts, according as the Vine ſhall bee waxed.
               Alſo you are to note, that in cutting the Vine, you muſt haue a good knife, or rather a ſharpe hooke, as in France, in ſuch a forme as the Shoomakers knife, wherewith you muſt cut the branches very euen, and very neere the old wood, to the end that the Vine growing, may couer the cut.
               When you ſee in the moneth of May or Iune, that there grow vpon your Vine many ſprigs ariſing

from tho foote of the old Wood, you muſt plucke them off with your hand, and let none grow, but ſuch as grow vpon the laſt yeeres branches, vnles the Vine be very ſtrong; in ſuch caſe you may leaue her ſome of ſuch twigs to multiply her.
               Thoſe that will haue their Vines grow without ſtakes or props, as they doe in Languedock and Prouence, ſuch you are to cut ſo ſhort euery yeere, that you leaue them but two or three knobs, to the end the Vine may grow big and be ſtrong enough at the foote.
               The third yeere, the Vine begins to pay and recompence or reward her Maſter for his labors; then muſt you cut her a little longer, and leaue her more branches, (viz.) two or three in euery one, and euer the loweſt. Obſerue alſo, that if the Vine breed much Wood, then you muſt cut it when the Moone wayneth; but if it bring forth little Wood or branches, cut it in the firſt quarter of the Moone, toward the full thereof: all muſt be cut in December, Ianuary, and February.
            
            
               
                  2. Another manner of planting the Vine, namely, ſuch as haue no rootes.
               FIrſt of all you muſt digge and prepare the earth (as we haue ſaid) and make it very euen: then take a line and lay it along the earth where you will plant, looking toward the South Sunne, as we haue ſaid. You muſt haue a Pinne or Dibble of Iron or of Wood, to make a

hole therewith in the earth, one foot and a quarter deepe; then put the biggeſt end of your Vine-plant within the hole of the earth ſo made; and if you haue dung very rotten, put of it one handfull in the ſaid hole; then treade it with your foote, and with the Pinne or Dibble bore the earth round about the plant to faſten it, that the earth may thereby ioyne cloſe, and be combined with it; then cut it, as we haue ſaid, and keepe it very neate and cleane from weeds all the yeere.
            
            
               
                  3. Another faſhion of dreſsing the Vine, after the manner of Italy, and of Piedmont or Sauoy.
               
               THe greateſt part of the Vines of thoſe Countries are planted in the open fields, and grow vp vpon trees, that are planted there to that end; they plant one or two Vines at one Tree, namely, of the longeſt Vines they can get, to the end they may grow, and bee the ſooner vpon the top of each tree; and they cut the branches of the Trees off, that bee too long, that the Trees may grow round, as much as may be.
               Touching the Vine, it muſt be cut euery yeere, as we ſaid already, yet they muſt leaue this many more branches then are vſually left vpon other Vines. And where there are no Trees planted, there cut off ſome long and big boughes of trees, or get euen whole Trees, of the bignes of a mans thigh or thereabouts, leauing onely vpon them

the bigger end of the boughes, and plant them in the earth, to ſupport and proppe vp the Vine.
               Obſerue alſo, that they plant the ſaid Trees or boughes ten or twelue foote diſtance one from another or thereabouts. You muſt bee carefull when they be rotten, to ſet others in their rooms. Alſo they may till and ſowe that Land with Corne, not endammaging the Vine, which is husbanded while they till the ſaid Land.
               And for as much as in Virginia there are found old Vines in the lands, that the Inhabitants doe cleere for their vſe, they might ſpare the ſaid Vines, and plant by them ſuch Trees or boughes, as we ſaid, and tye the Vines vpon them, to prop them vp, as is ſaid; for they would bring forth much fruite the very firſt yeere, which would be as much time gayned, and labour ſpared. Withall, they might alſo plant of the longeſt Vines they could finde, neere to the Trees, to cauſe them grow vpon them, both neere the houſes and wayes, where they would haue Trees to growe; and theſe Vines will beare great ſtore of Grapes, though not to make ſo good Wine, as is made of the low Vine, yet good enough to bee drunke at meate.
               I haue ſeene in the Low Geuanden in Languedock, a Tree bearing a Vine, which hath yeelded in one yeere as many Grapes, as made halfe a Tunne of Wine.
            
            
               
               
                  4. Another forme of dreſsing the Vine, as they doe in Viuaretz and in Auuergne.
               
               THey plant it as we haue ſaid, and they cut it a little longer then they doe in Languedock; after that, they plant ſtakes of wood, of fiue or ſixe foote long, and binde three or foure of them together by their vpper ends, in forme of a round Tent; this they doe thus, becauſe the Vine there is ſtronger then in other places of France, and they tye the Vine vpon them. But in winter, when they will cut the Vine, and husband it, they take away the ſtakes: and towards the end of March, they ſet them vp againe, as they doe in France, where they ſticke but one ſtake vpright at one Vine, whereto they binde it.
            
            
               
                  5. Another way to dreſſe the Vine, after the manner of the Countrey of Seuenes.
               
               THere they plant the Vine as followeth. Firſt, hauing prepared the ſoyle, they make ditches, as we haue told you before; then plant they the Vine two foote, one from the other: and the firſt yeere they cut it very ſhort, leauing but three knobs or knots out of the earth. The ſecond yeere they cut it at the firſt quarter of the Moone, and leaue to euery one but one branch, as long as they can leaue it, and ſet a ſtake at euery one of the Vines. Two yeeres after, they prouide them certaine woodden forkes, of

the bignes of a mans legge, and woodden poles as big as his arme, alſo ſmaller poles: then they ſticke the forkes in the earth, from ſixe to ſixe foote diſtance, all along the ditch where the Vine is planted, and as much in height, or leſſe if they thinke it fit, and ſo they doe alike in each ditch: then they lay the bigger poles from one forke to another, tying them together with Oſier or Willow; and then they tye the leſſer poles, being ſixe or ſeuen foote length, athwart ouer the bigger poles, binding them together with Oſier, in diſtance one from another of one foote and a halfe, much in the forme of the nets that men lay to take Deere to tranſport from one Parke into another.
               They cut the Vine the ſecond yeere, as long as they can leaue it, and they leaue it but one branch, to wit, the ſtrongeſt, to the end the Vine may mount vp the ſooner vpon the ſaid frame of Poles, which we now deſcribed, and they binde it thereupon. Now when the Vine is vpon it, which is the yeere following, then muſt you leaue more branches to the ſaid Vine, when you cut it, according as you ſhall ſee that her ſtocke is ſtrong and able enough to feede her. And you muſt leaue in euery branch, fiue or ſixe knots or eyes, and euery yeere binde vp the ends of all the new branches which are left vncut; vpon the pole, frame with Oſier, or with greene Ruſhes, or what you can get. They plant ſuch Vines vpon the arable Lands about houſes, and vpon or ouer the high wayes, terming them Treillies or platted

high Vines, which they plant as followeth. Firſt, they digge a ditch in the place, where they meane to ſet the Vine, in that ſort we deſcribed afore: And they plant the Vine within the ditch, as alſo wee haue ſhewed: then prouide they woodden forkes, and bigger and ſmaller poles, as is afore ſet downe.
               Such forkes as are ſet in the ditch, muſt be but two or three foote high: plant a row of them, ſixe or ſeuen foote from the ſaid ditch or thereabouts, right againſt the South, and lay on them great and ſmall poles, and tye them as aforeſaid.
               Such Vines as are planted ouer the high waies too, and neere houſes, there the forkes muſt bee longer, to wit, ſeuen or eyght foote high, and the poles ſo much the ſtronger, to bee able to beare the burden of the Vines, and hauing a reſpect to the breadth of the ſaid wayes. Carts and horſemen paſſe vnder them in thoſe countries, without hurt to the Vines, or moleſtation to the paſſengers. Such Vines, are to be planted, at both the ſides of ſuch waies, and tyed vp and dreſſed as is ſaid.
            
            
               
                  6. How to husband the Vine, and in what ſeaſon of the yeere.
               THe Vine muſt be husbanded three times a yeere, to wit, in March for the firſt time, the ſecond time in May, the third in Auguſt. In March you are to digge it deepe enough, (viz.) three quarters of a foote depth or thereabouts;

and at the other times halfe a foote deep or thereupon: And in plowing it, you muſt haue care to plucke off the ends that grow vpon the old wood of the ſaid Vines, for they ſpoyle the Vine.
            
            
               
                  7. How you are to chuſe the Vine-plants, for to plant of the best.
               WHen the Grapes be ripe, then conſider what plants be beſt, and which beare moſt branches. Then marke the ſame plants ſo, as you may know them againe in Winter, to tranſplant of them elſewhere. And alſo if there bee any Vines that thriue not well, plucke them vp, and ſet in their roome ſome of thoſe fruitfull ones: and if there bee any Vine which hath a branch long enough, cut it not from the Vine, but lay it in the earth a foote and a halfe deepe, or thereabouts, leauing out of the earth the ſmall end thereof, with three or foure knots vpon it, and cut off the reſt. It will bring forth fruite the ſame yeere. But you muſt lay in the earth ſo but one branch of a Vine in one yeere, for feare you ſpoyle the Vine by too much ſucking it. You are to cut the ſame branch frō the old Vine, the next yeere after that, to the end it draw not the ſappe and iuyce away too much from the old one; and by that time the ſaid branch will haue taken roote enough, able to feede it ſelfe. And thus you may ſtore and furniſh your Vineyard in a ſmall time with very good plants.
            
            
               
               
                  8. How to make Wine, and how to know when the Grapes are fully ripe.
               WHen you ſhall ſee the Grapes very blacke, and that there are no grayiſh graines among them, and that the ſtalke of the branch is become reddiſh, and the white Grapes draw to be of a yellowiſh colour, and the graynes tender; theſe be tokens that they are ripe, which thing you ſhall yet better perceiue in taſting them; If they be ſweete in taſte, and the liquor be gluiſh betweene your fingers, then is it time to gather them. Yet in euery place they cannot ripen alike, ſo wel as in ſome, though it be vnder the ſame Climate.
               In low places, and moiſt wet grounds, they are neuer ſo good, nor ſo ſoone ripe, as they are in the dry grounds, and the hilly or ſides of hills, and as in the ſtony and grauelly grounds; and that is the cauſe, why they are not to be gathered ſo ſoone in moiſt grounds.
               Note alſo, when you gather your Grapes, that you may haue the Wine to be good and fit to keepe long; doe it in dry weather, not in rayny, for that ſpoyles the Wine, and takes away his ſtrength, and hurteth the Vine.
               When you gather your Grapes, chuſe the ripeſt, and carry them home; but afore-hand prouide a Vat, or ſuch a Tub as Brewers vſe in Brewing. And ſuch as haue no great ſtore of Grapes, 
                     〈…〉
                   vſe leſſer veſſels, as barrels or halfe Hogſ-heads,

to let the Wine purge it ſelfe in. The Grapes muſt be trodden in the veſſell, with bare legs and feet; firſt of all in a leſſer veſſell or tub, and then after that, remoue the trodden Grapes, into a bigger Vat, by degrees as they are trodden, huske and all together: And you may fill the Vat or Tub, within halfe a foot of the brim therof. Such veſſels muſt ſtand vpon the one end, vpon their bottome, but all open vpward: they muſt be well bound; for otherwiſe the force of the new Wine will breake them all in pieces.
               Whoſoeuer will haue his Wine all Claret, let him gather all his Grapes all at once, the white and the blacke, and put them all together in the veſſell, and let them worke together.
               Before you put them into the Vat or Tub, make a little bundle of ſhort Vine-branches; then make a hole in the low end of the Vat or Tub in the forepart, to draw the Wine out, when it is purged: put the ſaid bundle of Vinebranches within the ſaid veſſell, iuſt before the tap-hole, and lay a cleane ſtone or Bricke vpon it, to keepe it from heauing vp with the Wine; this will hinder, when you draw the Wine, that the skins or huskes of the Grapes come not out at the tap-hole with it. You muſt let the Wine worke, and purge it ſelfe, fiue or ſixe dayes, or more, if you will haue it looke very red. After that, draw it below, and put it in Barrels or Hogſheads. By this time, you hauing gathered your greener Grapes, after you haue trodden the ſame, as we haue ſaid, put them into the Vat or

Tub, with the huskes or skinnes of the former preſſed Grapes, out of which you haue drawne the Wine, and mingle them well together, either with the foot or with a ſtaffe, and let the Wine worke together as before, and it will bee a meane ſmall Wine for the houſhold: After, when it hath purged it ſelfe ſeuen or eight dayes, draw it out and barrell it. Beware you ſtop not the large vpper hole of the veſſell, vntill the Wine hath loſt and ſpent all his great heate.
               There are ſome, who after this, preſſe the huskes in the preſſe, drawing out all that can come thereout, putting that liquor into a Barrell by it ſelfe. Others goe further, and put water to the huskes and latter Wine, at diuers times, not all at once, but by little and little, putting one Tenth part of water, in proportion of the quantity of the Wine, which they haue ſo drawne, and they let it worke and purge it ſelfe in the Vat, or leſſer veſſell, fiue or ſixe dayes, and then draw it and barrell it: This will be prettie ſmal Wine for the ſeruants or houſhold. And whoſoeuer will make Wine meerely white, let him gather all his white Grapes by themſelues, and let the Wine worke and purge it ſelfe in the Vat but two or three dayes; for if you let it ſtand longer, the colour will be yellow; this is the manner practiſed in Languedoc, Prouence, and elſewhere: but in Poictou and in ſome other parts of France, they doe otherwiſe, that it may be the whiter.
               After it hath been trodden, draw out the Wine, and put it in Barrels, and there let it purge, without his huskes or skinnes. You muſt be carefull to fill

vp the Barrels euery day, according as it diminiſheth with working, otherwiſe the Lees and other corruptions will goe downe into the Barrels, and when hot weather commeth, will ſpoile the Wine. You may do ſo with the Claret, when you will not haue it too red, but cleere, and namely in hot countries.
            
            
               
                  9. Obſeruations touching the wild Vine, that groweth in Virginia, and how to make Wine of the ſame.
               I Haue been informed by ſuch as haue bin in Virginia, that there grow infinite number of wilde Vines there, and of ſeuerall ſorts; ſome climbe vp to the top of trees in the woods, and they bring forth great quantities of ſmall blacke Grapes, which are the plainer to be ſeene, when the leaues are falne off from the trees. Another ſort of Grapes there is, that runne vpon the ground, almoſt as big as a Damſon, very ſweet, and maketh deepe red Wine, which they call a Fox-Grape. A third ſort there is, which is a white Grape, but that is but rare, which are all deuoured by the birds and beaſts.
               Now if ſuch men as dwell there, would take the paines to gather ſome of them, when they be ripe, and tread them as aforeſaid, and make the Wine worke with water, putting it in Vats or Tubs, as we ſaid, it would purge it ſelfe as well as good Wine doth; and if the Grapes bee too hard, they may boyle them with ſome water;

and if the Cauldron be too little to boyle them all together, boyle them one after another, till all be boyled, and then put them all into the Vat or Tub, to wit, the Wine, the water, and the huskes of the Grapes, and then let them worke thus together fiue or ſixe dayes, or elſe ſo long till you thinke it fit and good to bee drunke. After that, you may draw it, and barrell it, as wee haue ſaid, and vſe it when you need. I haue oftentimes ſeen ſuch Wine made reaſonable good for the houſehold. And by this meanes euery man may preſently haue Wine in Virginia to drinke.
            
            
               
                  1. How to plant the Figge tree, and the nature of the ſame.
               
                  THe Figge tree is a tree that groweth ſpeedily, and the ſecond yeere beginneth to beare fruit, and is of that nature, that during a moneth or fiue weekes, in that ſeaſon when Grapes are ripe and good to eate, you may gather ripe Figs of it euery day. The Fig tree heerein is like the Vine, that it may be planted without rootes, of a branch, albeit ſuch as haue roots, bring forth ſooner: And being either plucked vp, or cut off a long time before, you muſt put them in water (as we haue ſaid of the Vine) and plant them in the like manner. And in hot Countries, they plant them ordinarily in the open Vineyards, for it loues naturally to grow with the Vine, as hauing

affinity together; for their fruit grow, and are ripe at one time. When you plant the Figge tree without root, you muſt lay the branch within the earth, as we haue ſaid of the Vine.
            
            
               
                  2. How to plant Peach trees, and the nature of them.
               THe Peach trees of euery kinde, are trees of no long continuance, and ordinarily are planted in the open Vineyards, as the Figge trees, without hurt to them; and their fruit ripens in one ſeaſon.
               Many being in their Vineyards, when they gather and eate a Peach that pleaſes them well in their taſte, doe forthwith plant the ſtone thereof in the earth, in that place where they will haue a Peach tree grow the next yeere, and there the ſame groweth without any further labour. The like may be done of all ſorts of Peaches, yea euen with Apricots: and thoſe that will not plant them in their Vineyard, may plant them firſt in their Garden, and tranſplant them afterwards where they pleaſe, and they will bring forth the like fruit, as the tree of which the ſtone was.
               There are places in France, as at Paris, where they graft them vpon Plum-trees, or Almond-trees, which are more laſting, though not fit to be planted in Vineyards, becauſe the Plum-tree breeds too many roots and ſuckers, which ſpoyle the Vine.
            
            
               
               
                  3. How to plant Quince-trees.
               AS for Quince-trees, they may be planted of a bough thereof, without roote, as Figge trees: though it is better to plant them with rootes, when ſuch may be had. They like well to be planted in moyſt ground, yet they will grow euery where. Alſo you may graft them, one vpon the other, thereby to get the better fruite. Likewiſe you may ſowe his ſeede, to wit, when his fruite is ripe, then are you to take out the kernels, and ſow them, as you ſowe the ſeeds, and kernels of Apples and Peares, which commonly is done in February and March.
            
            
               
                  4. Of the Oliue tree, and the nature thereof.
               THe Oliue tree alſo is a great louer of the Vine, commonly they plant it in March, Aprill and May, ordinarily they plant no Nurceries of them, becauſe they are a long time in growing.
               There growes at the roote of the olde trees, ſprigs, or ſuckers, which being growne bigge, they vſe to cut them off, together with as great a piece of the ſtocke of the olde tree, as is a mans two fiſts or thereabouts, and this is without hurting the tree, and ſo they plant the ſaid ſprigges or ſuckers with their adiunct aforeſaid, putting that great piece in the earth, which ſerues it in

ſtead of a roote, then muſt we cut off his head or toppe vpward, as commonly wee doe to other trees.
               Alſo you may ſowe ſome of his fruite, together with the ſtone thereof, being very ripe, as about Chriſt-tide, when they are blackiſh, and this without drying them. You muſt husband it at the roote, as the Vine, twice in a yeere, and fatten the earth with good dung, if need require. In many places they ſowe corne or other things vnder the Oliue trees, without hurt to them.
            
            
               
                  5. Of the Pomegranate tree, and of his nature.
               THe Pomegranate tree is euer little, of the bigneſſe and forme of a white Thorne: In hot countries they growe neere the High-wayes, and in Woods, eſpecially in ſtony ground. They make few Nurceries of them, becauſe they caſt many ſprigs at the foote, whereof ſo many may bee pluckt off and planted where they will, and as many as they pleaſe.
               Note, that there are ſome ſweet, and ſome bitter; the bitter are not eaten, but are good for other vſes, as namely, for Curriers to giue a good gloſſe to their Spaniſh Leather Skinnes. Being once ſowne or planted in any place, there they grow of themſelues, and hee that will ſowe of them, when he eates of the beſt of them, he may put the ſeede, or kernell of them preſently in the earth.
            
            
               
               
                  6. The manner of ſowing the ſeedes or kernels of ſundry kindes of fruites, for to haue trees of them: and how to preſerue the ſeedes, vntill the time be fit to ſowe them.
               FOr the ſeede of the Vine, it may bee well ſowne, and it will grow as other ſeeds doe: but becauſe it is a long time a growing, they vſe to ſowe very little of it. Yet whoſoeuer would be curious to trie concluſions, may ſow of it, as they ſowe other ſeeds. For to draw out and get the ſeedes of them, the Grapes being very ripe, you muſt gather▪ them and wring them betweene your hands, and ſo take out the ſeeds or kernels, and then ſowe the ſame preſently, or elſe dry them in the ſhaddow, not in the Sunne, and keepe them till February or March next comming, and then ſoke them in freſh water two or three dayes before you ſowe them.
               7. For the ſeed of the Fig tree, draw it alſo out of his Figs, being freſh, and ſowe it, as that of the Mulbery tree, whereof wee haue treated already.
               8. The ſtones of Peaches and Apricots, are the ſeed of thoſe trees, which thriue beſt, when they are planted aſſoone as they are out of their fruit, without drying them. And thoſe that will keepe them till March next, muſt dry them in the ſhaddow, not in the Sun. And before you plant them, put them foure or fiue dayes in water or wine, then put them foure inches deepe in the earth. Otherwiſe, without

drying them, you may keepe them in an earthen pot, with earth in it.
               9. The Cherry ſtone is to be mannaged as the Peach and Apricot, as wee ſayd before. The fruit that comes of them, will prooue as the Cherries were, howbeit, not altogether ſo big as the former were.
               10. Wall-nuts muſt alſo be planted greene, and freſh, and with all the vpper Rinde, and take heed Rats and Mice come not at them to eate them, for they are very liquoriſh of them.
               Alſo, you may keepe them dry, as we ſaid heeretofore of other things, but they profit not ſo well. The Tree that ſhall come thereof, being of the ſaid nature, will produce the like fruit.
               11. The Almond is to be husbanded and planted as the Peach and Apricot.
               12. The ſtones of Plums are to bee vſed and planted as the Almond; but the Tree that ſhal come of them, will not bee ſo good, and that is the reaſon why they muſt be grafted.
               13. The Cheſt-nut is to be planted greene and freſh, elſe it will neuer proſper, if you let it be dried. You muſt put them in the earth, three or foure inches deepe; And to keepe them, you muſt put them in freſh water three or foure dayes, then wipe off the water from them, and keepe them in a pot with earth in it, vntill the Spring come, to plant them. The Trees that will come of them, will not bring forth ſo good fruit, as the Cheſt-nut was, and therefore the beſt way is to graft them.
               14. The ſeeds of Lemons and Oranges, ordinarily

are ſowne, aſſoone as they are taken out of their fruit. They prepare the ſoyle towards the South, well digged and dunged, and plant them the ſmall end vpward, two inches deep in the earth. Alſo they graft them ordinarily, to get the better and goodlier fruit of them.
               15. For the ſeeds of Apples and Peares, the fruit being very ripe, you are then to take out the ſeed, and dry them in the ſhade, and you may keepe them till February following or March, to ſow them. Then muſt you haue prepared for them good ground, and you muſt make in it ſmall rayes or furrowes, of two or three inches in breadth, and of like depth, each furrow being three quarters of a foot diſtant one from the other, and you muſt ſow the ſeed within the ſaid furrowes, couering them with earth. It is very good to ſow them, aſſoone as they are taken out of their fruit; for they come foorth of the earth the ſooner: And it is needful to graft them, becauſe the fruit that proceedeth of them otherwiſe, is not ſo good. It is alſo good, that all the ſeeds and ſtones here beforenamed, be planted and ſowne at the firſt quarter of the Moone.
            
            
               
                  16. How to dry Grapes, to keepe them.
               WHen the Grapes be very ripe, then are you to chooſe them in the Vineyard, of the biggeſt and beſt, and namely, white ones. After you haue choſen and gathered as many as you will haue, you muſt burne a certaine quantity of Vine-cuttings, not mingling therewith

any other kind of Wood, and then gather the aſhes thereof (but the beſt is, that they bee all of white Vine branches:) after that, put faire water and thoſe aſhes in a Cawldron vpon the fire, and ſeethe them together, till you haue made a cleere liquor; then taking away all the aſhes, put the liquor into a cleane Cawldron againe, and ſet it ouer the fire, and being ready to ſeethe, then muſt yee take rods of wood, ſuch as Chandlers vſe, whereupon they ſet and make their Candles; vpon which rods you muſt tye the bunches all along, one bunch of Grapes on one ſide the Rod, and on the other ſide another bunch of Grapes; tye them with thred by their ſtalkes to hang them on; which done, then diue them in the liquour, as the Chandler puts his Candles in the molten Tallow, and that ſundry times, as foure or fiue times: thus, hauing diued one rod of Rayſins, hang it by to dry; then take another, and wet it in the ſame manner, and ſet it by, and doe ſo of all the reſt: then hang them vp in the Sun, or elſe ſpread them vpon Hurdles or Lattices of Rods, or ſuch like, vntill they bee almoſt dry: then barrell them, preſſing them very flat in the ſaid Barrels. Others dry them, without this ſteeping them, euen as they come from the Vine.
            
            
               
                  17. How to dry Figs.
               FIrſt, gather them very ripe; And hauing made ready Hurdles or Lattices of Reeds, or of Oſier, ioyned together, as Oſier Lattices vſe to be, with lights or cli
                     •
                  ts betweene Oſier and Oſier,

to the end that the ayre paſſing thorow the rifts, & void ſpaces of them, may helpe the Sun to dry them vp, when they are ſpred vpon the ſaid Lattice Tables; and take heed, that neither the raine, nor the dew fall vpon them. Alſo you may drie them in this manner: Firſt take a big Reede or Cane, of two or three foote long, and bore little holes all the length of it, thorow which holes you are to put little ſtickes very ſharpe, of two foote long; then thred the figs vpon the little ſtickes, till they be very full of them; then hang the Cane in the Sun; and when they be dry, barrell them, preſſing them very hard in the Barrell, as we ſaid of Grapes.
            
            
               
                  18. How to drie Peaches of all kinds, and Apricots.
               WHen they bee very ripe, then you muſt pare off the vpper skin, and cleaue them into foure quarters, and dry them as Figs, and barrell them, to keepe them for winter.
               The manner how to dreſſe them, after they are dry, for to eate them, is this; You muſt prouide a cleane earthen pot, and after you haue waſhed your Peaches in faire water, then put them into the pot, and put in as much Wine as will couer the Peaches, and then ſeethe them halfe a quarter of an houre. Alſo they may bee made ready another way without boyling them, by putting them in wine, and ſoking them three

or foure daies; and this way they are better. Alſo you may put in ſome Cinnamom in powder; in this manner you may keepe them one moneth within the ſaid pot. Vſing them euery morning, they prouoke an appetite or good ſtomack, and are very wholeſome.
            
            
               
                  19. How to hinder wild beaſts, from eating the fruits in the night.
               YOu muſt make fires in ſundry places, and namely, in euery ſuch way as leadeth to the wood, and that only in the night, and no wild beaſt will come neere them. And ſpecially doe this about the Vineyards, from the time the Grapes begin to be ripe, vntill they be wholly ripe.
            
            
               
                  20. Aduice for thoſe in Virginia, touching the place for to plant Vines in.
               FOraſmuch as euery plat of ground is not fit for the Vine, it were good and conuenient, that euery Towne and Village, wherabouts is, or ſhall bee found any good or proper ground for that purpoſe, that there the inhabitants ſhould plant Vines one neere another: and ſuch men as haue intreſt or right to ſuch grounds, may change them for ſome other, in another quarter of the Countrey, according to the quantity, that euery one may be able to apply himſelfe vnto. For the Vines being thus ioyned together, will not coſt

more to keepe then one plat; Neither ſhall the wild beaſts eate any the more; and ſo one may helpe another, and learne one of another like good neighbours.
            
            
               Concluſion.
               I Haue many more vſefull things to impart, which for want of leaſure I muſt leaue vnpubliſhed till ſome other time. Wherefore I will now onely heartily recommend theſe my approued experiments (which I haue ſent you) to the care and diligent practice, of you the Colonies of Virginia and the Summer Ilands. If you cheerefully apply your ſelues to theſe inſtructions, I ſhall be incouraged to doe more and better ſeruice for you heereafter; and you for your paines, I dare aſſure it, ſhall be richly recompenced with ample profit. Eſpecially, and aboue all others, if you conſtantly purſue thoſe two moſt inualuable commodities of Silkes and Wines, which you may with eaſe and little coſt bring ſpeedily to perfection. For Nature (which doth nought in vaine) hath euery where for this purpoſe, moſt luxuriouſly ſtored Virginia ready to your hands, with excellent Mulbery Trees, and Vines of diuers ſorts, which none, though neuer ſo malicious, or can, or dare deny. Since then that Nature her ſelfe, as proud of this her ſumptuous worke, beckens you to her, and points you round about, with her bounteous hand, to behold heere in euery place, her braue Mulberies, and her merry Vines, liſten no more to me then, but hearken to

her now, what ſhe ſayes and truly counſels you, moſt part from her ſelfe, and ſome part of what ſhe hath heard from others.
               And thus ſhe ſpeakes vnto you:
               Friends of my beſt beloued Nation, view mee well, and tell mee if you are not come into another Land of promiſe, into another Paradiſe? to paſſe by my moſt fertile graine (ſo much of all commended) the nouriſhing Maiz, and many other things; behold now onely, my two great Treaſures, my richeſt Plants, my Mulberies and my Vines, which I haue purpoſely prouided ready for you, and that abundantly, without your care, without your coſt or charge. Beleeue mee, I make all my leaſt and commoneſt workes, for ſome good purpoſe euer, much more theſe then that are ſo precious. Regard them well. I heare you all confeſſe now, they are rich and beautifull: How haps it then, that I and they are ſlighted ſo much by you? and that which worſt is, all for a ſmoakie Witch? I haue heard ſome ſay, that dice are made of Coniurers bones, and cards of Witches skins, whereby thoſe that handle them, though they loſe ſtill, and are vndone by them, yet they can neuer leaue them. Sure there is ſome ſuch ſorcery in this weed; it was firſt ſowne (it ſeemes) by ſome Indian Enchanters hand, with ſpels and Magicke verſes, or otherwiſe you could neuer ſo much dote on it. For all the fruit of this, it is but ſmoke, which vaniſhes, and likely will not alwayes laſt. But theſe my two other bounties I haue giuen you, for Silkes and Wines, be they neuer ſo plentifull, yet ſhall they be alwayes durable,

and generally ſtaple, to your exceſſiue gaine. Doe not then ſtill Ixion-like, imbrace a cloud, for Iuno, and ſmoake, for ſubſtance. Let but the fruitfull ſoyle and happy Clime heere (the chiefe nurſe of theſe and all other plants) perſwade you for mee.
               All Authors of Agriculture will tell you, that neither Arable, Paſture, Meddowes, nor any other grounds, are ſo proper to plant the Vine in, as thoſe cleered grounds are, wherein not ſhrubs, but tall Trees grew. And what Countrey in the world ſo full as this, of tall and goodly Timber trees? ſo as when you cleere your grounds, you eaſily may remooue your Vines into them, and the remoouing giues them alſo a perfection. Likewiſe may you leaue your Mulberies ſtill growing, euen where you plant your Vines: for ſuch loue and affinity there is betweene theſe two, (as good things alwayes goe together) That the ſoyle and Clime which fits the one, fits the other; and what the one loues or hates, the other doeth the like. Were not this knowne to all, yet the abundance of them both, ſo naturally growing here together, would, without other experience, ſufficiently confirme it. Againe, were not this Countrey and Climate heere moſt proper which I haue choſen for them, you ſhould not haue ſeene them, be ſure of it, ſo freely and willingly flouriſh euery where as they doe. For this purpoſe compare Virginia now, with other Countries, that are ſeated in the ſame degree of latitude that ſhe is, marke their Commodities, and you ſhall ſee, that ſhee is

as well a kinne to them, in them, as in the ſame degree. Your great Mathematician Hariot, who liued ſometime in Virginia,
                  Virginia in the ſame degree of latitude that Perſia is. and who with many praiſes (iuſtly due vnto her) wrote of her, and her Commodities, ſaith in that his booke, that ſhe is ſeated in the ſame latitude that Perſia is: And they that haue trauelled Perſia, and write of it, will tell you Paulus Venetus, 1. Booke, 19. Chap. how it abounds with all good graine and fruits, and how it exceeds in Silkes, and Wines, as this her Couſin-german, in the ſame degree, Virginia, doth the like, with Mulberies, Vines, Maize, and other graine.
               Another, an eye witneſſe alſo of Perſia, ſaith, that Ludouicus Romanus, 3. Booke, 19. Chap. 
                  Chorazain, a Prouince of that Countrey, is ſo fruitfull of all things, that a dearth is neuer knowne there: and that you may ſee in one onely City, called, Eri, ſuch ſtore of Silke, as in one day you may buy as much as will load 3000. Cammels. And who knowes not, that the abundance of Silke, raiſed from the propriety of that ſoyle & Climate, is the vnſpeakable rich Staple Commodity of that great Empire? Theſe Silkes are the ſinewes of the Perſian State, by which treaſure, the Sophy is inabled ſtill as hee doth, to wage warre with the Turke, to the great good of all Chriſtendome. I need not tell you, by the way, how hopefull a Trade this is to the Engliſh Eaſt India Company, if it bee not (as pity it were) ſiniſterly hindred.
               For by this meanes great ſtore of Clothes may be vented there, multitudes of poore ſet on worke,See Maſter Mu
                        •
                     nes, and Maſter M
                        •
                     ſſeldens bookes of this and England inriched, and made in time the Magazin for ſilkes. And by this fetching of ſilke ſtill

from the fountaine head in Perſia, the Turke ſhall be depriued of this great Tribute, weakened in his treaſure and impoueriſhed; and the Perſian, by this Trade, bee the more inriched and ſtrengthened againſt the Turke, to the common good of Chriſtendome. And I hope all good men will wiſh this Trade to proſper and proceed ſtill with the Perſian, farre rather then with the Turke. So much the more, for that all Authours and Trauellers report, Paulus Ʋenetus, Mercator. The Perſian to be courteous, gentle, liberall, kind to Chriſtians, and a louer of learning and of Arts, eſpecially Aſtrologie, Phyſicke, and Poetry; ſo as when there ſhall bee an Ambaſſadour once ſettled with the Sophy, there can be expected nothing but all good vſage, with a greater gaine. The Turke contrariwiſe is rude, barbarous, cruell, couetous, perfidious, a Chriſtian and a Learning-hater. The loue of Perſia, ſo like Virginia in many things, hath made me ſtay longer in her then otherwiſe I would: but now I will take my leaue of her, and her rich ſtore of Silkes, and leade you thence, to a greater and a more opulent Empire yet, to China, 
                  
                     Ʋirginia in the ſame degree of latitude that China is. which alſo is ſeated in the ſame degree of latitude that our Virginia is: and heere you may ſee how likewiſe they two are a kinne in ſundry naturall Commodities, which by reciting and comparing of them, you ſhall eaſily perceiue. China is ſtored with Woods of Mulberies to feed Silke wormes with, and ſuch abundance of Silkes they make, Joh. Bar
                        •
                     ius, De
                        •
                     ad Aſia
                        •
                     . Mercator. that at the City of Nimpo, which others call Liampo, the Portugals haue obſerued 16
                     •
                  000. pound waight of Silke, carryed out in

Ships in three moneths ſpace.
               Into Cambula, the chiefe City of Tartary, there come euery day from China, about a thouſand Wagons laden with Silke, as Paul Venetus. Mercator. Bertius Geograph. Authours of no ſmall credit, and one that was there, reports. China alſo is full of nauigable Riuers, and is fertile of all graine, Maiz, Rice, and others, of which it hath three or foure Harueſts in a yeere; it is ſtored with Fiſh and Fowle, it hath Mines of Siluer, Braſſe, Iron, and other metals, Quick-ſiluer, Niter, Allom, and precious Stones, Pearle, Muske, Cotton, Rubarb, China roots, ſtore of Flax, and rich Furres.Gonſales Mendoſa hiſtorie Of China. 1. Booke, 3. Chap. They loſe not a ſpan of ground, but all places are imployed to their proper vſe: the dryer, they ſow with Wheat and Barly; the moyſt, with Rice and Sugar canes: Hils and Mountaines abound with Pinetrees, and Cheſſenuts, betweene which they plant Maiz, and ſow Panicke, and all kind of pulſe: in other proper places, are Mulbery Groues, faire Gardens, Orchards, and Flax grounds, no waſte Land, but all put to ſome good vſe or other. It is not my purpoſe to ſpeake of the ſharpe wit, or of the excellent Art and induſtry of the Chineſes, wherein they equall, if not exceed all Nations of the world againe: that is beſides our matter now: but as there is a conſanguinity betwixt China and Virginia, in the ſame degree of latitude; ſo I will onely compare and ſhew the like affinity and agreement betwixt the natiue Commodities of the one and the other Climate: China hath ſtore of Maiz for food, and Mulbery trees for Silke, and what Maiz, and Mulberies Virginia hath, is ſo well knowne to all,

as of that I need ſay no more. China yeelds ſtore of Fiſh and Fowle, Virginia hath the like; and for Fiſh, no where more plenty, nor ſo large as there: witneſſe your many Sailes, that yeerly come out of England hither, for this purpoſe, ſo as at this time, it makes a great trade, and will yeerely more and more increaſe ſtill, eſpecially after your Salt-works (that are now ſetting vp) are finiſhed; and for the Flax of China, you haue naturally growing in Virginia, Silke-graſſe, Flax, and Hempe, of diuers ſorts, and of approoued goodneſſe, and which culture will yet much more perfect. You haue likewiſe, as China, knowne Mines of Iron, and of Copper, and of other richer Mines alſo you haue more then hopes: China hath Pearle, and ſome of the Indians weare it in Virginia: as it hath Muske, ſo hath Virginia, the beaſts called by ſome, Muſcaſſus, which haue good Muske, and by all likelihood are of the ſame kind. The rich Furres reported of China, are exceeded by Virginia, in ſtore of Beares, Otters, Martins, and black Fox skins, beſides many others, of which the French and Dutch haue made hard by you heere, a great trade, theſe many yeeres. As for the other naturall commodities, mentioned, that China hath, and are not yet here knowne to the now Colony, as Rubarb, China roots, Mercator in his deſcription of Virginia ſaith, that it hath Allom, Niter, Pitch, Tarre, Turpentine, Iron, Copper, Silke, Flax, Hempe, Tobacco, and precious Stones. Niter, Allom, Quick-ſiluer, &c. You may probably at leaſt preſume, conſidering that Virginia conſorts with China in ſo many knowne things, as in the ſame height, the like happy tempered Clime, the like fruitfull ſoyle, the like many nauigable riuers, the many like natiue knowne Commodities, already

named: you may probably preſume (I ſay) that time & your induſtry, in diligent ſearching (which for theſe reaſons you ought the rather to quicken) will diſcouer alſo heereafter many of theſe, if not all vnto you. And as for the other commodities that Virginia hath not at all as yet, as Rice and Sugars, likewiſe none may doubt, ſeeing the ſoyle and Clime heere are indued with no contrarieties, extremities, or diſtemperatures to hinder the growth of them, but hath all conueniences alike fitting for theſe purpoſes; there is no doubt then (I ſay) but that when they are once tranſported hither from other places, and planted heere, but that it muſt needs prooue capeable of them, being ſo naturally fitted already for them. Neither yet is it to bee thought, that any cultiuated Country in the world, though neuer ſo fruitfull, had all things at firſt there naturally growing in it, as now it hath, but that many of them were brought afterwards thither from other places. And ſo in like ſort, the Spaniards haue tranſported out of Europe and the Eaſt-Indies, diuers plants of fruits, drugs and dies, and many rich commodities, which they haue proſperouſly planted in the Weſt Indies, to their great gaine, as may eaſily bee ſhewne. And you, if you conſider your ſtore of your plaine, moiſt, fat, and fruitfull grounds, and your goodly riuers by them, for helpe of water, you cannot doubt but that you are moſt fitly prouided for the entertaining and bringing vp of Rice and Sugar Canes. You haue already made ſuccesfull triall of other grounds, which prooue moſt proper for Cotten

wooll plants and Indico, for the ordering of which, and of many other more profitable commodities, you ſhall ſhortly (as I heare) haue directions printed and ſent vnto you. Now for the three or foure Harueſts which China hath yeerely, ſo as dearth is neuer heard of there: It is knowne likewiſe and written of Mercator, in his deſ
                        〈…〉
                     tion of Virginia.
                  Virginia, that at Roanoak they reap three Harueſts in fiue moneths ſpace: they ſowe in May, and in Iune, and in Iuly; and reape againe, in Iuly, Auguſt, and September. And as for that part of Virginia which is now planted, there is Mr. Perce, the Cape Merchant, vnder his handwriting. one of the moſt ancient and expert Planters now in England, that credibly auerres, that they may, and doe begin to ſowe of our Countrey graine in September, and ſo after continue ſtil their ſeed ſeaſon for wheat very well vntill the middle of February following, and about the end of Iune, they begin to reape the firſt Harueſt of Wheate and Barley, which is very good, and in the other moneths after, that which was later ſowne. Whereupon is to be inferred, that Virginia hauing ſtore of Ploughes and good Huſbandmen, need not onely neuer feare dearth and ſcarcity, but may by the many ſeedings and many Harueſts, bee made a Countrey as plentifull of all graine, as China, or any other whatſoeuer in the world. Beſides, ſome knowne commodities you haue, which China wants: to omit others, that which is called Terra-Lemnia, formerly a peculiar treaſure of the great Turkes onely, Mendoſa, Hiſtory of China. and Wine of Grapes, whereof they haue none: for all theirs are made either of the Palme tree called Cocos, or of the Palme that beares Dates, which being exceeding

good, and made with diuers mixtures, after diuers faſhions, this perhaps makes them leſſe care either to plant or to dreſſe the Vine. But to bid China farewell now, and the multiplicitie of her commodities and her affinities with Virginia, I will returne againe to ſpeake particularly of our Mulberies and Silke: and for this purpoſe I will now carrie you into France and Italy, onely to viewe the rich and mighty profits that they make of them: Notwithſtanding their Mulbery trees (which are eſteemed alwaies to counteruaile the halfe of all the whole charges of this buſineſſe) are not produced by the earth of her owne accord, with my helpe onely, as here, but by labour and induſtry and expence. Agricoltura Giornata. 16.
                   
                  Auguſtino Gallo an excellent Author of Agriculture ſaith, that but a few yeeres ſince (finding the ſweete by keeping Silke-Wormes) in the Territory of Breſci
                        •
                     
                  
                  ▪ they did yeerely ſow Millions of Mulbery trees, which after foure yeeres growth, the beſt and fayreſt of them were remoued, to bee planted by high way ſides or other places, where they thought fitting, and that both noble and ignoble did take ſuch a pleaſure in keeping great ſtore of Silke-Wormes, ſo as gaine quickening their induſtry, they did more and more amongſt all ſorts yeerely augment this buſineſſe. Ol. Serres. Agricultur. Booke 5. cap. 15.
                   It is not aboue twenty yeeres, ſince theſe Silke-Wormes were generally ſet vp in France, Henry the Great, with great wiſedome appointing Commiſſioners for that purpoſe.
               
                  Le Tellier memoires & inſtructions, &c. pag. 3.
                   
                  Le Tellier, in his booke of the Silke-arte,

ſaith, that the inuention and firſt knowledge of Silke, came from the Eaſt Indies into Europe aboue a thouſand yeers ſince, & was brought into Italy, not aboue two or three hundred yeeres agoe: for before that time, this fabrick and worke was more rare and ſtrange there, then it was about twenty yeeres ſince, in France, afore which time (though not many yeeres ſince) the people of Prouence, Languedock and Dauphine (the neighbour Prouinces to Italy) applying themſelues to this Silke-Worme, found the progreſſe ſo eaſie and profitable, inſomuch as the ſole reuenew of Silke, brings more money (ſaith he) at this preſent to thoſe Prouinces, then all their Corne, Oyle, & Woad, together, which notwithſtanding are there in very great aboundance; Ol. Serres Agricultur. Booke 5. cap. 15.
                   Another ſaith, that France muſt ſaue and gaine by the progreſſe of this Silke fabrick, aboue foure millions a yeere; Italy then incomparably more: and yet France for the getting of this great gaine, makes of the Silke-wormes breede, of one ounce of Seede, in the moſt places, but fiue or ſixe pound of Silke, euery pound worth two & three French Crownes and ſomewhat more. Yet in the better parts of France, as in Languedock, and Prouence, they make ſeuen or eight pounds of Sike, of an ounce of Sike-ſeede. Agoſtino Gallo 6. Giornata of his Agriculture. But in Italy, namely, in Breſcia, they make of one ounce of Spaniſh Silke-ſeede, eight, nine and tenne pound of Silke, and the Silke-Wormes ſpinning of this ounce of Silke-ſeede, cate but about two hundred and fifty pound waight (after the The Breſcia pound waight is twelue ounces waight of Genoa and eight ounces waight of the great ounce of Venice. pound waight of

                  Breſcia) of Mulberie leaues to make the ſaid quantitie of Silke; And of an ounce of Calabrian Silke-ſeed, they make there in Breſcia eleuen and twelue pound waight of Silke, and the Wormes of that ſeede (as being of a bigger breede) eate about three hundred Breſcia waight of Mulbery leaues; and no doubt but in other places of Italy, which are yet more proper for this buſineſſe, they make of the like proportion of ſeed, a greater quantity of Silke then this.
               Such difference there is betwixt Clymate and Clymate, in the naturall propriety of it, to the great increaſing and bettering of this worke. Conſidering therefore the great charge and labour, that Italy and France is at, in planting of Mulbery trees, and for that purpoſe ſowing Mulbery ſeeds, and expecting ſixe or ſeuen yeere after (for ſo long it is ere they grow to perfection) afore they can make good profit of them, and conſidering beſides, that their Clymate is nothing ſo proper for this Silke-commodity, as Virginia is, and yet for all that, they make their greateſt gaine of it:
               It cannot be doubted then, but Virginia hauing infinite ſtore of the beſt ſort of Mulbery trees, ready growne vp to your hands, without your charge or labour, and hauing the Clymate (as is experimented) more naturally proper for this worke, and the food for the Silkewormes better, whereby they become more ſtrong, to paſſe their naturall and other caſuall ſickneſſes with leſſe danger, and ſo are generally more

healthfull, and alſo are bigger bodied, and make larger Silke-bottomes, and finiſh their worke in a ſhorter time then other doe other-where; hauing all theſe preeminences, it cannot be doubted (I ſay) by any reaſonable man, but that Virginia is euery way better fitted, to yeeld incomparably a farre richer profit by the Silkeworkes to you, then France or Italy can doe to them.
               And if in France, their profit be thus rated by them, which account alwaies, that the fourth part of the price of the Silke defrayes all the charges, there remayning three parts of cleere gaine to the Owner, and in Italy, a ſixth part will diſcharge al expences, making fiue parts of cleere gaine, where they reckon neuertheleſſe, that the price of the Mulbery leafe (as I will ſhew by and by) counteruailes the full halfe of the whole charge of the Silkeworke; you may then certainely aſſure your ſelues, that in Virginia, where you haue what ſtore of Mulbery leaues you will for nothing, with all the other aduantages afore mentioned, that the tenth or twelfth part of your Silke you make there, muſt needs cleere all your charges, and make nine; ten or eleuen parts cleere gaine to your ſelues. Your chiefe charge will be, for the gathering of the leaues to feed the Wormes. A man and a boy will feede the Wormes, comming of ſixe ounces of ſeeds, till they be paſt their fourth ſickneſſe, and within a fortnight of ſpinning. But for the laſt fortnight, becauſe the Wormes muſt be then carefully and often fed (that being the chiefe time,

wherein they conceiue, and ſtore vp the matter for the Silke, which they after vomit out and ſpin) then you muſt adde three or foure helpers, to the other two aforeſaid.
               For the feeding, and ſhifting of the Wormes, and other imployments, women, children, and impotent perſons may be vſed. And as one skilfull gouernour of the Silkewormes may imploy hundreds vnder him, ſo he may in ſixe weekes ſpace, eaſily teach them the chiefeſt points of this art, if they be capable, and will addict themſelues to the learning of it.Ol. Serres ibid.
                   The Gouernour of the Silkewormes in France, hath two, three and foure crownes a month, beſides his diet: and his charge continues, from the firſt hatching of the Wormes, to the finiſhing and winding of the Silke. Le Tellier in his Booke of the Silke-art. Moreouer, you muſt not thinke it to be abſolutely neceſſary, to be ſo ſuperſtitious in curiouſly following all the booke rules and written precepts, ſo as if any of them be omitted, or euery thing be not preciſely followed, in the hatching, lodging, feeding, and tending of the Silkewormes, that then all the buſineſſe is ſpoiled and ouerthrowne: for it may notwithſtanding profit and ſucceed, to the contentment of thoſe that keepe them. Onely let euery man doe what he can commodiouſly, to his power and ability, and aſſure himſelfe, though he keepe not all ſtrict rules in euery thing, that yet he may make a great gaine, notwithſtanding ſtill the greater, the more curious he be in obſeruing and practiſing all the approued experiments, Rules,

and precepts hereunto belonging.
               Theſe Rules are chiefly to ſhew the perfection of this Art, and that alſo a man may learne thereby, that if the Silkewormes miſcarrie or proſper not ſo well one yeere, what might be the cauſe of it, and where the fault lay, and how next yeere that may be remedied which was amiſſe afore, without deſpayring or being diſcouraged. Beſides you muſt know, that all generall Rules euer admit ſome exceptions, and varie according to ſome particular circumſtances. And therefore to make the Rules the ſurer for you, the nature of the Clymate muſt be obſerued, how and in what one Clymate differs from another, as alſo the ſeaſon of one yeere, altering from another, in cold, heat, drought, or moyſture, the manner of the lodgings, the qualities of the windes, to be let in, and kept out vpon occaſion fitting, and ſo according to all the different qualities, to gouerne this worke differently with diſcretion. As if it be a cold ſeaſon, to vſe more artificiall heat, for the cheriſhing the Wormes; if it be a verie hot ſeaſon, to let in the coole ayre and the windes, as much as may be to refreſh them, eſpecially when they ſpin their Silke, for feare of ſtifling them with too much heat. If it be a moiſt time (the worſt ſeaſon of all other euer for the Silkewormes) to vſe drying heats and perfumes ſo much the more, to qualifie the moiſt and the ill ſeaſon, and to be carefull, that the Mulbery leafe be wel dried, and kept the longer after it be gathered, afore it be

giuen. But if the ſeaſon be dry, then conſider, that the leafe, after it hath lyen and cooled a while, may be giuen the freſher, and the Mulbery tree roots may be watered in theſe droughts, to refreſh the leaues, as they doe ſometimes in Spaine, eſpecially if it be in a drie and hot ground, which otherwiſe without theſe cautions were not ſo good. Then muſt you conſider alſo, if the Mulbery tree grow in a ſhady place, or in a ſowre, foule or wet ſoile, what inconuenience that food may bring vnto the worm, & thereafter either to auoid it wholy, if it be poſſible, or elſe to qualifie it as well as may be: Neuertheleſſe noting that in a hot and dry yeere, a man may be more bold to feed with thoſe leaues, that grow in a ſhady or moiſt ground, by reaſon the temper of the ſeaſon hath the better corrected the ill quality of them. Thus regard with reaſon alwaies, what kinde of ground the leafe grew in, and in what qualified ſeaſon you gather it in, and conſider the kinde, and nature of the tree, and the nature and kinde of the Silke-ſeed you vſe, and according to all particular circumſtances, well pondered, ſo to make your exceptions, and to order euerie thing with iudgement, and diſcretion thereafter. Time and obſeruation will teach you many experiments, out of which perhaps ſome more rules of art may be made, as beſt fitting in ſome particularities, the Countrie and Clymate of Virginia, which finding, after good triall made, you ſhall doe well to ſet them downe in writing, that in time they may be publiſhed

alſo, for the better directing, and profiting of others. And becauſe in Perſia (where ſuch infinite ſtore of Silke is made) it is not likely, that they tie themſelues to all the ſtrict rule, and niceties, which for the moſt part are neceſſary to be obſerued in many Countries, but doe what is fitting otherwiſe, for that Clymate, moſt proper for this worke; (with which Virginia ſo neerely agrees, and naturally conſorts as is aforeſaid) for this eſpeciall purpoſe therefore, meanes are made (I heare) to certifie you from the Engliſh Factory in Perſia, of the art and order that they vſe, in all particulars, for the Silke-workes there; which may guide you, happily, to a more compendious and ready way, for the better ſpeeding of this rich buſineſſe. And yet where all theſe rules are curiouſly followed, they make not onely Spaine, and Italy, but in the worſer parts of France, and other-where, a farre greater gaine (ſo much for ſo much) by feeding the Silke-wormes, then by any other commodity whatſoeuer. Inſomuch as ſome Gentlemen in Italy, which keepe no Silke-wormes themſelues (and which are therefore of the worſt ſort of huſbands) yet by letting out their Mulbery trees to others, for the leafe onely, make a great part of their reuenues, ſome 500. li. ſome 1000. li. a yeere; ſome more, ſome leſſe, according to the number, greatneſſe, and goodneſſe of their Mulbery trees. Ol. Serres ibid.
                   So likewiſe in Auignon, Dauphiné, Lauguedoc, Prouence, and other parts of France, ſome let out their Mulbery trees to others, from

two ſhillings, to twelue ſhillings apiece and vpwards, accordingly as they are. Auguſtino Gallo, ibid.
                   But ſome other Gentlemen in Italy let out their Mulberie trees, after another maner, namely, they are at the charge onely, to giue the leafe of their Mulbery trees, to ſome poore folkes, for which they are to finde at their coſt, the Silke-ſeed, and are to feed and tend the Wormes, till they haue made their Silke: which done, they deuide the Silke bottomes, by halues betweene them. Thus you ſee, what a rich reuenue I haue prouided for you, in Mulbery trees alone, which are halfe the charge, and yet coſt you nothing. And I hope I need not tell you, how it is a matter, no leſſe profitable then eaſie, for the better aduancing this Commodity, to build for this purpoſe farre from your houſes (if need be) in the moſt conuenient places, of the beſt Mulbery woods, ſome ſlight Silke-worme lodgings, ſoone ſet vp, and with Stoues in them, after that excellent manner of Sicilie, formerly deſcribed; which by this Art may correct the ill ſite and temper, and qualifie the Ayre well, in the cold, moyſt and ſhady woods, leſt otherwiſe that might be a hindrance to this worke. And here alſo in theſe lodgings, you may make good ſhift (eſpecially for ſo great a gaine) with neceſſary prouiſions to lodge your ſelues, from the beginning, to the end of your Silke-harueſt time, about ſome ſixe weekes only: where you ſhall need but one third part of your companie, the firſt foure weekes, and two third parts more, the laſt fortnight onely, for the often

then and plentifull feeding of the Wormes. To inuite you to this enterpriſe, you haue aboundance of choyce Materials, to erect theſe Silkelodgings with, which will coſt you nothing, but a little labour, to cut out ſome poſts, and to fit them and ſet them vp; or to ſawe out ſmall quarters, and rafters, and plankes, and boords, to fence the ſides in ſtead of walles, and to couer the roofe in ſtead of tiles; all which muſt be ſo cloſe layd in all places, one within another, that no raine, winde, nor weather get in at any riftes or creuiſes to hurt the Wormes. Which the better to preuent, the chinkes (if any be) may be all ſtopped, euery where about, with ſome loame or clay. And thus for their better profit, may many Families (eſpecially of the poorer ſort) ioyne hands together, for the ſpeedy ſetting vp of theſe Silke-lodgings, and for the gathering and ſorting of the Mulbery leaues, and for the helping and teaching one another to feed and order the Wormes, and ſo worke, and liue together, all the Silke-harueſt time, and at the end of it, to deuide all the Silke bottomes made amongſt them, by number, weight, or meaſure, after the number and proportion of euerie Family, and perſon; as to ſome one, ſome two, ſome three, ſome foure ſhares, and ſo more or leſſe ratably, and according to their firſt agreements ſet downe in writing. Here alſo in the meane time, for their better ſuſtenance, may they commodiouſly keepe neere about them, their Poultry, Swine, and Milch cattell, for milke and

butter, and ſpare their owne paſtures neere home the while.
               Thus you ſee, what rich benefits I affoord you, for your ſmall labour onely. And if I ſhould giue you all things perfect, without your paines at all, I ſhould breed but mine owne contempt, and nurſe your ſloth. For theſe my great commodities, and all other then, I aske ſome little attendance of you (iuſtly due vnto me) to bring them to perfection. Giue me but two hand-maids onely, Art and Induſtry, to waite vpon me, and I will moſt honourably and richly then endow both them and you. And for this purpoſe now (not to ſpeake of Husbandry at large) I will chiefly commend the skill of Gardening, to you all and euery one. Let none be ignorant to ſow, to ſet, to plant, to graft, to manure, to dreſſe, and order all plants, according to their kinds, and that in proper grounds and ſeaſons fitting them. This is part of that skill, which Emperours, Kings, and Senators of Rome haue both writ of and practiſed. Let no man then diſdaine it, but get and peruſe their and ſuch like Bookes of this, and other Husbandry. I know not whether the profit of it, or delight be greater. Wherefore all and euery one in Virginia, men and women too, from the higheſt to the loweſt in ſome proportion, muſt know and practiſe it, if they minde to thriue, proſper, and haue true delight. By Gardening alone (eſpecially in theſe rich grounds and temperate Clime) may all haue delicate variety, and good ſufficiencie of ſuſtenance, were there nothing elſe, for Summer and for Winter. Beſides the Caſſaui, for

good bread, I might particularize the wholeſome and great variety of many other nouriſhing roots and herbs, and of other Garden and Orchard fruits, in theſe hotter Countreys eſpecially, moſt excellent for food. And this was the chiefe ſuſtenance of the wiſe and ſober Ancients in the golden times. Panis and Holus (Julius Scaliger. by a moſt learned and iudicious Writer) are deriued from two Greeke words, that ſignifie all, and the whole: for the Ancients eſteemed (ſaith he) that if they had but bread and Garden fruit, they had all and the whole, and euery whit that was neceſſary for their food. Neither is this all for as you may be fed, ſo may you bee clothed alſo, by this skill alone, as by the expert planting of Cotten, Silke graſſe, Flaxe, Hempe, and ſome ſuch other like. Beſides, the Art of planting well followed, as it can, ſo will it bring you to the greateſt wealth aboue all things whatſoeuer elſe. I need not tel you beſides of the Mulbery plants for Silkes, the infinite treaſure by planting Vines, Oliue trees, and Sugar canes, for Wines, Oyles, and Sugars, nor of many other rich Plants, for Phyſicall Drugs, Dies, Paints, and many other vſes. And as for your Wine and Oyles to be made heere, beſides many other profits, you ſhall therein bee aduantaged, aboue the Weſt-Indies alſo, which haue neither of theſe two Commodities; the King of Spaine, in policie forbidding the planting of them there, notwithſtanding the Countrey is very proper for them. For they two being the great Staple Commodities of Spaine, the Canaries, and other his Dominions, with which they abound, and

knowing that trade of Merchandize conſiſts in bringing in of wares from one Countrey into another, maintaines mutuall trafficke therefore, betwixt his Weſt Indies and his other Dominions, by the taking of the Commodities of one another, which cannot be done, vnleſſe one Countrey haue ſtore of thoſe Commodities, which the other wants; For ſtore of the ſame Merchandize in all parts, would but glut & hinder all. Wherfore to ballance the Commodities well of all his Dominions, for the good of all, the planting for Wines and Oiles in the Weſt Indies, vpon good reaſons were inhibited. The like he doth in Braſilia, who though they haue ſtore of Ginger there, yet may it not bee carried from thence into Spaine, for feare of impoueriſhing them of S. Domingo, whoſe chiefeſt Trade it is to get their liuings by. And the like doth Great Brittaine for you heere, which ſuffer no Sheepe to be carried thither, that Cloth might not be made there, but ſo orders it for the good of both, that you heere ſhall haue from thence, her natiue Commodities, and her Manufactures onely, and vſe no forraine Merchandize, but ſuch as is for health or like neceſſity, for which you returne the proper Commodities of Virginia thither. Moreouer, by the Arte of skilfull planting, grafting, tranſplanting, and remoouing, the bad wilde plants are wonderfully bettered: Inſomuch, as one of the beſt Authors of Husbandry ſaith, Ol. Serres Book. 6. Cha. 17.
                   that euery replanting or remooing of wilde plants (hauing regard to the fitneſſe of the ſoile and ſeaſon) is worth halfe a grafting: ſo as two remooues then, are worth a

whole grafting. One that hath writ a Hiſtorioſme, ſayes well and wittily, Plin. natural. Hiſt. lib. 17. c. 10
                   that this remoouing and tranſplanting of wild plants, doeth wonderfully mitigate and a ingentle them, whether it bee (ſaith he) becauſe that the nature of plants, as of men, is deſirous of nouelty and peregrination, or becauſe that at their parting (from the former grounds) they leaue there that ranke wildneſſe, virulence, and ill quality that is in them, and as wild beaſts, ſo they become gentle by handling, whilſt the Plant is pluckt vp by the roote.
               Since then the tranſplanting and remoouing wild plants, doe ſo much domeſticate and inable them, I need not tell you then, how by grafting, or remoouing only, the Mulbery trees and wild Vines may infinitely be bettered; To ſhew this, I will inſtance in one Plant for all. In the printed Booke of the valuations of the commodities of Virginia, Sarſaparillia wilde, is fiue pound the hundred, and Sarſaparillia domeſticke, is ten pound the hundred: ſo as the Spaniard hauing no other but the wilde Sarſaparillia at firſt, yet by replanting and cultiuating it, that he made it domeſticke, and ſo much thereby innobled it in worth and goodneſſe, as raiſed it to a double price you ſee. And the like is to be done with other wild plants, by the often remoouing or grafting of them. As he then that was asked, what was the firſt, and chiefeſt thing in Oratory, ſaid, Pronunciation: and being demanded what was the ſecond thing in it, and afterwards, what was the third, ſtill anſwered, Pronunciation: ſo if I were asked what were the beſt Art, chiefly to

aduance the Plantation and Planters; I ſhould anſwere as oft, or oftner, the Garden Art of planting, planting ſtill. I could wiſh therefore, that euery Free-holder, beſides his proper profeſſion, ſhould be inioyned to haue a Garden, and practiſe ſometimes Gardening and planting: And that according to the cuſtome and wiſe inſtitution of the Romane Cenſors, thoſe ſhould bee ſeuerely puniſhed, that did not husband well their fields and Gardens, and well culture their Vineyards, Trees, and Plants. Let euery one then in Virginia and the Summer Ilands, that mindes to haue plenty of healthfull food, and of good raiment, and of great wealth, let him begin to addict and delight himſelfe, in this moſt profitable and pleaſing Art of Gradening and grafting.
               Now whereas the labor of cleering the woodded grounds heere in Virginia, is ſuppoſed by ſome to be a hindrance to your profit; it is nothing ſo; for the many great commodities that to good huſbands may ariſe, by the wood ſtill cleered off the grounds, will with large intereſt, meane while, repay the coſt and labour, eſpecially after that excellent and rare inuention of Saw-Mills (an incredible aduancement to the Colonie) bee once put in practice. What ſhould I ſpeake of the ſtore of Timber, ſo neceſſary for your buildings, and other vſes? for Clapbord, Pipe-ſtaues, and other rich wood for noble ſeruices? or of the abundant ſtore of wood, neuer to be ſpent, for your Iron workes? and for your Glaſſe Furnaces now ſet vp? for Pot-aſhes, and Sope-aſhes? for boyling of Sugars? and

of Pitch and Tarre? and for all Furnace works? (the great deuourers of fewell and deſtroyers of woods) beſides, of the great vſe & profit of propping your Vines, by whole Trees or by ſtalkes? & for poles for the Hops which grow here wild? But aboue all, what endleſſe ſtore of excellent Timber haue you for the moſt excellent vſe of building Ships? And heerein I cannot, I confeſſe, conceale the pride I take in my Virginia. For what Countrey in the world againe, abounds ſo plentifully as this, with all things whatſoeuer for making Ships? no one thing is wanting; for beſides Timber of all ſorts, for all vſes in this kind, and ſtore of Maſts, no where taller and larger; you haue tried Iron alſo of perfect goodneſſe, and Silke graſſe, Flaxe, and Hempe, as well for Sayles and Cordage, as for richer vſes, and Forreſts of Trees for Pitch and Tarre, ſo as nothing for this purpoſe was lacking heere but onely Shipwrights, which now alſo with great wiſdome are lately ſent, to build you Boats and Pinnaces for Trade, and Buſſes, for the richeſt fiſhing here that all the world affords. Of Cod and Sturgeon, of great skulls of Herring, as big againe as thoſe in other places, and ſuch plenty alſo of other excellent fiſh vnknowne to theſe parts, that by credible report, M. Purchas in his Pilgrimage. there haue beene 5000. taken at a draught, the leaſt, of two foot in length, whereof likewiſe there might bee a great gaine made, by skilfull ſalting, pickling, or drying of them. Moreouer, beſides the increaſe of ſhipping and of Mariners, and the ſtore of ſuſtenance that this fiſhing may yeeld vnto the Colony (for which purpoſe therefore, no houſholder that

is a good husband, will be without his Fiſherboats and nets for his owne prouiſions) there be yet other great aduantages and profits alſo that it brings with it, namely, the fiſhing vpon the coaſts of Virginia, being much more timely then in other places, your Marchants haue made their prime Markets, and are ready to returne, before others come that bring their fiſh from other places. To this, Salt being made now in Virginia, you ſhall with ſmall charge tranſport great multitudes of people hither: for ſince there may well bee many hundred Saile imployed in fiſhing here, people will be brought moſt part for the Salt, that they lade heere for their fiſhing, which will coſt you but little. And by this meanes alſo, may a double profit be raiſed vnto the Planters, by bringing their people hither euery fiſhing time, and as occaſion ſerues, taking ſome of his men here with him to helpe him fiſh; which done, he ſends them backe againe vnto the Colony, to follow his Commodities and other buſineſſes heere. But to goe on now, though this be granted by ſome, that the ſtore of wood in Virginia well vſed, is no impediment but a matter of ſingular benefit to the Plantation, yet others obiect ſome other hinderances by the natiue Sauages. But as for the many aduantages that ariſe, rather by the iuſt warring with them, and vanquiſhing of them (a matter ſo eaſie to bee done) I referre you to the laſt declaration of the State and Colony of Virginia, where the reaſons are well and fully handled. As for my ſelfe I vtterly diſclaime them, they haue done againſt all my Lawes, they are moſt vnnaturall, and ſo none of

mine. And therefore they that know no induſtry, no Arts, no culture, nor no good vſe of this bleſſed Country heere, but are meere ignorance, ſloth, and brutiſhneſſe, and an vnprofitable burthen onely of the earth: Such as theſe (I ſay) like the Dai and Syri, and ſuch other people, are naturally borne ſlaues, as my chiefeſt Ariſt. 
                        •
                     . Politic. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Secretary well defines: And there is a naturall kind of right in you, that are bred noble, learned, wiſe, and vertuous, to direct them aright, to gouerne and to command them. But others now there be, perhaps, that are diſcouraged from this worthy enterpriſe, by raylers and ſcoffers at this noble Worke, men next a kinne, indeed, to theſe hatefull Sauages, enemies heerein to God, their King, and Country; But regard not them. The mocker not regarded, is mocked himſelfe. Goe on then, and cheerfully proceed, eſpecially in thoſe my two fore-praiſed great Commodities, which if you doe, as you know not yet the twentieth part of them that this rich Country yeelds, ſo thoſe then alſo, I will ſhew heereafter to you.
               Amongſt all which, the moſt honourable and the chiefeſt is, that by the induſtry of ſome noble and heroicke ſpirits (borne to immortalize their names and nation) a paſſage to the South Sea, will, beyond our Falls and Mountaines, through the Continent of Virginia, aſſuredly bee found. All the Indians from Canada to Florida, relate, that there is beyond the Mountaines here, to the Weſt, and Northweſtward, a great Sea, and men and Ships, in ſhape and faſhion like to yours that Trade there: So as this can be no fiction nor no falſhood: theſe diuers nations

being ſo farre aſunder, all conſtantly agreeing in the ſame report. By this diſcouery and paſſage to the South Sea found, being from our Falls (by the Natiues relation hereabouts, and by the iudgement and computation of moſt learned Mathematicians) about a fortnights iourney onely, or thereabouts, part to be made by land, and part by water, by ſome riuers leading to that Sea: what an infinite rich trade may there bee made from hence then, to the Eaſt Indies, to China, to Cathay, and other places in the South Sea? For this paſſage, as it wil be ſhort, ſafe, and eaſie, ſo will it not only ſaue the liues of many men now daily loſt, and ſpare much ſhipping of neceſſity waſted, by the great long voyages that now are taken, but will alſo bring great wealth and treaſure, trebling the gaine now got, by your quick returne that will be heereby made. Moreouer alſo, what a great rich Staple? what a mighty Magazine of Commodities for all Chriſtendome, will bee thereby erected in Virginia, and make the ſpeedy peopling, aduancing, ſtrengthening, and inriching of it, to the great and endleſſe honour of his Sacred Maieſty, in whoſe auſpicious Raigne, and by whoſe wiſedome, fauour, and gracious furtherance, this famous Worke is brought to paſſe, to the vnſpeakeable benefit of his flouriſhing Kingdomes, and to the euerlaſting glory, and immortal name of them, by whom this happy diſcouery muſt bee perfected? But for this purpoſe, I referre you farther to the Treatiſe of the Weſt and North-weſt paſſage to the South Sea by Virginia, written by that excellent Mathematician Maſter Henry Briggs, and

lately publiſhed, as alſo to his Map thereof, with a more large Diſcourſe, ſhortly to come foorth in Print.
               Laſtly, remember now and practiſe what I haue ſaid, and in deſpight of malice, you ſhall finde all ſolid truth that I haue ſpoken to you. I take my leaue now, and as I haue bleſſed you many wayes, ſo giue I to all of you my hearty bleſſing. Proſper and farewell.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE TREASVROVR COVNCELL AND COMPANY OF VIRGINIA, TO THE Gouernour and Councell of State in Virginia reſiding.
            
               AFter our very hearty commendations: His Sacred Maieſty, out of his high wiſedome and care of the noble Plantation of Virginia, hath been graciouſly pleaſed to direct his Letters to vs heere in England, thereby commanding vs to aduance the ſetting vp of Silke workes, and planting of Vineyards; as by the Copy herewith ſent, you may perceiue.
            The intimation of his Maieſties pleaſure, wee conceiue to be a motiue ſufficient, to induce you to imploy all your indeuours to the ſetting forward thoſe two Staple Commodities of Silke, and Wine; which brought to their perfection, will infinitely redound to the honour, benefit and comfort of the Colony, and of this whole Kingdome: yet we, in diſcharge of our duties, doe againe renew our often and iterated Inſtructions, and inuite you cheerfully, to fall vpon theſe two ſo rich, and neceſſary commodities. And if you ſhall finde any perſon, either through negligence or wilfulneſſe, to omit the planting

of Vines, and Mulbery trees, in orderly and husbandly manner, as by the Booke is preſcribed, or the prouiding of conuenient roomes for the breeding of Wormes; we deſire they may by ſeuere cenſures and puniſhment, be compelled thereunto. And on the contrary, that all fauour and poſsible aſsiſtance bee giuen to ſuch, as yeeld willing obedience to his Highneſſe Commands therein. The breach or performance whereof, as we are bound to giue a ſtrict account, ſo will it alſo be required of you the Gouernour and Councell eſpecially. Herein there can be no Plea, either of difficulty or impoſsibility; but all the contrary appeares, by the naturall abundance of thoſe two excellent Plants afore-named euery where in Virginia: neither will ſuch excuſes be admitted, nor any other pretences ſerue, whereby the buſineſſe be at all delayed: and as we formerly ſent at our great charge the French Vignerons to you, to teach you their Art; ſo for the ſame purpoſe we now commend this Booke vnto you, to ſerue as an Inſtructour to euery one, and ſend you ſtore of them to bee diſperſed ouer the whole Colony, to euery Maſter of a Family one. Silk-ſeed you ſhall receiue alſo by this Ship, ſufficient to ſtore euery man: ſo that there wants nothing, but induſtry in the Planter, ſuddenly to bring the making of Silke to its perfection: which either for their owne benefit (we hope) they will willingly indeuour, or by a wholeſome and neceſſary ſeuerity they muſt be inforced.
            This particular aduice we thought neceſſary to giue you, leſt that if it ſhould haue come to you mingled with others, you would haue interpreted it as a common Inſtruction, or a buſineſſe that was not taken ſo to heart, as this is by vs, and we hope will be by you in humble obedience

to his Sacred Maieſties Royall Inſtructions. The paines and induſtry of the Authour, for the benefit of the Plantations (being a member of our Company) are ſufficient arguments of his good affection to the Action, and they both deſerue your beſt acceptance and ours, that others may thereby be inuited to impart their knowledge in buſineſſe of this and the like nature; whereby the Colony may not onely bee ſupported for the preſent, but brought to that perfection, that may redound to the glory of God, the honour of his Maieſty, and the ineſtimable benefit of his noble Kingdomes; which as they are the true aime and end the Aduenturers and Planters haue propoſed vnto themſelues; ſo ought they to bee ſtill the honorable ſeeds to put others alſo forward in this action: we commend this buſineſſe againe to your ſpeciall care. And ſo we commit you all, and your waighty affaires, to the protection of the Almighty.
            
               
                  HENRY Southampton.
            
            
            
         
      
   