
      
         
            
            
            THE THIRD
BOOKE OF COMMENTARIES
VPON
THE APOSTLES
CREEDE,
Contayning the blaſphemous Poſitions of
Ieſuites and other later Romaniſts, concerning
the authoritie of their Church:
Manifeſtly prouing that whoſoeuer yeelds ſuch abſolute
Beleefe vnto it as theſe men exact, doth beleeue it better then Gods
word, his SONNE, his PROPHETS, EVANGELISTS,
or APOSTLES, or rather truly beeleeues no part
of their writings or any article in this
CREEDE.
            Continued by THOMAS IACKSON B. of Diuinitie and Fellow
of CORPVS CHRISTI College in OXFORD.
            1. King. 18. v. 21.
            How long halt yee betweene two opinions, if the Lord be God follow
him; but if Baal, follow him.
            LONDON,
Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY, and are to be ſold by Iohn
Budge at the great South doore of Paules, and at
Brittaines Burſſe. 1614.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
REVEREND FATHER IN
GOD, AND MY HONORABLE
LORD, WILLIAM BY DIVINE
PROVIDENCE L. BISHOP OF DVRHAM,
Grace and Peace bee
multiplied.
            
               
                  RIght Reuerend Father,
the ſweet refreſhing your
Honourable fauours did
yeeld to ſuch of my labors
as hitherto enioy the light,
when a ſuddaine vncomfortable
blaſt had ſorely
nipt them in the very ſetting, makes theſe last
gatherings of that ſpring ſeeke that comfortable
warmth vnder your benigne protection, which
the vnconſtant frowning ſeaſon would hardly affoord
them in their growth. Beſides theſe and
other my perſonall obligements, that famous and
worthy founder of this Attick Beehiue, of whoſe

ſweetneſſe would God I had beene as capable as I
haue beene long partaker, had neuer allotted any
Cell therein for me or other Countriman of mine,
but with particular relation to that ſeat of dignitie,
which he ſometimes did, your Lordſhip now
doth, and, to the encreaſe of Gods glorie and
good of his Church, long may enioy. Seeing this
our great foſter Father is now ignorant of his
childrens demeanor, and knowes not me; it ſhall
be my comfort, to haue his honourable ſucceſſors
witneſſes of my care and induſtrie to fulfill his
godly deſire, whoſe religious ſoule in his life time
(as his written lawes doe teſtifie) did deteſt nothing
more then idleneſſe in the Miniſtrie, ſpecially
in his adopted Sonnes. The matters I here
preſent vnto your Lordſhips & the worlds view,
are ſometimes in themſelues ſo harſh and hard to
be concocted, as he that would ſtriue to make them
toothſome vnto nice taſtes, ſhould put himſelfe to
exceſsiue paines; vnleſſe his iudgement be much
riper, his wit readier, his inuention pleaſanter,
his opportunities better, and his leiſure greater
then mine are. But it is one and the ſame point
of iudgement, not to require exact Mathematicall
proofes in diſcourſes of moralitie, or a ſmooth

facile Rhetorical ſtile in Logical or Scholaſtique
conflicts. And, as by the ſtatutes of that ſocietie
wherein I liue, I am bound to auoid barbariſme:
ſo my particular inclination moues me, in controverſies
eſpecially, to approue his choice that ſaid;
Fortia mallem quam formoſa. If any profeſſed
enemie to the truth we teach, will anſwere me
from point to point, or attempt (not as their cuſtome
now is only in ſcoffing ſort but ſeriouſly) to
auert thoſe vnſupportable, but deſerued imputations,
I lay vpon the foundation of his Religion,
I ſhall (I truſt) be able to anſwere him; the better
by continuance of your Lordſhips wonted fauours,
whom I ſtill requeſt the Chriſtian Readers,
as many as reape any profit from my paines
on my behalfe to remember with ſuch reſpect as is
due to honorable Patrons of religious ſtudies, or
cheriſhers of painefull endeuours in good cauſes.
            
               From Corpus Chriſti College, March
xxv. 1614.
               
               Your Lordſhips
in all obſeruance,
THOMAS IACKSON.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the indifferent Reader ſpecially to the
learned Artists of the two famous
VNIVERSITIES.
            
               CHriſtian and beloued Reader, I haue been detained
in this entrie, though not longer then
the ſtructure of it required, yet then I my
ſelfe, or thou perhaps, could haue wiſhed,
for ſpeedier diſpatch of the maine edifice
intended. Somewhat notwithſtanding, to
my apprehenſion, I had obſerued, whereby
Artiſts more accurate, but yonger Diuines then my ſelfe (whoſe
furtherance in the like, throughout all my meditations I ſtill reſpect)
might bee directed, for taking ſure hold of their ſlipperie
antagoniſts in this conflict. And finding my ſelfe euery day then
other more vnapt, more vnwilling at leaſt, to bee any Actor in
quarrels of this nature, becauſe moſt deſirous to ſpend my mortall
ſpirits in opening the pleaſant Fountaines of immortalitie; I
thought it not altogether vnlawful to diſpence with theſe labours
for a while, in hope to proſequute them more ſafely and with better
ſucceſſe hereafter, by ſeconding ſuch as had gone before mee
with my ſmall ſtrength, for intercepting theſe deſpitefull Philiſtims,
which continually labour to damme vp theſe ſacred Wells
of life. Many excellent wits and graue Diuines, as well in our
Engliſh as other reformed Churches, I knew, had accurately deciphered
the ſpeciall characters of the Beaſt, and demonſtrated
moſt properties of great Antichriſt vpon the Pope. But that the
fundamentall charter of the Romiſh Church, or the commiſſion
pretended by Ieſuites for the erection of it, ſhould (as the manner
was to demoliſh leſſer religious houſes for building others more
magnificent) extend to raze the very firſt foundations of religion
as common to Chriſtians, Iewes, and Turkes; that the acknowledgement

of ſuch infallibilitie as they Deifie her with ſhould be
more incompatible with Chriſtianitie then any Idolatrie of the
Heathen; that ſuch as abſolutely beleeue all her decrees without
examination, truely beleeue no article of this Creede; with the like
principall branches of Antichriſtianiſme; were points, for ought
I knew, rather touched by the way, or propoſed as clear in themſelues
to the indifferent and ingenuous, that iudge of the Romiſh
Church by the knowne picture of her miſſe-ſhapen limmes, then
proſequuted at large, or with purpoſe to pull off that artificiall
painting, wherewith late Ieſuites haue ſo beautified this vgly
Monſters face, that the world bewitched with gazing too much
on it cānot but loue her other deformities though in themſelues
moſt loathſome. For though the practiſes enioyned by her bee
ſo vile, as would haue cauſed Rome Heathen to haue bluſhed at
their mention, or her other doctrines ſo palpably groſſe, that her
owne Sonnes heretofore haue derided them, and as yet ſpare to
ſpeake ought in particular for their defence: yet to ſalue all this it
muſt ſuffice, that the Church, which cannot erre, hath now authorized
them.
            If any thinke I preiudice the truth of moderate accuſations, by
laying ſuch heauie imputations vpon this doctrine, as make it incomparably
more deteſtable then any other, hee ſpeakes not inconſequently
to his poſitions, if hee hold the Trent Councell was
infallibly aſſiſted by the holy Ghoſt, or that the Pope in Cathedrall
reſolutions cannot erre. But, he which thinkes foule impieties
may bring Romiſh Prelates out of fauour with the ſpirit of
truth, and make them as obnoxious to errors as others are, or can
perſwade himſelfe, that many practiſes and opinions, by that
Church alreadie authorized, are in their nature abominable and
impious, muſt either accord to me or diſſent from Reaſon, Conſcience,
and Religion. For theſe, ſo hee will but vouchſafe his ſilence
or attention, ioyntly proclaime aloude, that nothing amiſſe,
either in matter of doctrine or manners, can be ſo deteſtable with
out this preſumptuous groundleſſe warrant of abſolute infallibilitie
as with it; that albeit a man would ſet himſelfe to practize
all particulars directly contrarie to what God hath commanded
or to contradict God and his goodneſſe, yet his iniquitie without
this abſolute beliefe of full authoritie deriued from him ſo to doe,

would be but as a bodie without a ſoule, in reſpect of the Romiſh
Churches impieties, which makes the holy Ghoſt the principall
Author of Gods written word the abettor of all her fraude, vntruths,
or villanies. Briefly as it is not the doing of thoſe materials
God commands vs to doe, but faithfull ſubmiſſion of our wils to
his in doing them, which, as S. Iames inſtructs vs, makes vs true
Chriſtians: ſo is it not the doing or maintayning of what God
forbids or hates, but the doing of it vpon abſolute ſubmiſſion of
our ſoules and conſciences to other lawes then he hath left, which
makes men liue members of Antichriſt, as being animated, informed
and moued by the ſpirit of errour. Now this perſwaſion of
abſolute infallibilitie and vniuerſall warrant from the holy ſpirit,
without condition or reſtraint, being peculiar to the Romiſh
Church, admitting it to be as faultie in practiſes and as obnoxious
to errours as any other, none can be reputed ſo truly Antichriſtian
as it. For albeit Mahomet pretended diuine reuelations, yet his
Prieſts challenge no ſuch abſolute infallibilitie as doth the Pope;
they make no ſecond Rocks or foundations, no ordinarie Paſtor equiualent
to their great Prophet. Whence although the Turkes
hold opinions in themſelues, or materially conſidered, more
groſſe, and maintayne ſome practices not much leſſe villanous
then Ieſuites doe: yet the grounds or motiues of their beliefe,
(which are as the ſoule or ſpirit of Religion) are nothing ſo peſtiferous,
nothing ſo directly oppoſite to the holy ſpirit, as is this
Ieſuiticall rule of faith. Nor doe they either profeſſe ſuch beliefe
in Chriſt, or acknowledge him for a foundation ſo elect and precious,
as brings them within the Temple of God, within which
vnleſſe Antichriſt ſit his contrarietie vnto Chriſt could not bee ſo
eſſentiall, ſo immediate or direct, as by the rules of ſacred Philoſophie
we are taught it muſt be. Yet I know not, whether the
indignitie of this doctrine is more apt to affect Diuines or Men
rightly religious and fearing God, then the ſottiſhneſſe of their arguments
to perſwade it, to prouoke the iuſt indignation of ingenuous
Artiſts, which cannot endure, though in matters of indifferencie,
to captiuate their vnderſtandings to poſitions deuoide of
ſenſe. To require ſome probabilitie of reaſon, ciuill or naturall,
is on their part no inſolent demand, for exchange of Chriſtian
faith or aduenturing their inaſſurance of life eternall in the ſeruice

of meere forrainers whom they neuer ſaw. Yet vnto peremptorie
reſolutions no leſſe dangerous, doe Ieſuites ſolicite vs, not only
without any tollerable ſhew of probabilitie but quite contrarie
to Gods principall lawes and our naturall notions of good and
euill; as by theſe labours euery Academique may in part perceiue,
but more fully, if he would vouchſafe to ſift more of their
arguments, then in theſe ſhort tranſcurſiue diſputes I could. Nor
would I diſſwade any Artiſt well grounded in Ariſtotle from pervſing
the moſt learned workes any Romaniſt hath written in this
argument. In moſt other controuerſies betwixt vs and them it is
dangerous, I muſt confeſſe, euen for well grounded Artiſts to beginne
with their writings, not ſo in this: for I proteſt in the ſight
of God and his holy Angels, that as farre as I can remember the
inclinations of my youth, or by them prognoſticate how afterwards
I might haue beene affected, I neuer was, I neuer ſhould
haue beene, ſo throughly poſſeſſed with ſuch great diſlike of Romiſh
Antichriſtianiſme in this point, by hearing the moſt famous
Preachers in this Land, or reading all the learned Writers in reformed
Churches, as I was by examining the labours of Bellarmine,
Valentian, and others of beſt nore amongſt them ſeriouſly
addreſſed to this purpoſe; comparing them only with the known
principles of Chriſtianitie and ſuch paſſages of ſacred Writ, as euery
Chriſtian Artiſt ſhould be acquainted with. For the principles,
whereon I proceede, I haue beene only beholden to the Canon
of Scriptures; for deducing of ſuch blaſphemous conſequences
from them, as I charge the Aduerſarie with, only to that
ſmall meaſure of knowledge in Ariſtotelian Philoſophie wherewith
my God had bleſſed mee, whiles I was bound by locall ſtatutes
to the ſtudie of Artes, purpoſely abſtaining from other writings,
which with their informations of my vnderſtanding might
haue bred preiudice in my affection. Since that time, although
the yeares of my Miniſtrie hardly exceede the ſpace of ordinarie
apprentiſhips, yet haue I often wiſhed the diſcuſſion of theſe
points had beene then impoſed vpon mee by ſome experienced
Diuine, that would only haue giuen me right hold of their aſſertions.
Vpon this conſideration I would beſeech the flouriſhing
Artiſts of this famous Academie, whom God hath furniſhed with
all ſtore of munition neceſſarie for this ſeruice, not to neglect opportunities

preſent. Let them deferre (if ſo they pleaſe) the
fruits of their labours in other points (though this be the fault of
our Engliſh) vntill the Autumne of their age. But the marke I
now propoſe vnto them, being the euident reſolution of Ieſuiticall
poſitions into thoſe groſſe and palpable blaſphemies whereto
they tend, which they only ſeeke to hide by Sophiſmes and
artificiall tricks of wit, Academicall wits might diſplume them of
theſe figge-tree leaues and manifeſt their nakednes to the world,
much better in the ſpring whiles their skill in artes were freſh and
flouriſhing, whiles the ſtrength and vigour of their inuention
would more eaſily bend this way, then in the Autumne, when
their leaues begin to fade and their ſap retire to the root, as their
pleaſant grapes grow ripe. Many towardly plants in this nurcerie,
now able to match the ſtouteſt Ieſuite liuing at his owne weapon,
whileſt in his mature age, multo iam fractus membra labore,
more fit to be a Leader, then a combatant in theſe encounters, he
ſhall looke back on his former labours or cals to minde his wonted
dexteritie in Schoole diſputes, may take vp old Neſtors complaint.
            
               Tunc ego debueram capienda ad Pergama mitti;
               Tunc poteram magni, ſi non ſuperare, morari
               Hectoris arma meis: ſed in illo tempore nullus,
               Aut puer Hector erat; nunc me mea deficit aetas.
            
            The ſchoole Ieſuite in theſe ſtudies is like the Iuy alwaies greene,
becauſe not ſet to bring forth fruit vnto ſaluation, but rather to
choake and ſtrangle the plants of life. And for ſuch inſtruments
of the Romiſh Church, as this Land vſually yeelds, this wrangling
facultie is all the skill they care for, or for the moſt part make
profeſſion of. Yet ſuch is the brittleneſſe of the matter they are
to worke vpon in this controuerſie, that were all the Prieſts and
Ieſuites harboured within the confines of great Brittaine at this
preſent day, but enioyned to write all they could to any purpoſe
in defence of their Mother; ſome few Artiſts of thoſe Vniuerſities,
which out of their pride they ſeeme to vilifie amongſt the
ignorant, would, I dare not ſay make them bluſh (for ſooner might
they make a black-moores face of the ſame colour with his teeth)
but as many of their fauourers of this Kingdome, as haue not
ſworne allegeance to the Church of Rome, and are able to examine

an argument, to bee aſhamed on their behalfe, euen to acknowledge,
that for ought theſe Mounte-bankes could ſay or
write in their defence, the Poſitions maintayned by their Maſters,
forraine Ieſuites, were indeed idolatrous and blaſphemous;
howbeit the Church it ſelfe, wee muſt beleeue, could neuer bee
vanquiſhed, becauſe no man can tell where or in what ſhape to
finde it.
            Nor neede yong Artiſts feare the countenance of antiquitie in
this point, from which their enemies ſupplies are ſo ſlender, that
would they come to open triall, and bring only ſuch of the Fathers
for their ſeconds, as liued within fiue hundred yeares of
Chriſt, or before the mixture of Romiſh Religion with Heatheniſme,
not fully effected till a little after that time: the paucitie of
thoſe whoſe aide they durſt ſolicit, in reſpect of that great armie,
which is as reſolute as wee againſt them, would make them inſtantly
either yeeld themſelues, or forſake the field. Nor haue
they beene hitherto able to addreſſe any anſwere, but to their
ſhame, to the Worthies of the Engliſh Church, whoſe labours haue
made the conqueſt in this quarrell eaſie to any of their ſucceſſors,
that will aduenture to follow their ſteps. Nothing remaines but
what beſt becomes the exerciſe of yong wits; to exceede the ſophiſticall
diſputes of Ieſuites againſt the truth, in copiouſneſſe of
irrefragable demonſtrations, that the allegeance they ſeeke to eſtabliſh
vnto the Romiſh Church is ſolemne apoſtaſie from Chriſt;
that the beliefe of it is the very abſtract of ſorcerie, the vtmoſt degree
of Antichriſtianiſme that can bee expected. Theſe and like
points, being fortified by ſtrength of argument, in the time of
your Regencie or fare-well to the ſtudie of Artes, might bee poliſhed
at your better leiſure, afterwards to be reuiſed and publiſhed
at the appointment of authoritie. Or if the zeale of Gods glorie
thus mightily eclipſed by this foule Idoll of the Romiſh
Church doe not as yet ſo fully moue you; yet that indignation
which firſt wrought a deſire in mee of giuing this onſet, ſhould
worke (me thinks) in euery heart, that beares any ſparkle of loue
vnto his natiue Countrie. For what indignitie is it to thinke, that
whilſt our gracious Soueraigne is a moſt zealous Profeſſor and
Defendor of the truth we teach; ſo many of his naturall ſubiects
our Countrimen and Brethren, ſhould bee wonne vnto the Romiſh

faction, eſpecially by importunate inculcating two hereſies,
of all maintayned by that Church in themſelues moſt ſottiſhly
improbable; and yet apparently moſt damnable Idolaters in
their conſequences, if erroneous▪ I meane this concerning their
Churches abſolute priuiledge from all errour, and that other of
Chriſts reall preſence in the Sacrament, by tranſubſtantiation. It
cannot againe but adde much to our griefe and indignation, if we
call to minde, how, when the chiefe Gouernour and publique authoritie
of this Land were for them, ſubſcription was not vrged
vpon ſuch violent and bloudie termes vnto any articles of their
Religion, as vnto that of reall preſence. The myſterie of which
iniquitie cannot better bee reſolued then into the powerfull and
deceitfull working of Satan, thus delighting to deſpite our Lord
and Sauiour by ſeducing his profeſſed ſubiects vnto the higheſt
and moſt deſperate kinde of rebellion he could imagine, vpon the
leaſt occaſions and ſhalloweſt reaſons. For ſuch is their madneſſe
in that other point, as hath beene ſhewed in this: Not one inconuenience
they can obiect to our opinion, but may be demonſtrated
againſt theirs; not any fruits of godlineſſe they can pretend
but our doctrine more directly brings forth then theirs could,
though we did admit it for true. For to what other purpoſe ſuch
a preſence as they imagine ſhould ſerue them, ſaue only to countenance
thoſe deſperate Idolatrous practices and litourges of Satan,
touched by the way in ſome parts of theſe diſcourſes, is inexplicable;
as ſhall be ſhewed more at large (without depriuing that
heauenly myſterie of any ſolemnitie of deuotion due vnto it) in
the vnfolding of that controuerſie.
            
               Yours in Christ Ieſus.
THOMAS IACKSON.
            
         
         
            
            A Table of Scriptures expounded or illuſtrated
by obſeruations in this third Booke of
COMMENTARIES.
            Out of the old Testament.
            
               Exodus.
               4 13 SEnd I pray thee by
the hand of him,
whom thou ſhouldeſt
ſend. Sect. 3. Chap. 11. Paragraph.
20.
               14 13 Feare ye not, ſtand ſtill,
and behold the ſaluation of the
Lord. ſec. 3. c. 6. par. 5.
               15 26 If thou wilt diligently
hearken, O Iſrael, vnto the voice
of the Lord thy God, &c. ibid.
               
               17 7 Is the Lord among vs
or no? ibid. p. 7.
               16 12 I haue heard the murmurings
of the children of Iſrael.
ibid.
               
               19 4 Yee haue ſeene what I
did vnto the Aegyptians, &c.
ibid. p. 7.
               20 10 In it thou ſhalt doe no
māner of worke, &c. ſec. 3. c. 1. p. 8
               24 10 They ſaid the God of
Iſrael. ſect. 3. c. 6. par. 5. p. 7
               24 9 Then went vp Moſes
and Aaron, ſect. 3. c. 11. par. 10
               28 30 Alſo thou ſhalt put in
the breaſt-plate of iudgment the
Vrim and the Thummim, &c. ſect.
3. c. 1. p. 2. 3.
            
            
               Leviticus.
               10 9 THou ſhalt not drinke
wine nor ſtrōg drinke,
&c. ſect. 3. c. 1. p. 5.
            
            
               Numbers.
               11 16 GAther vnto mee ſeuentie
men of the
Elders of Iſrael. ſect. 3. c. 11. p. 9.
               12 6 If there be a Prophet of
the Lord among you, &c. ibid.
par. 10.
               23 22 God brought them out
of Aegypt, their ſtrength is an an
Vnicorne, &c. ibid. par. 20.
               27 21 And he ſhal ſtand before
Eleazar the Prieſt, &c. ſect. 3.
c. 1. p. 3.
            
            
               Deuteronomie.
               11 29 WHen the LORD
thy GOD therefore
hath brought thee into the
Land, whither, &c. ſect. 3, c. 7, p. 4
               
                  
4 1, 2 Now therefore hearken,
O Iſrael, vnto the ordināces
&c. ſect. 3, c. 6, p 5
               4 
                     •
                  9 Take heede to thy ſelfe,
& keep thy ſoule diligently, that
thou forget not, &c. ſec. 3, c. 7, p. 6
               5 22 Theſe words the Lord
ſpake vnto all your multitude, in
the Mount, &c. ſect. c. 6, p. 7.
               5. 28, 29 I haue heard the voice
of the words of this people, ſect.
3, c. 11, p. 18
               10 17 The Lord your God is
God of Gods, and Lord of Lords,
&c. ſec. 3, c. 9, p. 6
               11 2 Conſider this day, for I
ſpeake not vnto your children,
&c. ſect. 3, c. 7, p. 2
               11 13 If yee ſhall hearken
therefore to my cōmandements,
&c. ibid. p. 4.
               11 18 Therefore ſhal you lay
vp theſe my words in your harts
and in your ſoules, &c. ibid. p. 2.
               11 19 And yee ſhall teach
them your children, &c. ibid.
               
               11 22 For if you keepe diligently
all theſe cōmandements,
&c. ibid.
               
               11 26 Behold I ſet before
you this day a bleſſing & a curſe,
&c. ibid. p. 4.
               18 15 The Lord thy GOD
will raiſe vp thee a Prophet like
vnto me, &c. ſect. 3, c. 11, p. 1
               18 15, 19 Vnto him ſhall yee
hearken according to all that
thou deſiredſt of the Lord, &c.
ſec. 3. c. 11, p. 21
               18 18 I wil raiſe them vp a
Prophet from among their brethren,
&c. ſect. 3. c. 11. p. 10
               18 18 Whoſoeuer will not
hearken vnto my wordes, which
he ſhall ſpeak, &c. ſec. 3, c. 11, p. 18
               18 19 Whoſoeuer will not
hearken, &c. ſect. c. 11, p. 16
               18 14 The Nations which
thou ſhalt poſſeſſe, hearken vnto
thoſe that regard the times. ibid.
p. 19.
               18 20 But the Prophet that
ſhall preſume to ſpeake a word in
my name. ibid. p. 1.
               17 8 If there ariſe a matter to
hard for thee in iudgement, &c.
ſect. c. 2, p. 1
               17 19 And it ſhall bee with
him, and he ſhall reade therin all
the dayes of his life, &c. ibid. p. 4
               24 10 There aroſe not a Prophet
ſince in Iſrael like vnto Moſes,
&c. ſect. 3, c. 11, p. 18
               27 11, 12, 13, 14, Theſe ſhall
ſtand vpon Mount Gerizim to
bleſſe the people, &c. ſ. 3, c. 7, p. 4
               30 1 Nowe when all theſe
things ſhall come vpon thee, &c.
ibid. p. 11
               31 16 That when they went
a whooring after the Gods of a
ſtrange Land, &c. ſect. 3, c. 9, p. 6
               31 10, 11, 12, 13 Euery ſeuēth
yeare, when the yeare of freedome
ſhall bee, &c. ſect. 3, c. 7,
p. 4
            
            
               
               Ioſhua.
               8 33, 34, 35 ANd all Iſrael, and
their Elders, and
their Officers ſtood on this ſide
the Arke, &c. ſect. 3, c. 7, p. 4
            
            
               Iudges.
               2 7, 8 THe people had ſerued
the Lord all the dayes
of Ioſhua, &c. ſect. 3, c. 7, p. 6
               6 13 The Lord is with thou
valiant man, &c. ibid.
               
               6 14 And the Lord looked vpon
him, and ſaid, goe in this thy
might. ibid. p.7
               17 15 When Gideon heard
the dreame told, &c. ibid. p. 8
               6 15 Ah my Lord, whereby
ſhall I ſaue Iſrael, &c. ibid.
               
               8 33 But when Gideon was
dead, &c. ibid. par. 9
            
            
               Samuel.
               1 23, 9 ANd Dauid hauing
knowledge, that
Saul imagined miſchiefe againſt
him, ſaid to Abiathar the Prieſt,
&c. ſect. 3, c. 1, p. 3
               1 30, 7, 8 And Dauid ſaid to Abiathar
the Prieſt Ahimelechs Son,
I pray thee bring me the Ephod,
&c. ibid.
               
               1 28, 6 Therefore Saul asked
counſell of the Lord, and the
Lord anſwered him not. ibid. p. 4
            
            
               Kings.
               1 13, 18 ANd hee ſaid vnto
him, I am a Prophet
alſo as thou art, and an Angell
ſpake vnto me, &c. ſ. 3, c. 8, p. 6
               1 22, 24 When went the ſpirit
of the Lord from me, &c. ſect.
3, c. 9, p. 2
               1 18, 36 And when they
ſhould offer the euening ſacrifice
Elijah the Prophet came and ſaid
&c. ſect. 3, c. 11, p. 7
               1 22, 28 If thou returne in
peace the Lord hath not ſpoken
by me. ibid.
               
               2 4, 27 Let her alone, for her
ſoule is vexed within her, &c. ſec.
3, c. 11, p. 11.
            
            
               Chronicles.
               2 21, 20 THus ſaith GOD,
why tranſgreſſe
yee the commandement of the
Lord? Surely yee ſhall not proſper,
&c. ſect. 3, c. 9, p. 6.
            
            
               Nehemiah.
               1 7 WE haue grieuouſly
ſinned againſt
thee, &c. ſect. 3, c. 7, p. 11.
            
            
               Pſalmes.
               2 7 THou art my Son, this,
&c. ſect. 3, c. 11, p. 22
               50 16 What haſt thou to do,
to declare mine ordinances, &c.
ſect. 2, c. 7. p. 12
               50 25 To him that diſpoſeth
his way aright, will I ſhew the
ſaluation of God, &c. ibid.
               
               78 33, 34 When he ſlue them
they ſought him, &c. ſ. 3, c. 7, p. 3.
            
            
               Iſaiah.
               6 1, 2, 3 I Saw alſo the Lord ſitting
vppon an high
Throne, &c. ſect. 3, c. 10, p. 5
               
                  
6 9 Goe and ſay vnto this
people, yee ſhal heare indeed but
yee ſhall not vnderſtand, &c.
ſect. 3. c. 5. p. 3.
               11 2 And the Spirit of the
Lord ſhall reſt vpon him, &c. ſect.
3. c. 10. p. 5.
               28 16 Behold I lay in Sion a
chiefe corner ſtone, &c. ſect. 2. c. 7
p. 7.
               35 5 Then ſhall the eyes of
blind be lightned. ſect. 3. c. 10. p. 5.
               40 3 A voice cryeth in the
wilderneſſe, prepare yee, &c. ſect.
3. c. 11. p. 12.
               42 1 Beholde my ſeruant I
will ſtay vpon him, &c. ſect. 3. c.
30. p. 5.
               61 1 The Spirit of the Lord
is vpon mee, therefore the Lord
hath anointed me. ſect. 3. c. 10. p. 5
               53 8 9 But his generation
who ſhall declare, &c. ſect. 3. c. 11.
p. 22.
               42 8 9 I am the Lord, this is
my name, and my glory I wil not
giue vnto another. ſect 3. c. 11 p. 13.
            
            
               Ieremiah.
               18 18 COme and let vs imagine
ſome deuiſe againſt
Ieremiah, &c. ſect. 3. c 9. p. 3.
               28 6. 7. 8. 9 Euen the Prophet
Ieremiah ſaid, ſo be it the Lord ſo
doe, &c. ſect. 3. c. 11. p. 7.
               26 8. 9. Now when Ieremiah
had made an end of ſpeaking all
that the Lord had commaunded
him to ſpeake, &c. ſect. 3. c. 9. p. 3.
               28. 10. 12. This ſaith the Lord,
euen ſo will I breake the yoke of
Nebuchadnezzars. ſect. 3. c. 11. p. 1
                     •
                  
               
               29 26 The Lord hath made
thee Prieſt for Iehoiada the Prieſt,
&c. ſect. 3. c. 9. p. 3.
               30 13 14 Their is none to
judge thy cauſe, or to lay a plaiſter,
&c. ſect. 3. c. 7. p. 11.
               32 24 Behold the Mounts,
they are come into the Citie to
take it, &c. ibid.
               
               32 42 43, &c. Thus ſaith the
Lord, like as I haue brought all
this great plague vpon this people:
ſo will I bring vpon them al
the good I haue promiſed them,
&c. ibid.
               
            
            
               Ezekiel.
               33. 32. 33 ANd loe thou art vnto
him, as a jeſting
ſong of on that hath a pleaſant
voyce. ſect. 3. c. 11. p. 7.
            
            
               Daniel.
               2. 44. THis Kingdome ſhal neuer
be deſtroyed, or giuen
to another people, &c. ſect.
2. c. 7. p. 20.
            
            
               Malachi.
               2. 12. ANd now O yee Prieſts
this commaundement
is for you, &c. ſect. 3. c. p. p. 6.
            
            
               Eccleſiaſticus.
               23. 45. 24. 25 BEcauſe Phineas
the ſonne of Eleazar
had zeale in the feare of
the Lord, &c. ſect. 3. c. 2. p. 8.
            
            
               
               Maccabees.
               1. 2. 36. 37. 38. But the other anſwered
them nothing, neither
caſt any one ſtone at them, &c. ſe.
3. c. 1. p. 9.
               1, 2 41 Whoſoeuer ſhould
come to make battle with vs vpon
the Sabaoth day, &c. ibid.
               
            
            
               Out of the New teſtament:
Matthew.
               7, 26 VVHoſoeuer heareth
theſe my words &
doth them not, &c. ſe. 2. c. 7, p. 25.
               11. 3. 4, &c. Art thou hee that
ſhould come, or ſhall wee looke
for another, &c. ſect. c. 10. p. 4.
               12. 27 By whom then doe your
children caſt them out, &c. ſect. 3.
c. 11. p. 4.
               12 28 But if I by the Spirit,
&c. ibid. p. 5.
               16. 13. 14, 15, &c. For Ieſus
when he came vnto the Coaſts of
Ceſarea, &c. ſect. c. 7. p. 2.
               16 18 Tu es Petrus, & ſuper
hanc petram, &c. ibid. p. 1. throughout
the whole Chapter.
               16 19 I will giue vnto thee
the keyes of the Kingdome of
Heauen, &c. ſect, 3. c. 3. p. 9.
               16 22, &c. Maſter bee good
to your ſelfe, &c. ſect. c. 2. c. 7. p.
21.
               16 23 Then he turned back
and ſaid vnto Peter, get thee behind
me, &c. ibid. p. 8.
               18 15 If thy Brother treſpaſſe
againſt thee, dic Eccleſiae. ſect. 2.
c. 2. p. 5
               21, 40, 41. 42, &c. When therefore
the Lord of the Vineyard
ſhal come, &c. ſect. 2. c. 7. p. 9.
               21. 42. Read you neuer in the
Scriptures, the ſtone which the
builders, &c. ibid.
               
               23 2. 3. The Scribes and Phariſees
ſit in Moſes ſeate, &c. ſect. 3. c.
3. p. 1.
               23. 29. 30. They builded the
tombs of the Prophets, &c. ſect.
c. 9. p. 4.
               23 35. ibid.
               
               26 27 Bibite ex hoc omnes. ſect.
2. c. 4. p. 8.
               26 57 They tooke Ieſus and
led him to Caiaphas, &c. ſect. c. 5.
par. 7.
               27 25 All the people anſwered
and ſaid, his bloud bee vpon
vs, &c. ibid.
               
               27 64 So ſhall the laſt errour
be worſe then the firſt, &c. ſect.
3. c. 11. p. 22.
               26 65 66 What thinke yee?
And they anſwered and ſaid, he
is worthie to die. ibid.
               
            
            
               Marke.
               6 2 ANd when the Sabaoth
was come hee began to
teach in the Synagogue, &c. ſect.
3. c. 10. p. 5.
               7 37 Hee did all things well,

&c. ſect. 3. c. 11. p. 7.
               9. 38. Maſter we ſaw one caſting
out Deuils in thy name, &c. ſec. 3
c.11. p. 4.
               13 21 22 If any man ſay to
you, loe heere is Chriſt, &c. ſect. 3.
c. 10. p. 7.
            
            
               Luke.
               4 14 ANd Ieſus returned by
the power of the ſpirit
into Galile, &c. ſect. 3. c. 10. p. 5.
               4, 16, 17, &c. And hee came to
Nazaret where hee had beene
brought vp, &c. ibid.
               
               4. 18. 16 The ſpirit of the Lord is
vpon mee becauſe he hath anonted
me, &c. ibid.
               
               4 23 Then hee ſaid vnto
them, Ye will ſurely ſay vnto me
this Prouerb, &c. ibid.
               
               4 29 30 And roſe vp and
thruſt her out of the Citie, &c.
ibid.
               
               4 34 I know who thou art, euen
the holy one of God. ſect. 1.
2. c. 7. p. 12.
               6 9 Whether is it lawfull on
the Sabboath dayes to doe good,
&c. ſect. 3. c. 1. p. 8.
               11 20. But if I by the finger
of God caſt out Deuils, &c. ſect. 3.
c. 11. p. 5.
               10 16 Hee that heareth you,
heareth mee, &c. ſect. 3. c. 1. p. 13.
               16 31 If they heare not Moſes,
&c. ſect. 3. c. 11. p. 21.
               22 32 I haue prayed for thee
thy faith ſhould not faile, &c. ſec.
2. c. 2. p. 1. &c. 6. par. 1. 2. &c.
               22 33 Lord I am readie to
goe with thee into priſon. ibid.
               
               22 66 Aſſoone as it was day
the Elders of the people, &c. ſec:
3. c. 5. p. 7.
               24 25 Fooles and ſlow of
heart in not beleeuing. ſect. 3. c.
12. p, 1.
               24 27 He began at Moſes, &c.
ibid. p. 2.
               24 32 Their heartes did
burne, &c. ibid.
               
            
            
               Iohn.
               1 18 NO man hath ſeene
God at any time, ſe.
3. c. 11. p. 10
               1 20 21 Art thou the Chriſt?
Art thou Eliah, &c. ſect. 3. c. 11.
p. 20.
               1 25 Why baptizeſt thou
then, if thou bee not the Chriſt,
&c. ibid.
               
               1 29 Behold the Lambe of
God that taketh away, &c. ſect. 3.
c. 11. p. 12.
               1 31 And I knew him not;
but becauſe he ſhould bee declared
vnto Iſrael. ſect c. 11. p. 20.
               1 33 And I knew him not,
but hee that ſent mee to baptize
with water, &c. ſect. 3. c. 10. p. 5.
               1 49 Nathaniel anſwered, and
ſaid vnto him, Rabbi thou art th
                     •
                  
                  
ſonne of God, &c. ſect. 3. c. 11.
p. 14.
               1 50 Becauſe I ſaid vnto thee
I ſaw thee vnder the figge Tree,
&c. ibid,
               
               2 22 Aſſoone as hee was riſen
from the dead, his Diſciples
remembred, &c. ſect. 3. c. 11. p. 16.
               2 24 25. But Ieſus did not
commit himſelfe vnto them, &c.
ſect. 3. c. 8. p. 3.
               3 5 Except that a man bee
borne of water and of the Spirit,
&c. ſect. 4. c. 11. p. 13.
               4 3 Euery ſpirit which confeſſeth
not that Ieſus Chriſt is
come in the fleſh, &c. ſect. 2. c. 7. p.
13.
               4 25 When he is come, hee
will tell vs all thinges, ſect. 3. c. 11.
p. 15.
               4 29 Come and ſee a man
that hath tolde mee all thinges,
&c. ibid.
               
               4 42 And they ſaid vnto
the woman, now we beleeue, not
becauſe of thy ſaiyngs, &c. ibid.
               
               5 22 For the Father iudgeth
no man, &c. ſect. 3. c. 10. p. 1.
               5 43 44 I am in my Fathers
name and yee receiue mee not,
&c. ſect. 3. c. 8. p. 3,
               5 46 For had yee beleeued
Moſes, you would haue beleeued
me, &c. ſect. c. 10. p. 3.
               6 5 And the bread that I
will giue is my fleſh, &c. ſect. 2. c.
4. p. 12. 10.
               6 51 If any man eate of this
bread he ſhall liue for euer. ibid. p.
11. 10.
               6 51 I am the liuing bread
that came downe from Heauen,
ibid. p. 12.
               6 53 Vnleſſe yee eate the
fleſh of the ſonne of man, &c. ibid,
p. 10.
               6 54 Whoſoeuer eateth my
fleſh, and drinketh my bloud, 
ibid.
               
               6 56 Whoſoeuer eateth my
fleſh, and drinketh my bloud
dwels in me, &c, ibid.
               
               6 58 He that eateth this bred
ſhall liue for euer, ibid.
               
               6 14 This is of a truth the
Prophet that ſhould come, &c, ſ.
3. c. 8. p. 3.
               6 30 What ſigne ſheweſt
thou then, that wee may ſee and
beleeue, &c. ſect. 3. c. 10. p. 7.
               5 68 Thou haſt the words
of eternall life, ibid.
               
               7 18 Hee that ſpeaketh of
himſelfe ſeeketh his owne glorie,
ſect. 3. c. 14. p. 2.
               7 31 Many of the people beleeued
in him, &c, ſect 3. c. 10. p. 7.
               10, 40, 41, 42, And went again
beyond Iordan, into the place
where Iohn &c. ſect. 3. c. 11. p. 12.
               11 50 It is expedient for vs
that one die, &c, ſect, 3. c. 5. p. 5.
               12 28 Father glorifie thy
name, &c. ſect. 3. c. 11. p. 16.
               12 30 This voice came not

becauſe of me, &c, ibid.
               
               12 32 If I were lift vp from
the Earth, &c, ibid. p. 17.
               12 44 Hee that beleeueth in
mee beleeueth not in mee, but in
him, &c, ibid. p. 16.
               12 48 And receiueth not
my words hath one that iudgeth
him, &c, ibid.
               
               12, 49, 50, For I haue not ſpoken
of my ſelfe, &c, ibid.
               
               14 29 Now I haue ſpoken
vnto you before it come, ibid.
               
               15 14 Yee are my friendes if
yee doe whatſoeuer I command,
&c, ſect. 3. c. 6 p. 3.
               16 4 Theſe thinges haue I
told you, that when the houre
ſhall come, &c, ſect, 3. c. 11, p. 16.
               16 30 Now know wee that
thou knoweſt all things, &c. ibid.
p. 15.
               21 15 Feed my lambes. ſec.
2. c. 6. p. 7.
               21 18 Verily verily I ſay vnto
thee when thou which waſt
yong, &c. ibid, p. 8,
               21 16 Feed my ſheep ibid. p. 8.
            
            
               Acts.
               2 15 YEe men of Iudea, and
yee all, &c. ſect. 2, chap.
6, p. 6.
               3 12 To the 13 verſe of the
4 chap. ibid.
               
               3 23 For it ſhall be that euery
perſon which ſhall not hear that
Prophet, &c. ſect. 3, chap. 12, p. 22.
Et ſect. 3, c. 11, p. 1
               3 26 Vnto you hath God raiſed
vp his Sonne, &c. ſect. 3, chap.
11, p. 21
               10 34 I perceiue of truth that
God is not an accepter of perſons.
ſect. 3, c. 9, p. 6
               13 27 For the Inhabitants of
Ieruſalem, and their Rulers, becauſe
they knew him not, &c. ſec.
3, c. 11, p. 21
               13 33 Thou arte my Sonne
this day, &c. ibid. p. 22
               13 46 Then Paul and Barnabas
ſpake boldly and ſaid, It was
neceſſarie that the word of God,
&c. ſect. 2, c. 6, p. 6
               17 2 And Paul as his manner
was, went in vnto them, & three
Sabboth daies diſputed, &c. ſect.
3, c. 14, p. 1
               17 11 They receiued the word
with all readineſſe, &c. ibid.
               
               26 22 I obtained help of God,
and continued vnto this day, &c.
ibid. p. 4
               26 26 For theſe things were
not done in a corner, &c. ſect. 3,
c. 11, p 22
            
            
               Romans.
               7 18 TO will is preſent with
me, &c. ſect. 3, c. 3, p. 5
               10 9 If thou ſhalt confeſſe with
thy mouth the Lord Ieſus, &c.
ſect. 2, c. 7, p. 7, 8
               
                  
10 11 Whoſoeuer beleeues in
him ſhall not bee aſhamed, &c.
ibid.
               
            
            
               Corinthians.
               1, c. 2, 15 BVt hee that is ſpirituall
diſcerneth
all things, &c. ſect. 3, c. 14, p. 4
               1, c. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 Who is Paul
then? And who is Apollos? but
the Miniſters by whom, &c. ſect.
2, c. 4, p. 15
               1, c. 3. 11 For other foundation
can no man lay. ſect. 2, c. 7, p. 7
               1, c. 4. 1, 2 Let a man ſo thinke
of vs as of diſpoſers of the ſecrets,
&c. ſect. c. 4, p 14
               1, c. 7. 10. Vnto the married
cōmand not I but the Lord, &c.
ſect. 3, c. 9, p. 6
               1, c. 11. 26, 27, 28, 29 As often
as yee ſhall eate this bread, &c.
ſect. 2, c. 4, p. 15
               1, c. 11. 34 Other things will
I ſet in order when I come, &c.
ibid.
               
               2, c. 8. 13 If meat offend my
Brother, I will eate none, &c. ſect.
2, c. 4, p. 21
            
            
               Galatians.
               1 8 THough Wee or an Angel
from heauen preach
&c. ſect. 3, c. 7, p. 7.
               2 7▪ When they ſaid the Goſpell
ouer the circumciſion was
committed, &c. ſect. 2, c. 6. p. 4
            
            
               Epheſians.
               2 20 WE are built vpon the
Foundation of the
Apoſtles, &c. ſect. 2, c. 7, p. 15
               5, 32 This is a great ſecret,
but I ſpeake concerning Chriſt,
&c. ſect. 2, c. 4, p. 14
            
            
               Coloſsians.
               3 20 CHildren obey your parents
in all things, &c.
Sect. 3, c. 1, p. 16
            
            
               Theſſalonians.
               2, c. 8. 11 THerefore GOD
ſhall ſend them
ſtrong, &c. ſect. 4, c. 7
               2, c. 2. 4 Hee ſits as God in
the Temple, &c. ſect. 2, c. 7, p. 22.
            
            
               Hebrewes.
               3 1, 2, 3, 4 COnſider the Apoſtle
& high Prieſt
of our profeſſion, &c. ſect. 3. chap.
6, p. 2
               9 22 Without ſhedding of
bloud is no remiſſion, &c. ſect. 2,
c. 4, p. 18
               10 28 He that deſpiſeth Moſes
Law, dyeth without mercie
vnder two or three witneſſes, &c.
ſect. 3, c. 11, p. 18
               
                  
11 12 Therefore ſprang their
Euen of one, &c. ſect. 3, chap. 12,
p. 22.
            
            
               Peter.
               1, c. 5. 1, 2, 3 THe elders which
are amongſt you
I beſeech, which am alſo an Elder,
&c. ſect. 12, c. 6, p. 10
               2, c. 1. 17 He receiued of God
the Father honor and glorie, &c.
ſect. 3, c. 11, p. 16
               2, c. 1. 14 Seeing I know that
the time is at hand that I muſt lay
downe, &c. ſect. 3, c. 13, p. 1
               2, c. 1. 16 When he opened
vnto them the power and comming
of Chriſt, &c: ibid. p. 2
               2, c. 1. 19 Wee haue alſo a
moſt ſure word of the Prophets,
to the which ye doe well that ye
take heede, ibid.
               
            
            
               Iohn.
               1, c. 4. v. 3 EVery ſpirit which
cōfeſſeth not that
Ieſus Chriſt. ſect. 2, c. 7, p. 13.
            
            
               Reuelation.
               1 3 BLeſſed is hee that readeth,
and they that
hear the word, &c. ſec. 2, c, 8, p, 4,
               13, 4, 5, 6, 7, The beaſt which
had his power from the Dragon,
&c. ſect. 3. c. 12. p. 4.
            
         
         
            
            A Table of the ſeuerall Sections and Chapters
in the Booke following.
            
               SECTION. I.
               COntaining the Aſſertions of the Romiſh Church, whence her
threefold blaſphemie ſprings, page 1.
               In the marginall note, parag. 10. for Petrum a voto, reade
Petrum a Soto.
               
               In the marginall note, para. 13. for propter leges, read praeter leges.
               
               Margine, parag. 13. propriae virtutis ſuae, reade propria.
            
            
               SECTION. II.
               The firſt branch of Romiſh blaſphemie, in preferring humane
authoritie before Diuine, Pag. 10.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Bellarmines replie to the maine obiection, ioyntly vrged by all Reformed
Churches againſt the Romiſh: the Equiuocation which he ſought
in the Obiection apparently found in his Replie, pag. 10.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Inferring, the generall concluſion propoſed in the Title of this Section,
from Bellarmines reſolution of faith, pag. 15.
               In the marginall note, parag. 9. for for the ſame grounds, reade
from the ſame grounds. Marg. parag. 1. dele ſi.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               Containing a further Reſolution of the Romiſh faith, neceſſarily inferring
the authoritie of the Romane Church, to be of greater authoritie
then Gods word abſolutely, not onely in reſpect of vs, pag. 24.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               That in obeying the Romiſh Churches Decrees, we doe not obey Gods
word as well as them, but them alone in contempt of Gods principall
Lawes, pag. 28.
               In the marginall note, parag. 13. putamus, reade non putamus.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               Propounding what poſsibly can bee ſaid on our aduerſaries behalfe for
auoiding the force of the former Arguments: ſhewing withall the ſpeciall
points that lie vpon them to proue, as principally, whether their beliefe
of the Churches authoritie can bee reſolued into any diuine teſtimonie,
pag. 46.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               That neither our Sauiours Prayers, for the not failing of Peters
faith, Luke 22. 32. nor his commending his ſheepe vnto his feeding,
Iohn 21. 15. prooue any Supremacie in Peter ouer the Church, from
which the authoritie of the Pope can, with probabilitie, be deriued, p. 49.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               That Chriſt, not S. Peter is the Rocke, ſpoken of Matth. 16. 18. that
the Ieſuites Expoſition of that place, demonſtrateth the Pope to be the
great Antichriſt, pag. 64.
               
                  In the marginall note, parag. 24. for That Romiſh faith is that
faith, reade that Romiſh faith is not that faith.
               In the marginall note, parag. 31. for a paralile, reade a paralell.
               
               In the marginall note, parag. 3. for Plinius, reade Pintus. Parag. 22.
for melang, reade felang.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               That the Romaniſts beliefe of the Churches in fallible authoritie, cannot
bee reſolued into any teſtimonie better then humane, whence the
maine concluſion immediatly followes. [That the Romaniſt in obeying
the Church-decrees without examination of them by Gods word, preferre
mans Lawes before Gods.] pag. 89.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               In what ſence the Ieſuites may truely denie they beleeue the words of
man better then the words of God: In what ſence againe our Writers
truely charge them with this blaſphemie, pag. 99.
            
            
               SECTION. III.
CHAP. I.
               What reſtraint, precepts for obedience vnto the Prieſts of the Law,
though ſeeming moſt vniuerſall for their forme, did neceſſarily admit:
How vniuerſall Propoſitions of Scriptures are to be limited, pag. 105.
               In the marginall note, parag. 3. for ſuſcitaturus, read ſciſcitaturus.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               The authoritie of the Sanhedrim not ſo vniuerſal or abſolute amongſt
the Iewes as the Papiſts make it, but was to bee limited by the former
Rules, pag. 119.
               In the marginall note, parag. 2. for ſarcedotem, reade ſacerdotem.
               
               Margine, parag. 11. for Canala, reade Cabala.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               That our Sauiours iniunction of obedience to the Scribes and Phariſees,
though moſt vniuerſall for the forme, is to be limited by the former
rules, that without open blaſphemie it cannot be extended to countenance
the Romiſh cauſe: that by it we may limit other places brought by them
for the Popes tranſcendent vniuerſall authoritie, pag. 128.
               
                  In the marginall note, parag. 11. quae ad populi ſalutem fuit, reade
vt quae ad populi ſalutem ſint.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               What it would diſaduantage the Romiſh Church to denie the infallibilitie
of the Synagogue, pag. 139.
               
                  Mar. par. 3. inueniebant, read inueniebantur. negat read negatur.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               That iuſtly it may be preſumed the Iewiſh Church, neuer had any abſolute
infallibitie in propoſing or determining Articles of faith, becauſe
in our Sauiours time it did ſo grieuouſly erre in the fundamentall point
of ſaluation, pag. 142.
               
                  Mar. par. 2. darmauit, read damnauit. ſunt enim, read ſicut enim
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               That Moſes had no ſuch abſolute authoritie, as is now aſcribed vnto
the Pope: That the manner of his attaining to ſuch as he had, excludes
all beſides our Sauiour from iuſt challenge of the like, pag. 151.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               That the Churches authoritie was no part of the rule of faith vnto the
people after Moſes death, That by experiments anſwerable vnto the
precepts and predictions, the faithfull without relying vpon the Prieſts
infallible propoſalls, were as certaine, both of the diuine truth, and true
meaning of the law, as their forefathers had beene that liued with Moſes
and ſaw his miracles, pag. 159.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               That the ſocietie or viſible companie of Prophets had no ſuch abſolute

authoritie as the Romiſh Church vſurpes, pag. 169.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               That the Church repreſentatiue amongst the Iewes was for the most
part, the moſt corrupt iudge of matters belonging to God: and the reaſon
why it was ſo, pag. 178.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               That the Soueraigntie giuen by Ieſuits to the Pope is greater then our
Sauiours was, pag. 186.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               Confirming the truth deliuered in the former Chapter from the very
Law giuen by Moſes for diſcerning the great Prophet, further exemplifying
the vſe and force of miracles for begetting faith: The manner
of trying propheſies: Of the ſimilitude betwixt Chriſt and Moſes, p. 197
               In the marginall note par. 19. for for ſorcerie, reade from ſorcerie.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               That the method vſed by the great Prophet himſelfe after his reſurrection
for planting faith, was ſuch as we teach: The exceſſe of Antichriſts
exaltation aboue Chriſt: The Diametrall oppoſition betwixt the
ſpirit of God, and the ſpirit of the Papacie, pag. 221.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               That the authoritie attributed to the preſent Pope, and the Romiſh
rule of faith were altogether vnknowne vnto Saint Peter: the oppoſition
betwixt S. Peters and his pretended ſucceſſors doctrine, pag. 226.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               That S. Paul ſubmitted his doctrine to examination by the wordes
before written. That his doctrine, diſpoſition and practiſe, were quite
contrarie to the Romaniſts in this argument, pag. 232.
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               A briefe taſte of our aduerſaries blaſphemous and Atheiſticall aſſertions
in this argument from ſome inſtances of two of their greateſt Doctors,
Bellarmine and Valentian: That if faith cannot be perfect without
the ſolemne teſtification of that Church, the raritie of ſuch teſtifications
will cauſe infidelitie, pag. 239.
            
            
               SECTION, IIII.
               Containing the third branch of Romiſh blaſphemie or the laſt
degree of great Antichriſts exaltation, vtterly ouerthrowing the

whole foundation of Chriſtian Religion, prepoſterouſly inuerting
both Law and Goſpell to Gods diſhonor, and aduancement
of Sathans Kingdome, pag. 245.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               The Ieſuits vnwillingneſſe to acknowledge the Churches propoſall for
the true cauſe of his faith: of differences and agreements about the finall
reſolution of faith either amongſt the aduerſaries themſelues, or betwixt
vs and them, p. 245.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               That the Churches propoſall is the true, immediate, and prime cauſe
of all abſolute beliefe any Romaniſt can haue, concerning any determinate
diuine reuelation, p. 249.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               Diſcouering either the groſſe ignorance, or notorious craft of the Ieſuit
in denying his faith, is finally reſolued into the Churches veracitie or infallibilitie:
that poſsibly it cannot be reſolued into any branch of the first
truth, pag. 256.
               
                  Mar. par. 3. faith, reade the Romaniſts faith.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               What manner of cauſall-dependance Romiſh beliefe hath on the
Church: that the Romaniſt truly and properly beleeues the Church only,
not God or his Word, pag. 268.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               Declaring how the firſt maine ground of Romiſh faith leads directly
vnto Atheiſme: the ſecond vnto prepoſterous Heatheniſme or Idolatrie,
pag. 277. Mar. par. 12. efferunt, reade afferunt.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               Prouing the laſt aſſertion, or generally the imputations laid vpon the
Papacie, by that authoritie the Ieſuites expreſly giue vnto the Pope in
matters of particular fact, as in the Canonizing of Saints, pag. 294.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               What danger by this blaſphemous doctrine may accrew to Christian
States; that of all hereſies, blaſphemies, or idolatries which haue beene
ſince the world beganne, or can be imagined till Chriſt come to iudgment:
this Apoſtaſie of the Ieſuites, is the moſt abhominable and contumelious
againſt the bleſſed Trinitie, pag. 300.
            
         
      
      
         
            THE TRIPLICITIE
OF ROMISH BLASPHEMIE
OR THE THREE DEGREES OF
ANTICHRISTS EXALTATION
Againſt all that is called
GOD.
         THE THIRD BOOKE.
         
            SECT. I.
            Contayning the aſſertions of the Romiſh Church, whence her
threefold blaſphemie ſprings.
            
               HAuing, in the former diſpute clearly
acquitted, as well Gods word
from breeding, as our Church from
nurſing contentions, ſchiſmes, and
hereſies, wee may in this, by courſe
of common equitie, more freely accuſe
their iniurious calumniators.
And becauſe our purpoſe is not, to
charge them with forgerie of any
particular, though groſſeſt hereſies,
or blaſphemies, though moſt hideous,
but for erecting an intire frame, capacio
                  •
               s of all villanies
imaginable; farre ſurpaſſing the hugeſt mathematicall forme humane
fancie could haue conceiued of ſuch matters, but only from
inſpection of this reall and materiall patterne, which by degrees

inſenſible hath growne vp with the myſterie of iniquitie, as the
barke doth with the tree; ſuch inconſiderate paſsionate ſpeeches,
as heat of contention in perſonall quarrells hath exſtracted from
ſome one, or few of their priuate Writers, ſhall not be produced
to giue euidence againſt the Church their Mother, whoſe triall
ſhall be as farre as may be, by her Peeres; either by her owne publike
determinations, in this controuerſie, or ioynt conſent of her
authorized beſt approued Advocates, in opening the title, or vnfolding
the contents of that prerogatiue, which they challenge
for her.
            2 Our accuſations are grounded vpon their Poſitions before
ſet downe,
               Lib 2 Sect. 1. c. 3 
               when wee explicated the differences betwixt vs. The
poſition in briefe, is this; That the infallible authoritie of the preſent
Church, is the moſt ſure, moſt ſafe, vndoubted rule in all doubts, or controuerſies
of faith, or in all points concerning the Oracles of God: by
which we may certainely know, both; without which wee cannot poſsibly
know, either, which are the Oracles of God, which not, or what is the true
ſenſe and meaning of ſuch as are receiued for his Oracles, whether written
or vnwritten:
            3 The extent of diuine Oracles, or number of Canonicall
bookes hath beene (as our Aduerſaries pretend) very queſtionable
amongſt the ancient:They acknowledges S. Hierom as the Oracle of Antiquitie, and yet directly contradict him in this decree concerning the number of Canonicall bookes. though ſuch of the Fathers, as, for their skill
in antiquitie, were in all vnpartiall iudgements moſt competent
Iudges in this cauſe, were altogether for vs againſt the Romaniſts,
and ſuch as were for their opinion, were but for it vpon an error,
as thinking the Iewes had acknowledged all thoſe bookes of the
old Teſtament for Canonicall Scripture, which the Churches
wherin they liued, receiued for ſuch, or that the Chriſtian Church
did acknowledge all for Canonical, which they allowed to be publikely
read. Safe it was (our aduerſaries cannot denie) for the Ancient,
to diſſent one from an other, in this queſtion, or to ſuſpend
their aſſent, till new probabilities might ſway them one way or
other. No reaſons haue beene produced ſince, ſufficient to moue
any ingenious mind vnto more peremptorie reſolutions, yet doth
the Councell of Trent binde all to an abſolute acknowledgement
of thoſe Bookes for Canonicall, which, by their owne confeſsion
were reiected by S. Hierome, and other Fathers.Si quis autem libros ipſos integros cum omnibus ſuis partibus (provt in Eccleſia Catholica legi conſu
                     •
                  uerunt, & inveteri vulgata Latina editione habentur) pro ſacris, & canonicis no ſaſceperit; & traditiones praedictas, ſciens & prudens contempſerit: and thema ſit. Conc. Trid. Seſs. 4. decret. de Canonicis Scripturis. 
               If any ſhall not

receiue the whole Bookes with all their parts (vſually read in the Church,
and as they are extent in the old vulgar) for ſacred and Canonicall, let
him be accu
                     •
                  ſed. So are all, by the ſame decree, that will not acknowledge
ſuch vnwritten traditions, as the Romiſh Church pretends
to haue come from Chriſt and his Apoſtles for diuine, and
of authoritie equall with the written word.
            4 So generally is this opinion receiued, ſo fully beleeued, in
that Church; That many of her Sonnes, euen whileſt they write
againſt vs, forgetting with whom they haue to deale, take it as
granted: That the Scriptures cannot be known to be Gods word,
but by the infallible authoritie of the preſent Church. And from
this ſuppoſition, as from a truth ſufficiently knowne, (though neuer
proued) they labour, in the next place, to inferre: That, without
ſubmiſsion of our faith to the Churches publike ſpirit, wee
cannot infallibly diſtinguiſh the orthodoxall, or diuine ſenſe of
Gods Oracles, (whether written or vnwritten) from hereticall or
humane.
            5 Should we admit vnwritten Traditions, and the Church
withall as abſolute Iudge to determine which were Apoſtolicall,The decree of the Tr
                     •
                  t councell authorizing the latine vulgar editiō.
which not: little would it boote vs to queſtion with them about
their meaning. For when the point ſhould come to triall, wee
might be ſure to haue the very words framed to whatſoeuer ſenſe
ſhould bee moſt fauourable for iuſtifying Romiſh practiſes. And
euen of Gods written Oracles, whoſe words or characters (as hee
in his wiſedome hath prouided) cannot now be altered by an Index
Expurgatorius, at their pleaſure: That ſuch a ſenſe as ſhall bee
moſt ſeruiceable for their turne, may (as time ſhall miniſter occaſion)
bee more commodiouſly gathered; the Trent Fathers, immediately
after the former decree for eſtabliſhing vnwritten Traditions,
and amplifying the extent of diuine written Oracles, haue
in great wiſedome authorizedInſuper eadem Sacroſancta Synodus conſiderās nō parū vtilitatis accedere poſſe Eccleſiae Dei, ſi ex omnibus latinis editionibus, quae circūferuntur, ſacrorum librorum, quaenam pro Auth
                     •
                  ntica habenda ſit, innoteſ
                     •
                  at: Statuit, & declarat, vt haec ipſa vetus & vulgata Editio, quae longo tot ſaeculorum vſis in ipſa Eccleſia probata eſt, in publicis lectionibus, disputationibus, praedicationibus, & expoſitionibus, pro authentica habeatur, & vt nemo illam reijcere quovis praetextu audeat, vel praeſumat. Conc. Trident. Seſs. 4. Decret. De editione & vſu ſacro
                     •
                  ū librorū. the old and vulgar tranſlation of
the whole Canon. Which, though it were not purpoſely framed
to maintayne Poperie (as ſome of our writers, ſay they, haue as friuolouſly
as maliciouſly obiected) yet certainely, aſwell the eſcapes
and errors of thoſe vnskilfull, or ill-furniſhed interpretors, as the
negligence of tranſcribers, or other defects, incident to that worke,

from the ſimplicitie of moſt ancient, the iniuries or calamities of
inſuing times, were, amongſt others, as the firſt heads or pettie
ſprings of that raging floud of impietie, which had well nigh
drowned the whole Chriſtian world in perdition, by continually
receiuing into it channell (once thus wrought) the dregs and filth
of euery other error vnder heauen, with the corrupt remainder of
former hereſies, for theſe thouſand yeares and more. And vnto
many groſſe errors in Romiſh religion, which this imperfect tranſlation
did not firſt occaſion, it yet affords that countenance, which
the pure Fountaines of the Greeke and Hebrew doe not; but rather
would ſcoure and wipe away; were they current in that
Church. Finally, though it yeld not nutriment to enlarge or feed,
yet it ſerues as a cloake to hide or couer, moſt parts of the great
myſterie of iniquitie.
            6 Yet, beſides the fauourable conſtruction, that may be made
for that religion, out of the plaine and literall ſenſe of this erroneous
tranſlation: the Church will bee abſolute Iudge of all controuerſies
concerning the right interpretation thereof. So as not
what our conſciences, vpon diligent ſearch and iuſt examination,
ſhall witneſſe to vs, but what the Church ſhall declare to them,
muſt be abſolutely acknowledged for the true intent and meaning
of Gods word, as it is rendred by the vulgar interpretor: To this
purpoſe is the very next decree.
            7Praeterea, ad coercenda petulantia ingenia, decernit, vt nemo, ſuae prudentiae innixus, in rebus fidei, & morum, ad aedificationem Doctrinae Chriſtianae pertinētium, ſacram Scripturam ad ſuos ſenſus contorquens, contra eum ſenſum quem tenuit, & tenet ſancta Mater Eccleſia, cuius eſt iudicare de vero ſenſu, & interpretatione Scripturarum ſanctarum, aut etiam contra vnanimem conſenſam Patrum, ipſam Scripturam ſacram interpretari audeat, etiamſi huiuſmodi interpretationes nullo vnquam tempore in lucem edendae forent. Qui contraueuerint, per Ordinarios declarentur, & poenis à iure ſtatutis puniantur. Concil. Trident. Ibidem. Moreouer, for brideling petulant diſpoſitions,The Trent Councells decree for interpretation of Scriptures. it is decreed;
That no man in confidence of his owne wiſdome or skill, in matters of
faith, and manners, making for the edification of Chriſtian doctrine,
ſhall dare to interpret Scriptures, wreſting them to his owne conceipt or
ſenſe, againſt that ſenſe or meaning, which the holy Church our Mother,
to whom it belongs to iudge of the true ſenſe and interpretation of ſacred
writ, heretofore hath held, or now doth hold, albeit hee neuer purpoſe to
publiſh ſuch interpretations.
            8 It is further added in the ſame place, (becauſe I take it had
beene ſpecified a Synode before) that no man ſhall dare to interpret
Scriptures againſt the vnanimous conſent of Fathers. Which I

thinke were impoſſible for any man to doe; though were it poſſible,
few or none would attempt, beſides the Papiſts. For, neither
can it be knowne what all of them hold in moſt places, wher
vpon are grounded controuerſies of greateſt moment; and in ſuch
as wee haue beſt plentie of their interpretations, albeit they doe
not contentiouſly diſſent, yet abſolutely agree each with other
they doe not. Euen one and the ſame Father oftimes thinkes, of
many interpretations, ſundrie alike probable: moſt of them vnwilling,
by their peremptorie determinations, one way or other,
to preiudice the induſtrious ſearch of others (though
their farre inferiours) for finding out ſome more commodious,
then any they bring; oftentimes intimating their doubts
or imperfect coniectures in ſuch manner; as if they would purpoſely
incourage their ſucceſſors to ſeeke out ſome better reſolution
then they could finde. Whence it is euident, that we ſhould
not alwayes interprete Scriptures againſt the ioint conſent of Fathers,
albeit wee went againſt all the particular interpretations
which they haue brought; becauſe they were more deſirous to
haue the truth fully ſifted, then their coniecturall probabilities
infallibly beleeued: Nor were it poſſible more to contradict moſt
of them, then by following their interpretations, vpon ſuch ſtrict
tearmes, as the Romaniſts would binde all men to doe, when they
ſeeme to make for their aduantage. Not the leaſt ſurmiſe or coniecture
of any one Father, but, if it pleaſe them, muſt ſuffice againſt
the ioinct authoritie of all the reſt. For, in all the three points aboue
mentioned, they admit the Church (as may appeare from
the decrees cited) for a Iudge, ſo abſolute, That, no man may imbrace
any opinion, vpon what grounds or probabilities ſoeuer, but
with humble ſubmiſſion to her cenſure: Whatſoeuer ſhe ſhall inioyne,
in all, or any of theſe points, albeit we haue reaſons, many
and ſtrong, not to hold it, to hold not one, beſides her bare authoritie;
yet muſt all beleeue it alone as abſolutely, as if wee had the
apparant vnanimous conſent of Fathers; yea of Prophets, Apoſtles,
or Euangeliſts, and all good writers in euery age.
            9 Hence
                  Bellarmines aſſertion concerning the Churches authority grounded vpon the former decree. 
               Bellarmine reiects (as diſſonant to the former decree)
this reſolution ofIn articul. 155 ex illis quingentis quos Coch
                     •
                  eus colligit ex libris Lutheri; ſic ait: Capite hoc Euangelium, quiae neque Papae neque concilijs, neque vlli haminū commiſſum eſt, vt conſtituat & concludat, quid ſit ſides. Ideo d
                     •
                  ben dicere: Papa, tu concluſiſti cum concilijs, nunc habeo ego iudicium, an acceptare qu
                     •
                  am neene. 
                     〈◊〉
                   quia non 
                     〈◊〉
                   pro me, 
                     〈◊〉
                   reſpondebis pro 
                     •
                  e, quando del co 
                     •
                  ori. Et falſam doctrinam nemo iudicare poteſt, niſi ſpiritualis homo. Ideo res eſt inſana, quod Concilia concludere & ſtatuere volunt, quid credendum ſit: cum ſaepe nullus vir ſit ibi, qui diuinum ſpiritum vel modicum olſecerit. Idem confirmat in aſſertionibus art. 27. 28. & 29. Bellarm. de verb. Dei Lib. 3. Cap. 3. 
               Luther, That albeit the Pope and Councell

conclude points of faith; yet haue priuate men a free arbitrement (ſo
farre as it concernes themſelues) whether they may ſafely beleeue
their concluſions, or no. Luther giues two reaſons for his aſſertion,
both moſt forcible. The one, becauſe the Pope ſhall not anſwere
for priuate men, at the houre of their death: The other, becauſe
none are competent Iudges of falſe Doctrines, but men ſpiritually
minded; when as it often fals out, that, in their Councels, there
cannot be found one man, (much leſſe a maior part of men, without
which how many ſoeuer there were, all were as none,) that
hath any the leaſt reliſh of the Diuine Spirit. The like aſſertion
doth the Ieſuit condemne in Brentius:
            
            10 It is not lawfull (ſaithSimiliter Brentius docet in Confeſſime Wirte
                     •••
                  rgica cap. de ſacra ſcript erat & copleſias in Pralegr
                     •••
                   contra 
                     〈…〉
                  . Primo, 
                     〈◊〉
                   licet, inquit, in cauſa 
                     〈…〉
                   ita inhaerere, vt eam ſine noſt
                     •
                  o ipſorum iudicio ampl
                     •
                  ct
                     •
                  mur. Secund
                     •
                   addit; Ad 
                     〈◊〉
                   quemque hominum priuat
                     •
                  m perti
                     •
                  et de doctrina rel
                     •
                  gionis iud
                     ••
                  are & 
                     〈…〉
                   internoſcere. Sed hoc intereſt inter priuatum & princip
                     •
                  m, quòd vt priuatus priua
                  
                     •••
                  , 
                     〈…〉
                   habet de doctrina religionis poteſtatem iudicandi & decidendi, &c. Nec illud aduert
                     •
                  t, ſi 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſententia vera ſit rectè 
                     〈…〉
                   & alios Catholicos Germaniae principes, ſi etiam mortis ſuppli
                     •
                  o 
                     〈…〉
                   ad ſidem Catholicam: Bellar. de verb. Dei lib. 1. cap. 3. 
               Brentius) for any man, in a point of
ſaluation, ſo to relie vpon anothers ſentence as to imbrace it without interpoſition
of his owne iudgement. The reaſon is there intimated;
becauſe, euerie man is to be immediately iudged by his own conſcience;
and may for auoiding the iuſt cenſure of condemnation
by it, ſafely diſclaime their opinions, the execution of whoſe ſentence
or bodily puniſhment, hee may not decline; ſeeing they are
(as was obſerued before) publique and lawfull, yet fallible Iudges
of controuerſies in Religion. And Bellarmine bewrayes, either
groſſe ignorance, or great skill in wrangling, when he exclaimes
againſt this poſition of Brentius, as abſurd and repugnant to it
ſelfe [That the ſupreme Magiſtrate, or publique Iudges, may bee
bound to command, where the ſubiect or inferiour is not bound
to obey.] For,
                  So Bellarmine grants, that Saint 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  did not commit any mortall ſinne, in contradicting Pope Stephens decree, whom out of ignorance hee oppugned, his reaſon is good, becauſe this perſwaſion remaining in full ſtrength, he had ſinned againſt his conſcience in obeying the Pope. His words are theſe, Ex v
                     •
                  ta part
                     •
                   non videtur mortaliter peccaſſe, quia non peccauit niſi ex ignorantia, putauit enim Pontificem pernicioſè errare; & ſtante illa opinione, tenebatur ei non obedire, quia non debebat contra conſcientiam agere. Ignorantia autem Cypriam non videtur fuiſſe craſſa, neque aſſecta, ſed probabilis, & proinde excuſans a mortali peccato. Bellar. Lib. 4. de Roman. Cap. 7. as well the Prince in commanding, as the people
in obeying, muſt follow whither their conſciences lead them.
Both may, and in caſe they diſagree, the one, or other, cannot but
erre in the precedent information of their conſciences; andVide Lib. 2. Sect. 1. Cap. 6. Parag. 11. & Sect. 4. Cap. 7. Parag. 2. 3. herein
properly doth their ſinne conſiſt, not in doing what erroneous

conſcience, vpon ſo ſtrict tearmes as penaltie of eternall
death, doth vnceſſantly vrge them to.
            11 The people, ſaithCanus aſſertion concerning Churches authoritie. Nihil igitur aſſerunt, qui Eccleſiae authoritatem non abſolutè ſed ex conditione ponunt Si namque ad eum modum res habet & mihi quoque 
                     •
                  ides habenda eſt quando pronunciauero ſecundum ſcripturas recte intellectas. Id 
                     〈◊〉
                   eſt non mihi ſed ſcripturae credere. At, abſolutè, non ex conditione populus Domino credidit & Moiſi ſeruo eius. Abſolute etiam Prophetis & Apoſtolis populi crediderunt Quale vero eſſet Prophetis Apoſto liſque loquentibꝰ fidem ea exceptione detrabere, quod perperam Dei verba intellexiſſent? Canus de Eccleſ Cathol. Lib. 4. 
               Canus, did abſolutely (not vpon condition)
beleeue God and his ſeruant Moſes: and vnleſſe men ſo
beleeue the Church, they mak it of no authoritie. Nor is it enough
to beleeue it to be infallible in points of moment, or ſuch as might
ouerthrow faith, vnleſſe it bee acknowledged ſo abſolutely inerrable
in al, as it cannot either beleeue or teach amiſſe, in any queſtion
of faith, for, if in any (ſeeing there is one and the ſame reaſon of
all;) it might aſwell faile in receiuing ſome books (indeed not ſuch)
for Canonicall and Diuine.In ſumma ſi Eccleſia poſſet in fidei quaeſtione falli, librum quoque diuinum recipere poſſet, qui tamen à Deo non fuiſſet. Cum ſit eadem ratio de vno libro, ad de vnequolibet dogmate. Quare non valeret argumentum, Eccleſia habet Euangelium Mathaei pro canonico, ergo canonicum eſt. Quod quoniam impijſſime & abſurdiſſime diceretur; illud nos dicamus potius, recte fideles Eccleſiam Catholicam eredere, non ſolum in eo ſenſu, vt Eccleſiae Catholicae fides deficiat numquam: ſed in eo etiam, vt nihil ipſa credere & docere poſſit, quod ſit verae fidei contrarium. Canus Ibid. paulo ante. The authoritie aſcribed to the Pope in his Bull of Confirmation.
                Whereupon, it would follow,
that this argument would not follow, The Church acknowledgeth
Saint Matthewes Goſpel for Canonicall, therefore it is Canonicall.
The deniall of which conſequence is moſt impious and abſurd, in
this mans cenſure, fully conſonant to Valent. before cited, That
Scripture which is commended vnto vs and expounded by the authoritie
of the Church, is now euen in this reſpect (becauſe the Church commends
it) moſt authentique.
            
            12 Vnto theſe, and farre more groſſe concluſions all their
moderne Writers, for ought I can find, thinke themſelues bound
by the former decrees of the Trent Councell. But what if any
ſhould diſſent from theſe great Champions in the interpretation
of it? Who ſhould iudge betwixt them, or whither were they to
repaire for reſolution? To the place which God hath choſen, to wit to
the Sea Apoſtolicall, or, in other tearmes, to Rome. So ſaith the
Si cui in eis aliquid obſcurius dictum, & ſtatutum fuiſſe, eam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ob cauſam interpretatione aùt deciſione aliqua egere viſum fuerit; aſcendat ad locum, quem Dominus elegat, ad Sedem videlicet Apoſtolicam, omnium fidelium magiſtram, cuius authoritatem etiam ipſa Sancta Synodus tam reuerenter agnouit. Nos enim difficultates & controuerſias, ſi que ex eis decretis ortae fuerint, nobis declarandas & decidendas, quemadmodum ipſa quoque ſancta Synodus decreuit, reſeruamus, parati ſicut ea nobis meritō, confiſa eſt, omnium Prouinciarum neceſſitatibus ea ratione quae commodior nobis viſa fuerit prouidere. Bull. Pij. 4. Sup. Confirm. Concil. Trid.
                Pope that confirmed this Councell. As if there were onely: a
tranſlation of the Sea, none of the Prieſthood, ſometimes eſtabliſhed

in Ieruſalem; where all were to worſhip. And if Rome
haue that place in Chriſtendome, which Ieruſalem had in Iewrie:
the Pope muſt be ſuch a Lord to all Chriſtians, as Hee that dwelt
betwixt the Cherubins was to the Iſraelites; both their anſweres
of like authoritie.
            13 But when we repaire to Rome, who ſhall there determine
what the Councell meant? the Pope alone, or with his Cardinals?
with his Cardinals, if he pleaſe; himſelfe alone, without them, or
any other, if he liſt; all after, as he ſhall find himſelfe diſpoſed to vſe
his ordinary orPlenitudinem, que ſuit Bealo Petro, dicūt Doctores ad Papam pertinere, non ſolu
                     •
                   quia quod omnibus & ſingulis Praelatis in Eccleſia Dei conceſſum eſt, id ſolus Papa poteſt, ſed etiam quia amplius quā illi omnes, & ſinguli poſſ
                     •
                  nt ipſe vnus poteſt, eo exemplo vtentes, q
                     ••
                  dquemadmod
                     •
                  m Deus potuerit ſtatuere leges naturalibus rebꝰ, vt iuxta
                     •
                  as operaretur: poteſt tamen idem Deus propter leges nature ex pro pr
                     •
                  ae virtutis ſuae agere, quod miraculum vocari ſolet: ſic in Eccleſia ſpectat, ad ſumum Pontiſicem condere leges morales & priſcribere ius omn
                     •
                  bus perſoais Eccleſiaſticis, & toti Eccleſiae, idem tamen non ſemper tenetur ſeruare, huiuſmodi leges, ſed poteſt agere praeter illas. Quando igitur Papa ea vult obſeruare, quae ſuis legibus continentur, tunc dicitur vti poteſtate ordinaria. Quando vero aliquid vult exequi ſupra id, quod legibus conſtitutum eſt, tunc dicitur pleaitudinem pòteſtatis exercere. Palaeot de ſac. Conſiſt. Conſult. partr. queſt. 3. art. 1. plenary power by the former of which (anſwerable
to Gods working with natural agēts) he determines of matters
by the vſuall courſe of lawes prouided for that purpoſe, vſing the
aduiſe or councell of his aſſiſtants; by the other (correſpondent to
Gods working in miracles effected by his owne immediate peculiar
power, without the coagencie of any inferiour or created
cauſe he may reſolue of himſelfe alone, not conſulting his Cardinals,
Biſhops, or others.
                  The authoritie giuen to the Pope by the Trent Councell: Supereſt aunc vt principes omnes, quod facit, in Domino moneat ad operam ſuam ita praeſtandam, vt, quae ab ea decreta ſunt, ab Haereticis deprauari aut violari non permittant; ſed ab his & omnibus deuotè recipiantur & fideliter obſeruentur. Quod ſi in his recipiendis aliqua difficultas oriatur; aut aliqua inciderint quae declarationem, quod non credit, aut deſinitionem poſtulant praeter alia remedia, 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  oc Concilio inſtituta, confidit Sancta Synodus Beatiſſimum Romanum Pontificem curaturum, vt vel euocatis ex illis preſ
                     •
                  rtim Prouincijs, vnde difficultas orta fuerit, ijs quos eidem negotio tractando viderit expedire, vel etiam Concilij generalis celebratione, ſi neceſſarium iudicauerit vel commodiore quacunque ratione ei v
                     •
                  ſum fuerit, prouideturum neceſſitatibus pro Dei gloria, & Eccleſiae tranquilitate conſulatur. Concil. Trid Seſſ. 25. De recipiandis & obſeruandis decretis Concilij. The authoritie giuen to the Pope by the Roman Catechiſme.
                This power and libertie, the Trent
Councell it ſelfe ſeemes to giue vnto the Pope, as it were for an
vp-ſhot to all the fooles thunderbolts they had let ſlie before. And
leaſt any man ſhould thinke this abſolute acknowledgement of
the Popes plenarie power, to be a Counſell, rather then a neceſſarie
precept; TheEccleſia vocatur vnatanta hominum multitudo quae tam longè latèque diſfuſa eſt, ob eas cauſar, que ab Apoſt lo ad Epheſios ſcriptae ſunt. Vnum enim Dominum: vnam fidem, vnum Baptiſma tantum eſſe praedicat. Vnus eſt etiam eius rector & gubernator inuiſibilis quidem Chriſtus, quem aeternus Pater dedit caput ſuper 
                     〈◊〉
                   Eccleſiam, quae eſt corpus eius: viſibilis autem is, qui Romanam Cathedram Petri Apoſtolorum principis legitimus ſucceſſor tenat. And immediatly after propoſing this queſtion, Quid de Romano Pontifice, viſibili Eccleſiae Chriſti capite, ſentiendum eſt? Confirmes the former blaſphemous doctrine with this ſhameleſſe lie; Do eo ſuit illa omnium patrum rati
                     •
                   & ſententia conſentiens, hoc viſibile caput ad vnitatem Eccleſiae conſtita endam & conſeruandam neceſſarium fuiſſe. Catech. Roman. part. 1. cap. 10. de nono art. ſiue Eccleſ. Catnol.
                Cathechiſme publiſhed by the Trent Councels

authoritie, hath inſerted amongſt the Articles of faith, That
the preſent Pope, is the ſole viſible head of the whole Chriſtian
Church, though Chriſt the inuiſible. The meaning of which (if
I miſtake not) is this, That the PopeThe inſtitutiō of Sacraments and certain other Excellencies as they call them, are by their confeſſiō peculiar vnto Chriſt, not communicable vnto his Vicar generall concerning the points aboue
mentioned hath as abſolute power, in Chriſts abſence, as
Chriſt himſelfe ſhould haue, were he preſent, or ſhall haue in that
day of finall iudgement; wherein if theſe mens poſitions bee true,
he ſhall haue nothing to doe in matters of ſaith, but onely to ratiſie
what the Pope hath defined, who muſt not be called to any account
of his Spirituall, as Kings and Monarchs muſt be for their
Temporall Stewardſhips: nor ſhall it be ſaid to him, as it muſt
be to ſome of them, Well done thou good and faithfull Seruant. For
ſuch men onely (by our aduerſaries Doctrine) doe well, as might
haue done ill; but the Pope, liue as hee liſt, cannot poſſibly doe a
miſſe, in determining matters of Faith, which are, of all that are,
of greateſt difficultie and conſequence.
            14 When firſt I reade Ioſephus Acoste, I much wondred, to ſee
a man, otherwiſe of an ingenuous ſpirit, and of partes ſo excellent,
ſo zealous withall, for the Popes Supremacie: But now, I
perceiue, the reaſon was all priuate Catechiſmes were to bee conformed
vnto that publique one, authorized by the Councell and
Pope. Amongſt other contents of that Article of the Catholique
Church (almoſt quite omitted in the former Indian Catechiſmes)
Doceātur ergo. Indi de Eccleſia tria praecipuè. Primum, quid illa ſit, congregatio certe hominum Chriſtum doctrinā
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Chriſti proſitentium, non Hiſpanorum aut barbarorune, aut nationis & gentis cuiuſdam numere & ſorte deſinita, omnia terrarum ſpatia, onmes temporum ſucceſſiones complectens, Hujus vero caput eſſe Romanae vrbis Pontiſicem, Petri ſucceſſorem, Chriſti vicarium pleniſſima ipſius in terris autheritate polientem, 
                     •
                  ui caeteri omnes Chriſtiani, etiam Reges & Principes parcant. Hoc eſt, Eccleſiam Catbolicam eredere, & vniuerſalem. Ioſ. Acoſt lib. 5. cap. 7. de procuranda Indorum ſalute.
                
               Acoſtaes aduiſe is, to haue this inſerted, as an eſſentiall part,
That the Pope is head of the Catholique Church; Chriſts Vicar on earth,
indued with his plenarie power; to whom all other Chriſtians (Kings
and Princes not excepted) owe obedience.
            
            Theſe allegations may teſtifie our ſinceritie in propoſing the
ſtate of the queſtion, and points of difference betwixt vs, gathered
not out of one or two, but the generall agreement of beſt Romiſh
Writers: and whereunto Valentian, were hee aliue, would
willingly ſubſcribe. For he, as ſince I haue obſerued,An vt fidei abiectum per Chriſti
                     ••
                  am fidem infallibiliter credatur, ſatis ſit, illud eſſe reuelatum diuinitus, & explicatum à 
                     〈…〉
                   verbi dei miniſtro: 
                     〈…〉
                   mete
                     •
                  ea neceſſe ſit, illud tanquam à Deo re
                     •
                  elatum. & ideo credendam proponi et oſtendi 
                     〈◊〉
                   per inſallib
                     •
                  tem aliquam et praeem
                     •
                  nentem anti 
                     〈…〉
                   editio Symboli ſeu articulerum 
                     〈◊〉
                   indicium atque deſinitio emnium ſide, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , quae vnquam oriri poſſunt Valent. Tom. 3 in Aquin Diſp. 1. Quaeſt. 1. Punct. 7. in Tit. Puncti.
                propoſeth
the title of his maine Controuerſie concerning the Churches
authoritie, in tearmes aequiualent to thoſe I vſed, Lib. 2. Section
1. Cap. 3. and Lib. 1. Parag. Vlt.
         
         
            
            SECT. II.
            The firſt branch of Romiſh blaſphemie in preferring humane
authoritie before Diuine.
            AGainſt theſe late recited,The generall obiection of Reformed Churches againſt the former aſſertions. and infinite other aequiualent aſſertions
frequent in their publique determinations, and beſt priuate
Writers; our Writers vſually obiect, If the Church be iudge
of Scriptures, her authoritie muſt be aboue the Scriptures; If the
ſenſe of Scripture, without the Church or Popes aſſeueration or
propoſall be not authentique, nor apt to beget moſt firme beleefe:
then the word of God muſt receiue ſtrength and authoritie from
the word of man.
            Some Romiſh Writers grant the inference, with this reſtraint,
[In reſpect of vs] and yet wipe their mouthes with the whore in
the Prouerbe, as if they had neither commited Idolatrie, nor ſpoken
blaſphemie. But Bellarmine was too cunning a Baude, to expoſe
his mothers foule face to publique view, without more artificiall
painting.
            
               CHAP. I.
               Bellarmines Reply to the maine obiection, iointly vrged by all Reformed
Churches againſt the Romiſh: the Equiuocation which hee ſought in
the obiection apparently found in his Reply.
               1 
                     THE former argument,
                  Reſpondeo, hoc argumentum, quod ab haereticis plurimi ſit, 
                        •
                     otum in aequiuocatione verſari: nam duobus modis poteſt intelligi Eccleſiam iudicare de Scripturis Vno modo, quod iudicet, verumne ſit an ſaſſum quod Scripturae docent: Alterò modo, quod poſito vt fundamento certiſſimo, Scripturae verba eſſe veriſſima, iudicet quae ſit vera corum interpretatio. Et quidem ſi primo modo Eccleſia iudicaret, verè eſſet ſupra Scripturam, ſed hoc non dicimus, quamuis Haeretici calumnientur id nos dicere, qui paſſim vociſerantur nos ſubijcere Scripturam pedibus Papae. At ſecundo modo iudicare Eccleſiam, vel Pontificem de Scripturis, quod nos aſserimus, non eſt Eccleſiam eſse ſupra Scripturam ſed ſupra iudicia priuatorum hominum. Non enim iudicat Eccleſia de veritate Scripturae, ſed de intelligentia tua, & mea, et aliorum. Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      hinc ſumit verbum Dei abquod robur, ſed intelligientia noſtra. Non enim Scriptura eſt verior aut certior, quia ſic ab Eccleſia exponitur, ſed mea ſeatentia eſt verior, quando ab Eccleſia confirmatur. Bellar. de verb. interpret. Lib. 3. Cap. 10. Raeſp. ad 14. Arg.
                   
                  howſoeuer much eſteemed
by ſuch as bring it; yet in Bellarmines
iudgment, is very weake, and as hee ſuſpects,
ſicke of his owne diſeaſe. Totum in aequiuocatione
verſatur. The aequiuocation he ſeeketh to
vnfold with this diſtinction; The former ſpeeches

may admit a double ſence. Firſt their meaning may bee, that the
Church doth iudge, whether that, which the Scriptures teach, be
true or falſe, Or, Secōdly, [This ſure foundation of faith being firſt
laid, The words of Scripture are moſt infallible and true] The Church
doth iudge which is the true interpretation, or meaning of them.
This diſtinction he applieth thus; The former obiectuns were pertinent,
if we held the Pope or Councell to determine of Scriptures, in the
former ſence; but, taking our right meaning, they are meere calumnies.
For we affirme the Church to iudge Scriptures onely in the later: and ſo
to iudge them, doth not ſet the Church or Pope aboue Scriptures, but aboue
the iudgment of priuate men. Nor doth the Church (by this aſſertion)
become a Iudge of Scriptures truth, but of priuate mens vnderſtanding.
Neither will it hence follow, that the word of God recetueth
ſtrength from the word of man; but priuate mens knowledge, may and
doth receiue ſtrength and infallibilitie, from the Church. Finally, the
Scripture or Word of God (as Bellarmine thinkes) is neither more true
or certaine, becauſe it is expounded by the Church; but euerie mans opinion
is more true and ſtable, when it is confirmed by the Churches expoſition
or deciſion.
               Hee hath ſaid as much as the whole Councell of Trent could
haue ſaid for themſelues. But let vs ſee if this be enough.
               2 A priuate mans opinion (ſaith Bellarmine) is truer, when it is
confirmed by the Church. If we had only an opinion of the truth
or ſence of Scriptures; the conſent of others, eſpecially men skilfull
in ſuch maters, would indeede much confirme vs, for all opinions,
or vncertaine perſwaſions, receiue increaſe of ſtrength,
from addition of probabilities. But his words are more generall,
and concerne not onely vncertaine, but all perſwaſions, that a
faithfull man in this life, can haue of Gods Word; at leaſt of thoſe
writings, which wee and they acknowledge for ſuch: and the
marke he aimes at is, That no perſwaſion, in diuine matters, can
be certaine, without the Churches confirmation; as hee expreſſely
addeth in hisVide Chap. 2. Parag. 7. anſwere to the next argument.
               3 If the Reader will be attentiue hee ſhall eaſily perceiue, that,
not our Writers obiections, but Bella
                        •
                     mines anſwere, is tainted
with aequiuocation. For this ſpeech of his, The Church doth iudge
whether that which the Scriptures teach be true or falſe, hath a double
and doubtfull ſence.
               
                  
                  In what ſence (as impertinēt as true) Gods word by Romaniſts is acknowledged of greater authoritie then the Church.
It may be meant
either.

                     Of Scriptures taken indefinitly or indeterminately,
for that which God hath ſpoken,
whatſoeuer that be.
                     Of thoſe particular Scriptures, which wee
and they acknowledge, or any determinate
(written or vnwritten) precepts queſtionable,
whether they were from God or no.
                  
               
               4 If we ſpeake of Scriptures in the former ſence, Bellarmines
anſwere is true. For the Romiſh Church doth not take vpon her
to iudge, whether that which is ſuppoſed, or acknowledged by all,
for Gods word, be moſt true in it proper & natiue, but indeterminate
ſence, ſeeing this is a Maxim vnqueſtionable (amongſt al ſuch
as haue any notion of a Dietie,) Whatſoeuer God hath ſpoken is moſt
true, in that ſenſe wherein he meant it. But, if we deſcend to any determinate
ſpeeches; written or vnwritten, either acknowledged or
ſuppoſed for Gods Word, or ſuch as can but ground any poſſible
queſtion, whether they are Gods Words or no; the preſent Romiſh
Church doth take vpon her, abſolutely to iudge of all and euerie
part of them. For this is the very abſtract, or abridgement of
that infinite prerogatiue, which ſhe challengeth, all men muſt infallibly
beleeue that to be Gods Word which ſhe commends, that not to be his
Word which ſhe diſclaimes for ſuch. So as onely, the former tranſcendent,
and indeterminate truth [Whatſoeuer God ſaith is true] is exempt
from the Popes vnlimited, tranſcendent, roiall ſentence; no
other word, or ſyllable of truth, which wee can imagine, God
hath or might haue ſpoken ſince the World began, either by his
owne or his ſonnes mouth, by the Miniſtery of his Angels, Prophets,
Apoſtles or Euangeliſts; but is euery way abſolutely ſubiect
to the Popes Monarchichall cenſure.
               5 And heere, let not the Reader miſtake it, as any argument
of our aduerſaries ingenuity, that they will for their owne aduantage
vouchſafe to grant (what no heathen Idolater did euer deny)
Whatſoeuer God ſaith is true. For, vnleſſe this were granted
by all; the Pope could haue no poſſible grounds of pretence, or
claime, to his abſolute infallibility, or infinite ſupremacie ouer all.
And that which his hirelings ſeeke to build vpon the former foundation,
is, Whatſoeuer the Pope hath ſaid, or ſhall ſay, ex cathedra, is
moſt true; becauſe, if we deſcend to any determinate truthes, wee

muſt beleeue that God hath ſpoken all, and onely that, which the
Pope hath alreadie teſtified, or, (when any queſtion ariſeth ſhall
teſtifie he hath ſpoken. In fine, the preſent Pope, by their poſitions,
is Gods onely liuing mouth, onely alſufficient to iuſtifie, or authentically
witneſſe all his wordes paſt: all which, without him, are
vnto vs, as dead. Whence they muſt of neceſſitie, admit the ſame
proportion, betwixt the preſent Popes and Gods acknowledged
written word, or ſuppoſed vnwritten veritie, which in ciuill matters
we make betwixt acredible mans perſonall auouchment, or
liuing teſtimonie of what he hath ſeene, heard, or knowne by vndoubted
experience, and another mans hereſay report, either of
the matters he ſpake of, his ſpeeches themſelues, or their true ſence
and meaning, after his death. For the Prophets, Apoſtles, and Euangeliſts (to vſe
                     Sacroboſ. and Valentian both vſe the like ſpeeches. their words) are dead, and Chriſt is abſent; ſo
as we can neither be certaine, what they haue ſpoken, or what they
meant in their ſuppoſed ſpeeches, but per viuam vocem Eccleſiae, by
the liuing voice of the preſent viſible Church; whoſe words are altogether
as vnfallible, as Gods owne words, were. And for this
reaſon, muſt bee acknowledged a moſt abſolute Iudge of Gods
written and vnwritten words, aſwell of their Spirituall ſence and
meaning, as of their outward frame or viſible character. This is
the height of their iniquitie and will inferre more then our purpoſed
concluſion in this Section, That euen of ſuch places, as are acknowledged
by them for Gods Word, we muſ not beleeue any determinate
ſence or meaning, but what the Pope ſhall expreſſely giue or may be preſumed to allow of.
               
               6 This Doctrine, as I would requeſt the Reader to obſerue,
brings the ſecond and third perſon in Trinitie on the one partie,
and the Pope on the other, to as plaine and euident competition,
for Rule or Soueraigntie ouer profeſſed Chriſtians faith; as God
and Baal were at in Elias time. This ther Doctrine, thus in ſhew
grounded vpon, indeed and iſſue moſt oppoſite to Scriptures, is
the true Spirituall Inquiſition houſe, whereof that materiall or
bodily one,The Romiſh racke of conſcience. is but a Tipe: Theſe following, are the ioynts or
limmes, of that racke of conſcience, whereunto, all ſuch as are, or
would bee true members of Chriſt, but willing withall to hold
their Vnion with the Pope as Viſible head of the Church, are daily
and howerly ſubiect.
               
                  
Firſt, their ſoules are tied, by ſureſt bondes of faith and nature,
vnto this principle [Whatſoeuer God hath ſaid is moſt true:] the Ieſuites
againe, ſeeke to faſten their faith and conſcience, as ſtrongly
vnto this; God ſpeakes whatſoeuer the Pope ſpeakes ex cathedra: This
third likewiſe, muſt be beleeued as an Oracle of God, euen by Papiſts (for the Pope hath ſpoken it ex cathedra) The Bookes of Moſes,
the Prophets, the foure Euangeliſts, are Gods Wordes, VVhatſoeuer
theſe haue ſpoken, we contend, all ſhould beleeue, for Gods own
Word, vpon ſuch groundes as Saint Peter did from experience of
their life-working ſence, communicate vnto them by hearing,
reading, meditating, or practize. But the Pope, vpon ſome controuerſies
ariſing, propounds a ſence of theſe writings, or of ſome
part of them, quite contrarie to that which brought the former
comfort to our ſoules; a ſence, to all vnpartiall ſences, contradictorie
to the places iointly acknowledged for Gods Word. A
ſence, the more wee thinke on in ſobrietie, the more wee diſlike; a
ſence, the more earneſtly we pray to God for his Spirits aſſiſtance,
and other good meanes for the right vnderſtanding of his Word,
and encreaſe of faith, the more ſtil we diſtaſte and loath. Here, vnleſſe
we let goe ſome one, or more of the mentioned holdfaſts of
faith either the firſt, [Whatſoeuer God ſaith is true] or the ſecond
[Whatſoeuer the Pope ſaith,
                  Leaſt they might in any doubt goe againſt their conſcience, they are taught to beleeue that whatſoeuer the Pope ſhall command is good and cannot hurt the conſcience. See the Annotation out of Bellarmine cap. 2. §. 2. 
                  God ſaith] or the third [The Moſaicall, Euangelicall,
and Apoſtolicall writings or thoſe particular places, about
whoſe ſence the controuerſie is, were ſpoken by God] our ſoules are put
to more violent torture, then Rauilaicks bodie was. But the true
Papiſts are wiſe enough to ſlippe the third or laſt, ſo as it ſhall not
pinch them; and haue a tricke withal to make the Firſt yeeld, what
way they pleaſe; who are reſolued to follow what way ſoeuer, it
ſhall pleaſe the Popes authoritie (whereunto their ſoules indeede
are onely tied) to lead them. But of ſuch as euer had, or hope to
haue, any taſt or reliſh of Gods Spirit ſhould reſolue abſolutely
to beleeue his interpretation of any place of Scripture, contrarie
to that life-working ſence, which muſt bee in euery heart endued
with hope of ſeeing God: that mans diſloialtie towards God and
his Holy Spirit, is as impudent, as if a poore ſubiect ſhould reply
vnto his Prince, commanding him in expreſſe termes to doe thus,
or ſo, I will not beleeue your wordes haue any ſuch meaning as
they naturally import; but a contrarie, ſuch as one of my fellow

ſeruants hath alreadie acquainted mee withall▪ whatſoeuer you
ſay, I know your meaning is I, ſhould beleeue him in al things concerning
your will and pleaſure: and whatſoeuer he ſhall enioyne
that will doe.
               8 th
                     ••
                   neither the Church can prooue the Scriptures, nor the
Scriptures the Churches authoritie, was proued in the fourth Sectiō
of the former Book; that ſuch as hold this damnable doctrine,
again
                     ••
                   which wee diſpute, doe not at all beleeue God ſpeaking
in the Scriptures, ſhal be euinced in the third Section of this. The
preſent inconuenience, which now (will they nill they) we are to
wreſt from their reſolutions of faith, is, that, indeed and conſcience, they either acknowledge no authoritie in the Church,
or Scriptures, or elſe greater in the Church, then in Scriptures.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Inferring, the generall concluſion propoſed in the title of this Section
from Bellarmines Reſolution of faith.
               1 
                     ASwell to occaſion the learned Readers further
conſideration of their ill-grounded and worſe
builded faith, as for deducing thence the propoſed
inconuenience: it wll not bee amiſſe to
propoſe Bellarmines reſolution of a Roman Catholikes
faith. One eſpeciall obiection of our Writers, as hee frameth
it is, That faith (if depending on the Churches iudgement) is
grounded but vpon the word of man, a weake foundation for ſuch an edifi
                     •
                  e;
that the Scripture was giuen by the Spirit of God, and muſt therefore
bee vnderſtood by the ſame, not by the Churches Spirit. Hereunto
                  Reſpondeo verbum Eccleſiae, id eſt Concilij vel Pontificis d
                        •
                     centis ex cathedra non eſſe 
                        •
                     emnino verbum hominis id eſt verbum errori obnoxium, ſed aliquo modo verbum Dei, id eſt ſi prolatum gubernante & aſſiſtence ſpiritu ſancto; imo dico, Haereticos eſſe qui reuera nitantur baculo arundineo. Sciendum eſt enim, propoſitionem fidei concludi tali Syllogiſmo. Quicquid Deus reuelauit in Scripturis, eſt verum: hoc dens reuelauit in Scripturis, ergo hoc eſt verum. Ex propoſitionibus huius Syllogiſmi prima certa eſt apud omnes, ſecunda apud Cathelicos eſt etiam firmiſſima: nititur enim teſtimonio Eccleſiae, Concilij, vel Pontificis, de quibus habemus in Scripturis apertas promiſſiones quod errare non poſſint, Actorum 15. Viſum eſt ſpiritui ſancto & nobis. Et Luc. 22. Regaui pro te vt non deficiat fides tua. At apud Haereticos nititur ſolis coniecturis, vel iudicio proprij ſpiritus, qui plerumque videtur bonus, & eſt malus. Et cum concluſio ſequatur deteriorem partem, ſit neceſſariò, vt tota fides Haereticorum ſit coniecturalis & incerta. Bellar. de verb. Dei interpret. Lib. 3. Cap. 10. Reſp. ad 15. a
                           •
                        g. Bellarmines Catholicke Syllogiſme wherein all concluſions of faith muſt be gathered.
                   Bellarmine anſwereth, The word of the Church. i. of the Councell,

or the Pope ſpeaking ex Cathedra, is not the bare word of man. He
meanes no word obnoxious to errour, but in ſome ſort the word of God:
in as much as it is vttered by the aſistance and gouernment of the Holy
Ghoſt. I adde (ſaith hee) that Heretiques are they, which indeede doe
leane vpon a broken reed. For we muſt know, that a propoſition of faith
muſt be concluded in this or the like Syllogiſme, Whatſoeuer God hath reuealed
in Scripture is true, but God hath reuealed thus or that in Scriptures,
Ergo this or that is true. The firſt propoſition in this Syllogiſme
is certaine amongſt all; the ſecond likewiſe amongſt Catholickes is 
                     •
                  oſt
firme, as being ſupported by the teſtimonie of the Church, Councell, or
Pope: of whoſe immunitie, from poſsibilitie of erring we haue expreſſe
promiſes in the Scriptures, as,Act. 15. v. 28. 
                  It hath ſeemed good to the Holy
Ghoſt and vs:
                  Luk. 22. v. 32. 
                  I haue prayed for thee thy faith ſhould not 
                        •
                     aile.
But, amongſt Heretikes, the ſecond or minor propoſition, is 
                     〈…〉
                  
onely on coniecture, or iudgement of a priuate Spirit; which vſually
ſeemes, but is not good. Whence, ſeeing the concluſion muſt follow the
weaker part, it neceſſarily followes, that all the faith of Heretikes (ſuch
in his language are all that will not relie vpon the Church) is but
coniecturall and vncertaine.
               2 A dreadfull imputation, could it be as ſubſtanſtially proued,
as it is confidently auouched. And the conſequence of his reſolution
(generally helde by all his fellowes) is of no leſſe importance,
then this; that no man can be infalliby aſſured, either of the
truth, or true ſence of any particular propoſition; in the whole
Canon of Scriptures receiued by vs and them, vnleſſe he haue the
Churches authoritie for confirmation of both. For, vnto vs, that
onely, which the Church auoucheth is certaine, and vnfallible;
that ſence of it, which the Church giues, onely ſound; if we ſpeake
of any particular or determinate truthes.
               3 How certaine and vnfallible aſſent vnto all, or any Scriptures,
may bee wrought in mens heartes, without any infallible
teacher, alreadie hath beene, and hereafter ſhall be (God willing)
in more particular ſort exemplified. In this place, it ſtood the Ieſuit
vpon, to haue giuen a better ſolution to the doubt obiected;
which he is ſo farre from vnlooſing, that hee rather knits it faſter;
as ſhall appeare, if the Reader will firſt cal to minde; That for the
eſtabliſhing of firme and vndoubted aſſent to any truth propoſed,
it skils not how infallible the truth in it ſelfe or the propoſer be, vnvnleſſe

vnleſſe they, whoſe beleefe or aſſent is demanded, be as infallibly
perſwaded of this infallibilitie in the truth, or the propoſer. In
this reſpect, our aduerſaries pleade their immunitie from errour, as
an article neceſſarie to be infallibly beleeued, for confirmation of
Gods Word, alwayes moſt infallible (as all grant) in it ſelfe, but
not ſo (as they affirme) to vs, vntill it bee auouched by infallible
authoritie.
               4 Herein they concurre with vs; both with the truth, That if,
we beleeue it onely as probable, that God ſpake all thoſe wordes,
which wee acknowledge to bee moſt infallible, becauſe his, our
beleefe notwithſtanding is not infallible, but probable, or coniecturall.
For as a man may haue bad deſires of things eſſentially
good; ſo may he haue vncertaine perſwaſions of truthes in themſelues
moſt certaine. It is not therefore the ſuppoſed infallibilitie
of the Church or Pope, howſoeuer, but infallibly apprehended and
beleeued that muſt ſtrengthen our faith, which otherwiſe (as is
pretended) would be but coniecturall. And by the former principle,
(acknowledged aſwell by them as vs) it neceſſarily followes,
that if we be only probably, not infallibly perſwaded, the Pope or
Church cannot erre; our aſſent vnto the minor propoſition. i. [vnto
any determinate part of Gods Word,] is onely probable not infallible.
For, by the Ieſuites Doctrine, we cannot bee certainly perſwaded,
that God ſpake this, or that, but by the Churches teſtimonie.
The immediate conſequence of which two aſſertions,
compared together, is, wee cannot bee more certaine that God
hath ſpoken this or that, then wee are of the Churches infallibilitie.
If then wee bee onely probably, not infallibly, perſwaded, that
the Church is infallible: our beleefe of the minor propoſition (that
is of any determinate truth which men ſuppoſe God hath ſpoken)
muſt bee onely probable, or coniecturall, not infallible. Conſequently
to theſe collections, the learned Papiſts generally holde,
that the Churches infallibilitie muſt be abſolutely and infallibly
beleeued; (as you heard before out of
                     Sect. 1. Parag. 1. & Seq. The firſt difficultie in their opinion whēce our former cōcl
                        •
                     ſion may be deduced. 
                  Canus, Bellarmine, and
Valentian) otherwiſe, as Bellarmine would inferre, our beleefe of
the minor in any Syllogiſme, wherein a propoſition of faith is
concluded, can be but coniecturall.
               5 The propoſed inconuenience wee may deriue from this difficultie;
How the Papiſts themſelues can attaine to the infallible beleefe

of the Churches infallible authoritie? The Church, they thinke, hath
a publique ſpirit; and publique ſpirits they know are infallible;
hence they may perſwade themſelues the Church is infallible, only
vpon the ſame termes, they beleeue it hath a publique ſpirit, if
their beleefe of this latter be but coniectural; their aſſent vnto the
former can be no better. Seeing then they muſt of neceſſitie grant
(for this is the principall marke they aime at) that all muſt infallibly
beleeue the Church hath a publique ſpirit: the difficultie remoues
to this point, how this infallible perſwaſion is, or may bee
wrought in them. Either it muſt be grounded vpon Scriptures, or
not: auouched vnto them and wrought in their hearts it muſt be,
either by a publique or priuate ſpirit. Let vs examine all the parts
of this diuiſion.
               6 Firſt if priuate mens infallible perſwaſion of the Churches
publike, or authentike ſpirit, be not groūded vpon Scriptures acknowledged
by vs and them: the Churches authoritie without
all controuerſie, is much greater then the authoritie of Scriptures;
if it, by this aſſertion, can be any, and the Churches not all in
all. For vnto that which men cannot know, whether it bee true or
falſe, they cannot be bound to yeeld abſolute or immediate obedience:
vnto that authoritie, which they abſolutely beleeue as infallible,
they are bound to yeeld infallible aſſent, and abſolute obedience
directly, in it ſelfe and for it ſelfe. But by this ſuppoſition
men cannot know Scriptures infallibly without the Churches
authoritie, and yet they muſt infallibly beleeue the Churches authoritie
without Scriptures; The Scriptures authoritie therefore
is either leſſe then the Churches, or none at all.
               6 But be it ſuppoſed that priuate mens infallible beleefe of the
Churches publike ſpirit is groūded vpon Scriptures, acknowledged
by vs and vrged by them to this purpoſe, as vpon theſe, it ſeemeth
good to the Holy Ghoſt & vs; I haue prayed for thee thy faith ſhould
not faile: The queſtion whereunto wee demaund an anſwere, is
whether this infallible beleefe of the Churches authoritie, grounded
vpon theſe places, muſt be wrought in mens heartes by a priuate
or publique ſpirit. If by a priuate ſpirit onely Bellarmine beleeued
the Churches publique ſpirit, or thoſe Scriptures truth, or
true meaning, whereon he grounds it: Hee and all other Papiſts
(ſuch as hee was when hee deliuered this Doctrine;) neither Biſhops

nor Cardinals, are ſubiect to the ſame inconueniences,
which he hath condemned vs for, as Heretiques. For all priuate
ſpirits, by his poſitions, are obnoxious to errour, vnſufficient to
plant any infallible perſwaſion in matters of faith; yet ſuch is this
article of the Churches authentique ſpirit, of which vnleſſe men
be ſo perſwaded, infallibly perſwaded, they cannot bee of the minor
propoſition in any Syllogiſme; wherein a point of faith is
concluded: and vncertaine of the minor, they cannot be certaine
of the concluſion, which, as Bellarmine rightly obſerues, alwayes
followes the weaker part. The infallible concluſion therefore of
Bellarmines reſolution, is; vnleſſe priuate men may haue publique
ſpirits to warrant the truth of Scriptures, and the Churches infallibilitie
thereon grounded; they cannot truly beleeue any concluſion
of faith. It remaines then we inquire; what inconuenience wil
follow, if they admit priuate men to be partakers of publike ſpirits.
               7 Diuerſitie of ſuch ſpirits they acknowledge not. If therefore
priuate mens infallible aſſent vnto the truth, or true ſence of
thoſe particular Scriptures whence they ſeeke to prooue their
Churches infallibilitie, muſt be planted by a publique ſpirit, planted
it muſt be by the ſame ſpirit; which guides, and guiding makes
the Church and Pope authentique and infallible, both in their
propoſall of Scriptures and declaration of Scriptures ſence. Seeing
this ſpirit is one and the ſame, if it can make the Church or
Pope infallible in all; why may it not make all priuate men (by this
ſuppoſition partakers of it) alike infallible, at the leaſt in the right
vnderſtanding of thoſe places, which warrāt the Churches infallibilitie
or publique ſpirit. For our aduerſaries, I hope, will eaſily
grant, that the Churches publique and authentique ſpirit muſt be
moſt infallibly beleeued, becauſe ſo expreſſely taught in thoſe
Scriptures cited by Bellarmine to this purpoſe. If this publike
or authentique ſpirit, can worke ſuch infallible apprehenſion of
thoſe places true meaning in priuate heartes, why not in all others
as neceſſarie for them to know; that is, in all neceſſarie to ſaluation?
And if thus it doe, why are wee bound to beleeue the Pope,
more then the Pope vs, wee being partakers of a publique and infallible
ſpirit aſwel as he?
               8 Or if they hold it no abſurditie to ſay; wee muſt beleeue two
or three places, [It ſeemeth good to the Holy Ghoſt and vs: Peter feed

my ſheepe;] by a pub
                     •
                  ique and authentique ſpirit, teaching vs from
theſe to relie vpon the Pope in all other parts of Gods Word, becauſe
(as it muſt be ſuppoſed) we haue but a priuate ſpirit for their
aſſurance: by this ſuppoſition the Popes authoritie, in reſpect of
vs, muſt haue the ſame exceſſe of ſuperioritie vnto Scriptures, that
publike ſpirit hath vnto a priuate; or the Pope (who beleeueth all
Scriptures by a publike ſpirit) hath vnto a priuate man. This publike
ſpirit, wherof they vaūt, is the ſame which did inſpire the ſcriptures
to Moſes, the Prophets and Apoſtles; and muſt (by this poſition)
be the Pope or Churches immediate agēt for eſtabliſhing this
inuiolable league of abſolute alleagance with mens ſoules vnto
them, but of none ſo abſolute to their Creator and Redeemer; and
the reſt of whoſe written lawes, and eternal decrees, muſt be communicated
vnto them by a priuate ſpirit, and ſubſcribed vnto with
this condition, If the Pope ſhall witneſſe them to be his lawes, or
to haue this or that meaning.
               9 Nor can our aduerſaries denſe the truth of this ſubſequent
collection, If it were poſsible for the Pope in matters controuerſed to
teach contrarie to Gods Word: wee were bound to follow him; For they
                  Si volunt Pontificem in rebus alioqui omnino controuerſis id eſt, non ſatis expreſſè in Eccleſia compertis ac determinatis defi
                        •
                     ire poſſe vt perſonam pub
                        •
                     
                     cam, errorem re ipſa contra fidem errant ipſi in fide grauiſſi
                        •
                     è. Poſſet enim imo teneretur tunc Eccleſia vniuerſa Pontificem de re controuerſa dicentem ac nondum haereſi manifeſtê notatum pro Paſtore ſuo agnoſcere, atque adeo ipſum omnino audire. Ita fierat vt ſi tunc errare poſſit, Eccleſia etiam vniuerſa poſſit immo teneretur errare. Valentian Tom. 3. de obiect. fid. Diſp. 1. Quaeſt. 1. Punct. 7. Paragraph. 4
                           •
                        . Bellarmine for the ſame grounds Collects that the Pope cannot erre in matters of manners.
                   
                  themſelues argue thus, If the Pope could erre in matters of faith;
faith might periſh from the Earth; all Chriſtians bound to erre,
becauſe bound to obey him. This prooues that our aſſent to any
Scriptures (beſides thoſe which teach the Popes authoritie) cannot
in it ſelfe be perfect and abſolute, but ſubiect to this condition
[if the Pope be infallible.] And euen of thoſe places, which (as
they pretend) witneſſe him to be ſuch, there yet remaines a farther
difficultie. Theſe the Pope beleeues not, becauſe they are confirmed
to him by his predeceſſor, but directly and immediatly, by
his publique ſpirit: But may priuate men beleeue them ſo too?
No. For theſe, eſpecially and the
                     Vide Librum 2. Sect. 4. Cap▪ 5. Paragraph. 14. Nam fides Catholica docet, omnem virtutem eſſe bonā, omne vitium eſſe malum, ſi autem Papa erraret praecipiendo vi tia vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Eccleſia credere vitia eſſe bona, & virtutes malas, niſi vellet contra conſcientiam peccare. Tenetur enim in rebus dubijs, Eccleſia acquieſcere iudicio ſummi Pontificis, & facere quod ille praecipit, non facere quod ille prohibet: ac ne ſorte contra conſcientiam agat, tenetur credere bonum eſſe quod ille praecipit: malum quod ille prohibet. Bellarmine Lib. 4. de Roman. Pont. Cap. 5. Churches infallibilitie contained
in them, are (by all our adueſaries conſent) propoſitions

of faith, in reſpect of vs, need by their doctrine) the propoſall or
teſtimonie of the Church, whereon all priuate mens faith muſt
be immediately grounded: beleeuing this we ſhall from it (at leaſt
conioyned with Scripture) beleeue all other parts of Gods Word
neceſſarie to ſaluation, aſwell as the Pope doth theſe former from
the teſtimonie of his publique ſpirit. Wherefore his authoritie
muſt be vnto vs altogether as great, as the authoritie of the Godhead
is vnto him; which is farre greater vnto him, then it is or can
be to any others; for euen that which is acknowledged for Gods
Word, both by him and vs, muſt be leſſe authentique vnto vs then
the wordes of this mortall man;
               10 For though we pardon our aduerſaries their former abſurdities,
in ſeeking to prooue the Churches authoritie by the Scripture,
and the Scriptures by the Churches; though we grant them
all they can deſire (euen what ſhall appeare in due place to be moſt
falſe,) That, whiles they beleeue the Popes particular iniunctions,
or deciſions, from a preſuppoſal of his vniuerſal tranſcendent
authoritie, they doe not onely beleeue him, or his wordes, but
thoſe partes of Gods Word, vpon which they ſeeme to ground
his infallibilitie: yet our former argument holdes ſtill moſt firme;
becauſe that abſolute aſſent, which priuate men muſt giue vnto
theſe ſuppoſed grounds of their Religion, before other portions
of Scripture, is not grounded vpon any preheminencie incident
to theſe words as they are Gods, as if they were more his then the
reſt, in ſome ſuch peculiar ſort, as the Tenne Commaundements
are in reſpect of other Moſaicall Lawes; nor from any internall
proprietie flowing from the wordes themſelues, as if their ſecret
character did vnto faithfull mindes, bewray them to be more Diuine
then others; nor from any precedent conſequent, or comitant
circumſtance, probably arguing that ſence, the Romiſh
Church giues of them, to be of it ſelfe more perſpicuous or credible,
then the naturall meaning of moſt other Scriptures, all inſpired
by one and the ſame ſpirit, all, for their forme, of equall
authoritie and perſpicuitie. All the prerogatiue then, which theſe
paſſages can haue before others, muſt be from the matter contained
in them; and that, by our aduerſaries poſition, is the Churches
infallibilitie. Wherefore, not becauſe they are Gods word,
or were giuen by his Spirit, in more extraordinarie ſort then others;

but becauſe they haue more affinitie with the Roman Lord,
in late yeares exalted aboue all that is called God, Father, Sonne,
or Holy Ghoſt: theſe places aboue cited, muſt bee more authentikely
beleeued, then all the wordes of God beſides. As I haue
read of pictures, though not more artificiall in themſelues, yet
helde in greater eſtimation amongſt the Heathen, and freer from
contemptuous cenſure then any other of the ſame Painters
doing, onely becauſe they repreſented their great God Iupiter.
               
               11 Another difficultie, whereunto we demand an anſwere is,
whether whiles they aſſent, as they profeſſe, not onely to the infallibilitie
taught (as they ſuppoſe) in the fore cited places,
but alſo vnto the infallibilite of Scriptures which teach it: they
acknowledge two diſtinct aſſents, or but one. If but one, let them
ſhew vs how poſſibly the Church can bee ſaid to confirme the
Scriptures: if two, let them aſsigne the ſeuerall properties of either;
whether is more ſtrong; whether muſt bee to the other as
Peter to his brethren; or if neither of them can confirme the other,
let them declare how the one can be imagined as a meane or
condition of beleeuing the other.
               12 An Heretikes beleefe of the minor propoſition in the former
Syllogiſme (ſaith Bellarmine) is but weake: A Romaniſts beleefe
of the ſame moſt ſtrong. Let this bee the Minor, Peter feed
my ſheepe, or Peter I haue prayed for thee that thy faith ſhould not faile:
what reaſon can be imagined, why a Romaniſts beleefe of theſe
propoſitions ſhould bee ſo ſtrong, and ours ſo weake? The one
hath the Churches authoritie to confirme his faith, the other hath
not. What is it then to haue the Churches authoritie, onely to
know her decrees concerning thoſe portions of Scriptures? If
this were all, we know the Romiſh Churches decrees aſwel as the
Romaniſts: but it is nothing to know them, if we doe not acknowledge
them. To haue Churches authoritie then is, to beleeue it as
infallible: and for this reaſon is a Romane Catholikes beleefe of
any portion of Scripture, more certaine and ſtrong, becauſe hee
hath the teſtimonie of the Church, which he beleeues to be moſt
infallible: and beleeuing it moſt infallibly he muſt of neceſsitie beleeue,
that to be Scripture, that in euery place, to be the meaning
of the Holy Ghoſt, which this Church commends vnto him for
ſuch. Let the moſt learned of our aduerſaries here reſolue the

doubt propoſed; whether there bee two diſtinct aſſents, in the beleefe
of the forementioned propoſitions: one vnto the truth of
the propoſition it ſelfe, and another vnto the Churches infallibilitie.
It is euident by Bellarmines opinion, that all the certaintie a
Roman Catholique hath aboue a Sectarie is, from the Churches
infallibilite. For the propoſition it ſelfe he can beleeue no better
then an Heretique may, vnleſſe hee better beleeue the Church, i.
he beleues the Churches expoſition of it, or the Churches infallibilitie
concerning it, better then the propoſition it ſelfe in it ſelfe
and for it ſelfe. And ſo it is euident that the Churches authoritie
is greater, becauſe it muſt be better beleeued.
               13 Suppoſe then one of our Church, which beleeues theſe
propoſitions to be the word of God, ſhould turne of Roman Catholique,
his former beleefe is by this meanes become more ſtrong
and certaine. This granted, the next queſtion is, what ſhould be
the obiect of this his ſtrong beleefe; the propoſitions beleeued:
Peter feed my ſheepe, I haue prayed for thee: or any other part of
Gods written word; or the Churches authoritie; not the propoſitions
themſelues, but onely by accident, in as much as the Church
confirmes them to him. For ſuppoſe the ſame man ſhould eſtſoones,
either altogether reuolt from the Church, or doubt of
her authoritie, his beleefe of the former propoſitions becomes
hereby as weake as it was before: which plainely cuinceth, that
his beleefe of the Church and this propoſition, were two diſtinct
beleefes, and that this ſtrong beleefe was faſtened vnto the Churches
authoritie, not vnto the propoſition it ſelfe immediately, but
onely by accident, in as much as the Church which he beleeueth ſo
firmely, did teach it; for his beleefe, if faſtened vpon the propoſition
it ſelfe, after doubt mooued of the Churches authoritie, would
haue continued the ſame, but now (by Bellarmines aſſertion) aſſoone
as hee begins to diſclaime his beleefe of the Churches infallibilitie,
his former ſtrong beleefe of the ſuppoſed propoſition
begins to faile, and of this failing no other reaſon, then alreadie is,
can be aſsigned. The reaſon was, becauſe the true, direct, and
proper obiect of his ſtronge beleefe was the Churches authoritie,
on which the beleefe of the propoſition did intirely depend, as the
concluſion doth vpon the premiſſes, or rather as euery particular
doth on the vniuerſall, whereunto it is eſſentially ſubordinate.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               Containing a further Reſolution of Romiſh faith, neceſſarily inferring
the authoritie of the Romiſh Church, to bee of greater authoritie then
Gods Word abſolutely, not only in reſpect of vs.
               
                  IF we racke the former ſyllogiſme a little farther, and
ſtretch it out in euerie ioynt to it full length: wee
may quickly make it confeſſe our propoſed concluſion
and ſomewhat more. The Syllogiſme was
thus, Whatſoeuer God hath ſpoken is moſt true. But
God hath ſpoken, and cauſed to be written all thoſe wordes contained in
the Canon of Scriptures, acknowledged by oppoſite religions of theſe
times. Therefore theſe wordes are moſt true. The certaintie of the
Minor depends, as our aduerſaries will haue it, vpon the preſent
Romiſh Churches infallibilitie, which hath commended vnto vs
theſe Bookes for Gods Word. Bee it then granted, for diſputations
ſake, that we cannot know any part of Gods Word, much
leſſe the iuſt bounds, extent or limits of all his words ſuppoſed to
be reuealed for our good, but by the Romiſh Church: The Spirituall
ſence, or true meaning of all, moſt, or many parts of theſe
determinate Volumes, and viſible Characters, as yet is vndeterminate,
and vncertaine; whereas all points of beleefe muſt bee
grounded on the determinate and certaine ſence of ſome part of
Gods Word reuealed; for our aduerſaries acknowledge all points
of faith ſhould bee reſolued into the firſt truth. Hence, if wee deſcend
to any particular or determinate concluſion of faith, it muſt
be gathered in his Syllogiſme, Whatſoeuer the Church teacheth concerning
the determinate and true ſence of Scriptures, whereon points
of Faith are grounded, is moſt true. But the Church teacheth thus and
thus, (for example her owne authoritie is infallibly taught by the
Holy Ghoſt in theſe wordes, Peter feede my ſheepe, Peter I haue
prayed for thee that thy faith ſhould not faile) goe: this ſence and meaning
of theſe wordes is moſt true. And as true as it is, muſt the ſence
likewiſe of euery propoſition, or part of Scripture by this Church
expounded or declared, be accounted.
               2 The Maior propoſition of this Syllogiſme, is as vndoubted

amongſt the Roman Catholiques, as the maior of the former was
vnto all Chriſtians: but as yet, the minor; The Church doth giue this
or that ſence of this or that determinate place, may be as vncertaine
indeed, as they would make our beleefe vnto the minor propoſition
in the generall Syllogiſme, before it bee confirmed by the
Churches authoritie. For how can we be certain that the Church
doth teach all thoſe particulars which the Ieſuites propoſe vnto
vs? wee haue Bookes indeede, which goe vnder the name of the
Trent Counſell, but how ſhall wee know that this Counſell was
lawfully aſſembled, that ſome Canons haue not beene foiſted in
by priuate Spirits, that the Councell left not ſome vnwritten tradition
for explicating their decrees, after another faſhion then the
Ieſuites doe? who ſhall aſſure vs in theſe or like doubtes? The
preſent Church? All of vs cannot repaire to Rome: ſuch as
can, when they come thither, cannot bee ſure to heare the true
Church ſpeake ex Cathedra. If the Pope ſend his Writs to aſſure
vs, what Critcicke ſo cunning as to aſſure vs, whether they be authentike
or counterfeite? Finally, for all that can bee imagined in
this caſe, onely the Maior of the Catholicke ſyllogiſme, indefinitely
taken, is certaine; and conſequently no particular or definite
concluſion of faith, can be certaine to a Romaniſt, becauſe there
are no poſſible meanes of aſcertaining the Minor, [What the true
Church doth infallibly define] vnto his Conſcience.
               3 Or if they wil hold ſuch concluſions,Wherein the Papiſts make the Popes authoritie greater then Gods. as are ordinarily gathered
from the Trent Councell, or the Popes deciſions, as infallible
points of faith: they make their authoritie to be farre greater then
the infallibilitie of Gods written word; yea more infallible then
the Deitie. This Collection they would denie, vnleſſe it followed
from their owne premiſſes; Theſe for example, That a concluſion of
faith cannot be gathered, vnleſſe the minor (God did ſay this or that determinately)
be firſt made certaine. But from the Pope or Churches infallibilitie,
concluſions of faith may be gathered, albeit the minor be not
certaine de fide. For who can make a Ieſuites report of the Popes
Decrees, or an Hiſtoricall relation of the Trent Councell, certaine
de fide, as certaine as an Article of faith: And yet the Doctrine
of the Trent Councell, and Popes Decrees, muſt bee held
de fide, vpon paine of damnation, albeit men take them onely
from a Prieſts mouth, or vpon a Ieſuites faith and credit.
               
                  
4 This is the madneſſe of that Antichriſtian Synagogue, that
acknowledgeth Gods Word for moſt infallible, and the Scriptures,
which wee haue, for his word, if it ſelfe bee infallible. For
it tels vs, they are ſuch: yet will not haue collections, or concluſions
with equall probabillitie deduced thence, ſo firmely beleeued
by priuate men, as the collections or concluſions, which are
gathered from the Churches infallibilitie. An implicit faith of
particulars, grounded vpon the Churches generall infallibilitie, ſo
men ſtedfaſtly beleeue it, may ſuffice. But implicit faith of particulars,
grounded onely vpon our generall beleefe of Gods infallibilitie,
prouidence, or written word, ſufficeth not. This prooues
the authoritie of the Church, to be aboue the authoritie of Scriptures,
or the Deitie, abſolutely conſidered, not only in reſpect of
vs, [that is all beſides the Pope and his Cardinals.] For that is of
more authoritie abſolutely, not onely in reſpect of vs, which vpon
equall notice or knowledge, is to be better beleeued, more eſteemed,
or obeyed; but ſuch is the authoritie of the Church in reſpect
of the diuine authoritie; ſuch is the authoritie of the Popes
Decrees in reſpect of Gods Word. For the Minor propoſition
in both the former Syllogiſmes being alike vncertaine; the concluſion
muſt bee more certaine in that Syllogiſme, whoſe maior
relies vpon the Popes infallibilitie then in the other; whoſe Maior
was grounded vpon the infallibilitie of the Deitie.
               
               5 Briefly, to collect the ſumme of all; The authoritie of the
Church is greater then the authoritie of Scriptures, both in reſpect
of faith, and Chriſtian obedience. In reſpect of faith; becauſe
we are bound to beleeue the Churches deciſions, read or explicated
vnto vs, (by the Popes meſſenger though à Sir Iohn Lack-lattin)
without any appeale: but no part of Scripture, acknowledged by
vs and them, we may beleeue, without appeale, or ſubmiſſion of
our interpretation to the Church, albeit the true ſence and meaning
of it ſeeme neuer ſo plain, vnto priuate conſciences in whom
Gods Spirit worketh faith. The ſame argument is moſt firme and
euident, in reſpect of obedience;
               6 That authoritie ouer vs is alwayes greateſt, vnto which wee
are to yeeld moſt immediate, moſt ſtrict and abſolute obedience:
but by the Romiſh Churches Doctrine; wee are to yeelde ſupreme,
and moſt abſolute obedience, to the Church; more ſupreme,

and abſolute then vnto Gods word: therefore the authoritie
of the Church is greater ouer vs. The Maior is out of controuerſie,
ſeeing greatneſſe of authoritie is alwayes meaſured by the
manner of obedience due vnto it. The Minor is as euident from
the former reaſon; Our obedience is more abſolute and ſtrict vnto
that authoritie, from which in no caſe we may appeale, then vnto
that from which wee may in many ſafely appeale: but, by the
Romiſh Churches doctrine, there lies alwayes an appeale from
that ſence and meaning of Scriptures, which Gods ſpirit and our
owne conſcience giues vs, vnto the Churches authoritie; none,
from the Churches authoritie or meaning vnto the Scriptures,
or our owne conſciences.
               7 Our Sauiour Chriſt, bids vs,I
                        •
                     h. 5. 7. 
                  ſearch the Scriptures; Saint Paul,
trie all,
                  1 Theſſ. 5. 21. 
                  retaine that which is good; Saint Iohn, trie the Spirits, whether
they bee of God or no:
                  Ioh. 1. Epiſt. 4. Suppoſe a Miniſter of our Church
ſhould charge a Romaniſt, vpon his allegiance to our Sauiour
Chriſt, and that obedience which he owes vnto Gods Word, to
ſearch Scriptures, trie ſpirits, and examine Doctrines for the ratifying
of his faith; he will not acknowledge this to be a Commandemēt
of Scripture, or at leaſt, not to be vnderſtood in ſuch aſenſe,
as may bind him to this practiſe. What followes? if our Clergie
charge him to admit it, he appeales vnto the Church: And, as in
Schooles, ſimus and naſus ſimus is al one, ſo in their language is the
Church and the Church of Rome. This Church tels him, he may
not take vpon him to trie of what ſpirit, the Pope is, not examine
his determinations, deciſions, or interpretations of any Scripture;
by other known places of Scripture, or the analogie of faith
acknowledged by all. Vnto this decree or ſentence of the Church,
(although hee haue it but at the ſecond hand, or after it haue
paſſed through as many Prieſts and Ieſuites mouthes, as are Poſt
Townes from London to Edenburgh, hee yeeldes abſolute obedience,
without acknowledgement of farther appeale, either vnto
Scriptures, or other authoritie whatſoeuer; further manifeſtation
of Gods will hee expects none. Let all the reformed Churches
in the World, or all the Chriſtian World beſides, exhort,
threaten, or adiure him, as he tenders the good of his owne ſoule,
as hee will anſwere his Redeemer in that dreadfull day of finall
iudgement, to examine the Church or Popes decrees, by Gods

written Lawes: his anſwere is, he may not, he cannot doe it, without
open diſobedience to the Church, which to diſobey is damnation
of ſoule and bodie. But O fooles and ſlow of heart to beleeue, and
obey from the heart, that doctrine whereunto yee were deliuered. Know
ye not, that to whomſoeuer yee giue your ſelues as ſeruants to obey, his
ſeruants ye are to whom yee obey, whether it bee the man of ſinne vnto
death, or obedience vnto righteouſneſſe? Ofall Mankinde are onely
Roman Catholiques, not bought with a price, that they may
thus alienate their ſoules from Chriſt, and become ſeruants of
men; that they may conſecrate themſelues, by ſolemne vow, to
the perpetuall ſlauerie of moſt wicked and ſinfull men, euen monſters
of Mankind.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               That in obeying the Romiſh Churches decrees, wee doe not obey Gods
Word as well as them, but them alone in contempt of Gods principall
Lawes.
               1 BVt the ſimple (I know) are borne in hand, by
the more ſubtile ort of this generation, That
thus obeying ſinfull men they obey Chriſt,
who hath enioyned them this obedience vnto
ſuch; That thus beleeuing that ſence of Scripture,
which the Church their mother tenders
vnto them, they doe not beleeue her better then Scriptures, becauſe
theſe two beleefes are not oppoſite but ſubordinate; that
they preferre not her decrees before Chriſts written Lawes, but
her interpretation of them, before all priuate expoſitions. This
is the onely Citie of refuge left them, wherein, proſecuted by the
former arguments, they can hope for anie ſuccour; but moſt
of whoſe gates alreadie haue beene, all ſhortly ſhall bee ſhut
vpon them.The groſſe impietie of the Romiſh Church, in binding men to beleeue negatiues; without any tollerable expoſition of thoſe Scriptures, which ſeeme to contradict her decrees, in matters damnable to aduenture vpon without euidence of truth on her part.
               
               2 That they neither beleeue nor obey Gods Word whileſt

they abſolutely beleeue and obey the Church without appeale,
is euident, in that this Church vſually bindes men, not vnto poſitiue
points of Religion gathered ſo much as from any pretended
ſence of Scripture expounded by it, but to beleeue bare negatiues;
as, that this or that place of Scripture, either brought by
their aduerſaries, or conceiued by ſuch amongſt themſelues, as deſire
the knowledge of truth and right information of conſcience,
haue no ſuch meaning as the Spirit of God, not fleſh and bloud,
(as farre as they can iudge of their owne thoughts,) hath reuealed
vnto them.
               3 But the Spirit may deceiue priuate men; or, at leaſt, they
may deceiue themſelues, in their triall of Spirits. They may indeed,
and ſo may men in publique place, more grieuouſly erre in
peremptorie iudging priuate men, becauſe obnoxious to errour
in the generall, erroneous in this particular, wherein they ground
their opinions vpon Gods Word, plentifull to euince it (at leaſt)
very probable reaſons they bring manie and ſtrong, whereunto
no reaſonable anſwere is brought by their aduerſaries, whoſe vſuall
courſe, is, to preſſe them onely with the Churches authoritie;
which appeares to be of farre greater waight then Gods word,
vnto all ſuch as yeeld obedience to her negatiue decrees, without
any euidence or probabilitie, either of Scripture or naturall reaſon,
to ſet againſt that ſence and meaning of Gods Lawes wherevnto
ſtrength of arguments vnrefuted, and probable pledges of
Gods Spirit vndiſproued haue long tied their ſoules. Doe wee obey
God, or beleeue his word, whileſt we yeeld obedience to the
Church in ſuch Commandements, as to our conſciences vpon
vnpartiall examination ſeeme condemned, ere made by the very
fundamentall Lawes of Religion, and all this oftimes without any
ſhew or pretence of Scripture, to warrant vs, that we doe not
diſobey God in obeying them?
               4 But doth the Romiſh exact abſolute obedience in
ſuch pointes, as, if it were poſſible they could bee falſe, may
endanger the very foundation of true Religion, without
euident demonſtration, that their daily practiſe neither doth
nor can endanger it? Yes. For what can more concerne the maine
foundation, which Chriſtians, Iewes, and Mahumetans moſt
firmely hold, then thoſe precepts, in number many, all plainely

and peremptorily forbiding vs to worſhip any Gods but One, or
any thing in the Heauen or Earth but him onely. The Romaniſts
themſelues grant,The fearefull dangers whervnto mens ſoules are expoſed by the Trent Councels decree for worſhipping the conſecrated hoaſt, For to aduenture on ſuch practizes with any ſcruple or doubt, is damnable, becauſe contrarie to the Doctrine of ſaith. And yet to enforce a beleefe vpon our ſelues, that Chriſt is their preſent, without warrant of Scripture is more damnable; for this were to affect ignorance for cloaking Idolatrie. V de lib. 2. Sect. 1. cap. 7. that, cultu latriae God alone is to bee adored,
that ſo to adore any other is Idolatrie; and Idolatrie (by their confeſſion)
a moſt grieuous ſinne. O how much better were it for
them to hold it none; or Gods Word forbidding it of no authoritie,
then ſo lightly to aduenture the hourely practiſe of it (in
contempt of ſuch fearefull threatnings, as they themſelues out of
Gods Lawes pronounce againſt it,) vpon ſuch broken diſioincted
ſurmiſes, as are the beſt they can pretend for their warrant.
               5 To beleeue Chriſts fleſh and bloud ſhould bee there preſent,
where it cannot be ſeene, or felt, yea where we ſee and feele another
bodie as perfectly as wee can doe ought, is, to reaſon, without
warrant of Scripture, but a ſenceleſſe blinde beleefe. But
grant his bodie and bloud were in the Sacrament rightly adminiſtred,
yet that out of the Sacrament, either ſhould bee in the conſecrated
hoſt, whileſt carried from Towne to Towne for ſolemne
ſhew more then for Sacramentall vſe, is to reaſon ruled by Scripture
(to ſay no worſe) more improbable. Now to worſhip that
as God, which to our vnerring ſences is a Creature, vpon ſuch
blind ſuppoſals, that Chriſts bodie, by one miracle may be there;
by another vnſeene is worſe then Idolatrie committed vpon deluſion
of ſence. So to adore a wayfer, onely a wayfer in all appearance;
without ſtrict examination, nay without infallible euidence
of Scriptures vrged for the reall preſence; is more abhominable,
then to worſhip euerie appearance of an Angell of light, without
triall what ſpirit it were, Sathan or ſome other, that ſo appeared.
And if we conſider the olde Serpents vſuall ſlight to inſinuate
himſelfe into euery place, wherein inveterate cuſtome or corrupt
affection, may ſuggeſt ſome likelihood of a diuine preſence vnto
dreaming fancies, (as he did delude the old World in Oracles and
Idols:) the probabilitie is farre greater, his inuiſible ſubſtance,
(by nature not incompatible with any corporeall quantitie)
ſhould be annexed to the ſuppoſed hoaſt, then Chriſts reall body,
vncapable for any thing wee know of ioinct exiſtence in the ſame
place with any other; howſoeuer, moſt diſproportionable to ſuch
baſe effects as muſt proceede from the ſubſtance contained vnder
the viſible ſhape of bread, ſuch as no accident could either breed,
or ſupport.
               
                  
6 This is a point (as is elſewhere obſerued) wherein Satan ſeemeth
to triumph ouer the moderne Papiſts, more then ouer all
the Heathens of the old World, whoſe ſences onely hee deluded,
or bewitched their reaſon, but quite inuerts all vſe of theſe mens
ſence, faith and reaſon, making them beleeue Chriſts bodie to be
preſent in the Sacrament, after a ſuppoſed miraculous manner,
quite contrarie to the knowne nature of bodies, and yet more
prepoſterouſly contrarie to the very end and eſſence of miracles.
For what miracles were euer wrought to other purpoſe, then to
conuince the imperfect collections of humane reaſon by euidence
of ſenſe, God vſing this inferiour or brutiſh part (thus aſtoniſhed
by his preſence) to confute the curious folly of the ſuperiour
or diuine facultie of the ſoule, as hee did ſometimes the
dumbe Aſſe to rebuke the iniquitie of the Prophet her Maſter. But
ſo prepoſterouſly doth Sathan ride the moderne Papiſts that hee
is brought to beleeue a multitude of miracles; againſt the euidence
of ſence, or reaſon, contrarie to the rule of faith; all offered
vp in ſacrifice vnto the Prince of darkneſſe; that he hauing, put
out the eyes of ſenſe, reaſon, and ſpirit at once, may euer after
lead them what way he liſt. And as vnhappie wagges, or lewd
companions, may perſwade blind men to beg an Almes, as if ſome
great perſonage did, when as a troupe of more needie beggers
then themſelues, paſſe by; ſo is it much to bee dreadded, leaſt the
Deuill perſwade the blinded beſotted Papiſt that Chriſt is preſent
where he himſelfe lies hid; that hee may with heart and ſoule offer
vp thoſe prayers and duties vnto him which belong properly vnto
God; and worſhip in ſuch manner before the boxes whereinto
he hath ſecretly conuaid himſelfe, as the Iſraelites did before the
arke of the Couenant.
               7De adorand. lib. 3. diſp. 1. c. 5. 
                  Vaſquez thinkes we may without offence adore that bodie
wherein the Deuill lurkes, ſo we direct not our worſhip vnto him,
but to the inanimate Creature, as repreſenting the Creator. Suppoſe
this might be granted vpon ſome rare accident, or extraordinarie
manifeſtation of Gods power in ſome particular place, in
caſe, men were ignorant, or had no iuſt preſumptions of any malignant
ſpirits preſence therein: Yet were it damnable Idolatrie
daily to practiſe the like eſpecially where great probabilitie were
of diabolical impoſture, which the ſolemne worſhip of any Creature

without expreſſe warrant of Scripture, will inuite. Yet ſenſe
doth witneſſe that Chriſt is not, no Scripture doth warrant vs,
that he or any other liuing Creature, vnleſſe perhaps
                     The knowne experiments of ſuch Creatures ariſing from corruption of their conſecrated hoſt: haue enforced the Schoolemen to inuent new miracles how they ſhould come there. Some thinke per creationem nouae materiae prima, others that the quantitie of the late deceaſed conſecrated hoſt Supplet locum materi
                        •
                     e primae, which is the greateſt miracle in the Sacrament, as Pererius thinks vide Pere. diſpu. 16. in 6 tom. Jobannis & S
                        •
                     ares Met. diſp. 20. wormes,
or ſuch as ſpring of putrifaction, is preſent in their proceſſions.
Notwithſtanding all the expreſſe Commaundements of God
brought by vs againſt their practiſe: theSi quis dixerit, in ſancto Euchariſtiae Sacramento Chriſtum vnigenitum Dei filium non eſſe cultulatriae, etiam externo, ad orandum: alque ideo nec feſtiua peculiari celebritate venerandum, neque in proc
                        •
                     ſſionibus, ſecuudum laudabilem, & vniuerſalem Eccleſiae ſanctae ritum, & conſuetudinem ſolemniter circumgeſtandum, vel non publicè, vt adoretur populo proponendum, & eius adoratores eſſe Idololatras; anathema ſit. Concil. Trid. Seſſ. 13. Can. 6. Trent Councell accurſeth
all that denie Chriſts reall preſence in proceſſion, or condemne
the propoſall of that conſecrated ſubſtance to be publikely
adored as God; not ſo much as intimating any tollerable expoſition
of that Commandment, which forbids vs to haue any
Gods but one.
               8The impious decree of the Trent Councell for communicating in one kind, againſt the expreſſe Commandement of Chriſt, the practiſe of his Apoſtles, and the Primitiue Church. To omit many more; another inſtance ſutable to the former
and our preſent purpoſe, wee haue in the decree of communicating
vnder one kind. Our Sauiour at his inſtitution of this Sacrament,
gaue the cup aſwell as the bread, and with the cup alone
this expreſſe iniunction Bibite ex hoc omnes, Drinke all of this, albeit
none of his Diſciples were conſicients or ſuch as did conſecrate.
S. Paul recites the ſame inſtitution in like words & continued
the practiſe in ſuch Churches as he planted. TheSeſſion 21. 20. Trent Councel
acknowledgeth that the vſe of the cup was not infrequent, or
vnvſuall in the Primitiue Church; indeed altogether vſuall, and
the want of it for many hundered yeares after Chriſt, vnknowne.
The onely inſtance, that can from Antiquitie bee pretended,
to proue it lawfull, and which in all likeli-hood did partly occaſion
it, argues the Ancients vſe of it in ſolemne aſſemblies, to haue
beene held as neceſſarie. For euen in caſes of greateſt neceſſitie,
when the cup could not bee carried to parties ſicke, or otherwiſe
detained from publique Communions; they had the conſecrated
bread dipped in it. AndErant autem ſub Arriana ſecta viuentes: & quia conſuetudo eorum eſt vt ad Altarium venientes, de alio calice Reges communicent & de alio populus minor, venenum in calice illo poſuit, de quo mater communicatura erat. Quo illa hauſto, protinus mortua eſt, non enim dubium eſt tale maleficium eſſe de parte Diaboli. Quid contra miſere Haeretici reſpondebunt, vt in ſancta eorum locum habeat minacus? Nos vero Trinitatem in vna aequalitate pariter & omnipotentia conſilentes etiamſi mortiferum bibamus, in nomine patris & filij & ſpiritus ſancti veri & incorruptibilis Dei, nihil nos nocebit. Greg. Turon Hiſt. Lib. 3. Num. 31. 
                  Gregorie of Towres relates the poyſoning

of King Clouis ſiſter (Queene to Theodoricke) by her owne
daughter, in the Chalice, ſo, as he intimates withall, the ordinarie
vſe of the cup at that time, aſwell amongſt French Catholickes as
Italian Arrians. Onely this was the difference; The Arrians did
not, as the Catholiques, drinke of the ſame cuppe with their Princes.
               9 It may be, feare, conceiued vpon this or like example, leaſt
the Prieſts ſhould, in a more proper ſenſe prooue conficients, not
of Chriſts, but of Lay Princes bodies; made them, afterwardes,
more willing to forbeare the Cup; and the people, either in manners
would not, or otherwiſe could not, be aduanced aboue them
at this Heauenly banquet. Turonenſis reaſon againſt theſe Heretiques,
I thinke, did hold no longer then his life; few Princes afterwardes
durſt haue aduentured to trie the truth of his concluſion
[Whether poyſon drunke in the Sacrament adminiſtred by
the ſuppoſed true Church would haue wrought. For, vnleſſe my
memorie faile mee, Eccleſiaſtike Princes, Popes themſelues, haue
beene as ſurely poyſoned, in Catholike Chalies; as the forementioned
Queene was in the Arrian cup.
               10 But what occaſions ſoeuer, either mooued the laitie of
themſelues to imbrace, or the Cleargie to enioyne this Communion
vnder one kind; theConcil. Trid. Seſſ. 21. Cap. 1. Itaque ſancta ipſa Synodus à Spiritu ſancto, qui ſpiritus eſt ſapientiae, & intellectus, ſpiritus conſily & pietatis edocta, atque ipſius Eccleſiae iudicium & conſuetudinem ſecuta declarat ac docet, nullo diuino praecept Laicos & Clericos non conſicientes obligari ad Euchariſtiae ſacramentum ſub vtraque ſpec
                        •
                     e ſumendum; neque vllo pacto, ſalua ſide, dubitari poſſe, quin illis alterius ſpeciei communio ad ſalutem ſufficiat. Nam etſi Chriſtus Dominus in vltima caena venerabile hoc Sacramentum, in panis & vini ſpeciebus inſtituit, & Apoſtolis tradidit: non tamen illa inſtitutio, & traditio 
                        •
                     o tendunt, vt omnes Chriſti ſideles ſtatuto Domini ad vtramque ſpeciem accipiendam aſ
                        •
                     ringātur. Sed neque ex ſermone illo ap
                        •
                     d Iohan. 6. recte colligitur, vtriuſque ſpeciei Communionem a Domino praeceptam eſſe, vtrumque iuxta varias ſanctorum Patrum, & Doctorum interpretationes intelligatur. Namque qui dixit, Niſi manducaueritis carnem filij hominis, & biberitis eius ſanguinem non habebitis vitam in vobis: dixit queque; Siquis manducauerit ex hoc pane, viuet in aeternum. Et qui dixit, Qui manducat meam carnem, & bibit meum ſurguinem habet vitam aeternam: dixit etiam: Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea eſt &c. mundi vita. Et denique qui dixit, Qui manducat meam carnem, & bibit meum ſanguinem, in me manet, & ego in illo: dixit nihilominus: Qui manducat hunc panem viuet in aeternum. Trent Councell ſpecifies none, and
yet accurſeth all that will not beleeue the Church had iuſt cauſes
ſo to doe. Without any ſure warrant of Scripture to perſwade it,
they bind all likewiſe to beleeue this bare negatiue, [That neither
our Sauiours wordes, at his inſtitution of the Sacrament, nor any
other place of Scripture, enioyne the vſe of the cup as neceſſarie,
by way of precept or commandement:] Nor doth Christs
words, in the ſixth of Iohn, howſoeuer we vnderstand them, according

to the diuerſe interpretations of Fathers, (either of Sacramentall or
Spirituall eating) enforce any ſuch neceſsitie. Will you heare their
reaſons for this bold aſſertion. He that ſaid, vnleſſe yee eate the fleſh
of the ſonne of man and drinke his bloud, you haue no life in you; ſaid
alſo,
                  
                     And in the ſecond Canon of the ſame Seſſion, it is expreſſed ſub paena Anathematis. Si quis dixerit, Sancta Eccleſiam Catholicam non iuſtis cauſis & rationibus adductam fuiſſe, vt laicos atque etiam Clericos non conſicientes, ſub panis tantummodo ſpecie communicaret, aut in co erraſſè; anathema ſit. 
                  If any man eate of this bread, he ſhall liue for euer. And he that
ſaid, whoſoeuer eateth my fleſh and drinketh my bloud hath eternall life;
ſaid alſo, the bread which I will giue is my fleſh, which I will giue for the
life of the World; Hee that ſaid, whoſoeuer eateth my fleſh and drinketh
my bloud, dwels in me and I in him: hath ſaid withall, hee that eateth
this bread ſhall liue for euer.
               
               11 Gods precepts muſt bee very peremptorie, and conceiued
in formall tearmes, ere any ſufficient authoritie to enioyne obedience,
in what ſubiect ſoeuer, will bee acknowledged in them by
theſe men, that dare thus deny a neceſſity of communicating
Chriſt in both kindes, impoſed vpon all in theſe wordes; Verely,
verely I ſay vnto you, except yee eat the fleſh of the ſonne of man, and
drinke his
                        •
                      bloud, you haue no life in you; onely becauſe it is ſaid in the
words going before, If any man eat of this bread, he ſhall liue for euer.
Of how much better inſight in Scriptures, then theſe graund ſeers
of Rome, would blind Homer, had he liued in their time, haue proued?
For he neuer denied his fained Gods their Nectar, becauſe
Ambroſia was an immortall meate, And would hee, or any man
not more blinde in heart and minde then he was of bodily ſence,
collect, againſt Chriſts expreſſe wordes, that his bloud, the true
heauenly Nectar, was not neceſſary, becauſe his fleſh doth ſtrengthen
to eternall life, eſpecially if hee conſidered their captious interpollation,
againſt whom in that place hee diſputes, which cauſed
him not to expreſſe his minde ſo fully there, as elſewhere hee
had done albeit afterwards he ingeminates the neceſſitie of drinking
his bloud, aſwell as eating his fleſh in ſuch preciſe and formall
tearmes; as if he had euen then bethought himſelfe, that ſuch Antichriſtian
Spirits as theſe Trent Fathes, might happily dare to elude
his moſt ſacred precept, by ſuch Satanicall gloſſes, as in that
decree they haue done.
               12 He had told the Iewes (aſmuch as was pertinent to their obiection)
that hee was the liuing bread, which came downe from
Heauen: much better then Manna, which their Fathers had eaten.
Bread he called himſelfe in oppoſition vnto Manna, not reſtrayning

this to his bodie or fleſh onely; albeit what he meant by
bread, he expounds partly by his fleſh, And the bread which I will
giue is my fleſh, which I will giue for the life of the World; Beſides that
bread in the Hebrew Dialect containes all ſorts of food, the manner
of giuing this An broſia was ſuch, as did affoord Heauenly
viſible Nectar too. For whileſt hee gaue his fleſh vpon the croſſe,
hee powred out his bloud withall. But the Iewes catch at this
ſpeech, ere he had expounded his full meaning, How can this man
giue vs fleſh to eate? Then Ieſus ſaid vnto them, verely, verely I ſay vnto
you, except ye eate the fleſh of the ſonne of man, and drinke his bloud,
ye haue no life in you. Which wordes, conſidered with the former
circumſtances,Iſta diſtinctiō (ſaith Bellarmine) tam frequens carnis, & ſanguinis, & 
                        •
                     ibi ac potus apertè indicat Chriſtum loqui de communicatione ſui ſub ſpeciebus panis & vi
                        •
                     i talioqui enim quorſum iſta diſtinctio, toties praeſertim repet
                        •
                     ta? Spiritualis enim perceptio Chriſti per ſidem non eget iſta diſtinone cum vno modo ſiat: idem enim eſt manducare, & b
                        •
                     bere in ſumptione per ſolam ſidem. Bellar. Lib. 5. de Sacrament. Euch. Cap. 5. in haec verba Iohan. to any mans capacitie not infatuation, import
thus much; Doe yee murmur that I ſhould profer you my fleſh?
verily I ſay vnto you, and yee may beleeue me, Vnleſſe ye drinke my
bloud, as well as eate my fleſh, yee haue no life in you. For ſo hee addes,
my fleſh is meate indeede, and my bloud is drinke indeed; that is,
both are as neceſſarie to eternall, as meat and drinke to corporall
life.
               13 For theſe and many like reaſons, neceſſarily ariſing from
the text; ſome, aſwell of their greateſt Schollers, as beſt interpretors,
denie the former places to be meant of Sacramentall eating,
otherwiſe, vnable to conceiue any poſſibilitie, either of auoiding
the inconueniences vrged by vs, or of defending their infallible
Church from errour in this decree. Yet ſaith the Councell, howſoeuer
they be vnderſtood, according to the diuerſe interpretations of Fathers,
they inferre no ſuch neceſsitie. No? not if moſt Fathers, as Maldonate
contends, did hold them to be directly meant of Sacramentall
eating? Why then did Ianſenius and Heſſelius renounce the
Fathers in this? ſurely to defend their mother, whoſe credit they
haue much better ſaued, vpon ſuppoſition that theſe wordes are
meant onely of ſpirituall manducation, then Maldonate, otherwiſe
acute, but moſt peruerſely ſottiſh, in his Apologie for this decree,
hath done. And yet, to ſpeake the truth, the ſame inconuenience
will follow as neceſſarily,Now if wee aſſume, But the Romiſh Church will not ſuffer Chriſtians to receiue CHRISTS bodie and bloud ſub 
                           〈◊〉
                         panis & vini, the concluſion is ineuitable, therefore the Romiſh Church directly contradicts Chriſt and as much as in her lies depriues the Laitie of eternall life. Our Sauiour in the ſixth of Iohn ſpeakes indefinitly both of Sacramentall and Spirituall eating, not peculiarly of either▪
                   though not ſo perſpicuouſly at firſt

ſight, albeit we grant them to be meant of ſpirituall eating primarily.Vide Bezae annotationes in verſ. 63. cap. 6. Iohannis.
For * in that they are meant primarily of ſpirituall they
cannot but be meant of Sacramental eating alſo, ſeeing theſe two
(as elſewhere I haue obſerued) are not oppoſite, but ſubordinate.
Whence if we grant that Chriſts bloud, aſwell as his fleſh, muſt
bee communicated to vs by faith, or ſpirituall manducation; the
conſequence will bee [Therefore the cuppe, as well as the bread,
muſt bee adminiſtred in the Sacrament;]Quoniam res ipſa, id eſt corporis & ſanguinis Chriſti ſpiritualis manducatio & potus ibi luculē
                     ter traditur, ad quam poſtea Euangeliſtae ad ſinem hiſtor ae ſuae declarant Chriſtum adiunxiſſe ſymbola externa panis & vini, idcirco nos caput illud à Sacramē
                     to Euchariſtiae putamus eſſe alienum. Peter Martyr Lib. cō
                        tra Gardinerum pag. 1. ad ſolutionem 32. obiecti.
                   becauſe Chriſt ſaith in
the inſtitution, that the cup is his bloud, and the bread his bodie
or fleſh: that is, the one is the ſure pledge, o
                     •
                   inſtrument; whereby
his fleſh; the other whereby his bloud, which wee muſt ſpiritually
eate, (as well in the Sacrament as out of it,) muſt bee communicated
vnto vs. For, as the auncient Fathers haue obſerued,
our Sauiour Chriſt did in his inſtitution exhibit that vnto vs ſenſibly
which before hee had promiſed as inuiſible, ſo that the precept
of eating Chriſts bodie, and drinking his bloud ſacramentally
doth binde all capable of this Sacrament as ſtrictly, as that
other of eating his bodie and drinking his bloud Spiritually: ſeeing
this latter is the ſeale and aſſurance of the other. And as our
aduerſaries acknowledge an abſolute neceſſitie of pre
                     •
                  pt, for
eating Chriſt Sacramentally and Spiritually, though that precept
concerne not infants: ſo in all reaſon they ſhould grant an
equall neceſſitie of precept, for eating his fleſh and bloud diſtinctly
in the Sacrament, though this bee not neceſſarie to all men,
at all times, if without negligence or contempt they cannot
be partakers of both. For impoſſibilitie, vpon what occaſion ſoeuer,
not cauſed through their one default, exempts them from
that generall precept of eating Chriſt vnder both kindes; as want
of yeares, or diſcretion, doth children from any iniunction, diuine,
or humane of communicating ſo much as in one kind. For
notwithſtanding the former precept, [except ye eate the fleſh of the
Sonne of man, and drinke his bloud, yee haue no life in you,] as peremptorie
as any can be for communicating, aſwell ſacramentally
as ſpiritually, in both kindes; it were vncharitble to miſtruſt
Gods mercie towardes ſuch poore ſoules, as long for the cup of
ſaluation, which no man giueth them; yea which the Romiſh
Church hath by decree, as peremptorie as ſhe could make, denied
to all the Laitie without exception, to al the Cleargie except ſuch,

as may by a peculiar right challenge his bloud as their owne, by
way of exchange, becauſe they haue made him a bodie which hee
had not before.
               14 Yet is it a ſmall thing with this great whore,The ſtrange interpretation of Saint Paule wordes whereby the Trent Councell deluded by Sathan ſeekes to delude the Chriſtian World. to depriue the
Chriſtian World of the Lords, vnleſſe ſhee vrge it, inſtead thereof,
to pledge her in the cup of Deuils, full of the wine of fornication,
coloured with her adulterate Scriptures authorized no
doubt for ſuch purpoſes. Where our Apoſtle Saint Paul ſaith,
that he, and his fellow Miniſters were ſtewards of the myſteries of
God; the vulgar Romane edition renders the Greeke, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   by
the Latine diſpenſatores and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   (rightly rendred in this place)
elſewhere (vpon careleſneſſe, rather then any intention of
harme, as I am perſwaded) by the LatineEphe. 5. verſe 32. 
                  ſacramentum. Whether
vpon ſet purpoſe of ſome more learned in that Councell, preſuming
to gull the ſimple and illitterate by their cunning, as
Chemnitius probably thinkes; or whether the myſterie of iniquitie
(as is more probable) wrought vnawares in the braines of the
ignorant,The improper vſe of which word in that place made Matrimonie a Sacrament amongſt the Papiſts, yet Bellarmine defends the tranſlation. Idem eſt Myſterium, Graecis & Latinis Sacramentum, Graecī enim cum de Sacramentis aegunt ſemper 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     vocant. Bellar. Lib. 2. de verbo Dei Cap. 14. Parag. Septimus. So oftentimes wee call an Aſſe a beaſt, but to tranſlate beſtia by the Engliſh Aſſe, would argue either rudeneſſe or negligence in the tranſlator, or the approuer, partialitie in the Apologizer. which were the maior part, and, as ſome haue related,
did ouerſway the learned vncapable of ſuch impudency as ſhould
giue countenance to this ignominious decree; partly from the equiuocation
of the Latine diſpenſatores, partly from the ſynominall
ſignification which the vulgar hath made of myſterium, and ſacramentum,
the beetle-heads haue hammered out an interpretation
of Saint Pauls words before cited, ſo ſcurrilouſly contrarie to
his meaning, that the blacke Dogge, which is ſaid to haue appeared
vnto Cardinall Creſcentius (might hee haue ſpoken in the
Councell) could ſcarce haue vttered it without bluſhing. For the
Apoſtle meant ſuch diſpenſatores or Stewards, as our Sauiour
ſpeakes of in the foure and twentieth of Saint Matthew; ſuch as
ſhould giue their fellow ſeruants their inſt portions without purloyning;
ſuch as daily expected their Maſters returne, to cal them
vnto a ſtrict account of their ſtewardſhip. For ſo it is expreſſely
added,1. Cor. Cap. 4. Verſ. 2. 
                  Moreouer, (or as much as belongs vnto our office) it is
required of Stewards, that they be all ſound faithfull.
               
               Not to diſpute of the Churches authoritie in diſpoſing of Sacraments,

nor to exagitate the impietie of this decree, be the one
for the preſent ſuppoſed as great, the other as little as they liſt to
make it; onely this I would demaund of any that is ſo himſelfe;
whether he can imagine any men, ſober, or in their right mindes,
would not aſſoone haue vrged that text, The foole hath ſaid in his
heart there is no God, for eſtabliſhing Atheiſme, or Saint Peters
checke vnto Simon Magus, to prooue Simonie lawfull; as deriue
the Churches authoritie, for detayning the leaſt part of the word
of life, much leſſe the cup of ſaluation, from theſe wordes, Let a
man ſo thinke of vs as of the Ministers of Chriſt, and diſpoſers of the
ſecrets of God. What ſecrets? of the Goſpell, before hid, but now
to be publiſhed to all the World; of which the ſame Apoſtle elſewhere
had ſaid, Ancceſsitie is laid vpon me, and wee vnto mee, if I
preach it not. Of the vſe, or neceſſitie of the Lords cup, not a word
in this place, not a ſyllable, for the Lord had ſent him, not to adminiſter
this Sacrament, but to preach the Goſpell: of which the
Doctrine of the Lords Supper was a part indeed; but where expreſſely
and directly he deliuers that, doth hee intimate by any circumſtance,
that either it had beene, was, or might bee otherwiſe
adminiſtred, then according to the patterne preſcribed by our Sauiour
at the firſt inſtitution? Rather his often repetition of theſe
coniunctiues, This bread and this cuppe, eating and drinking, the
bodie and bloud, &c. Argue, he neuer thought the one ſhould be receiued
without the other; that this prohibition of the cup was a
particular branch of the Myſterie of iniquitie, not to breake out
till latter ages, hid from his eyes that had ſeene the Myſterie it
ſelfe begin to worke. As often
                  1. Cor. 11. verſ. 26. 27. 28. 29. 
                  as yee ſhall eat this bread (ſaith the
Apoſtle) and drinke this cup, yee ſhew the Lords death till hee come.
Wherefore whoſoeuer ſhall eate this bread, and drinke the cuppe of the
Lord vnworthily, ſhall bee guiltie of the bodie and bloud of the Lord.
Let a man therefore examine himſelfe, and ſo let him eate of this bread
and drinke of this cup. For he that eateth and drinketh vnworthily, eateth
and drinketh his owne damnation, becauſe hee diſcerneth not the
Lords bodie.
                  Praeterea declarat, hanc poteſtatem perpetuo in Eccleſia fuiſſe, vt in Sacramentorum diſpenſatione, ſalua illorum ſubſtantiâ ea ſtatueret, vel mutaret, quae ſuſcipientium vtilitati ſeu ipſorum Sacramentorum venerationi, pro rerum, temporum, & locorum varietate magis expedire iudicaret. Id autem Apostolus non obſcure viſus eſt inſinuaſſe, cum ait: Sic nos exiſtimet homo, vt miniſtros Chriſti & diſpenſatores myſteriorum Dei, atque ipſum quidem hac poteſtate vſum eſſe ſatis conſ
                        •
                     at cum in multis alijs tum in hoc ipſo Sacramento, cum ordinatis nonnullis circa eius vſum. 1. Corinth. 11. verſ. 34. Caetera (inquit) cum venero, diſponam, Concil. Trident. Seſſ. 2. Cap. 2. Yet vnto the Trent Councell Saint Paul in the

former place, where hee had no ſuch occaſion, as not ſpeaking
one word either of the Doctrine, neceſſitie, or vſe of the Sacraments
ſeemes to intimate, and that not obſcurely, the Churches
authoritie in diſpenſing them as the Trent Fathers haue done.
What then might euery Miniſter of Chriſt, euerie diſtributer of
Gods ſecrets, haue vſed the like authoritie, before the Church repreſentatiue did; at leaſt, by tacite conſent, approue the practiſe?
This place doubtleſſe proues, either altogether nothing, or thus
much, for the Apoſtles wordes are indefinite, for their litterall
ſence, equally appliable to euerie faithfull Miniſter, or priuate diſpenſer
of ſuch ſecrets; not appropriate to the intire publique bodie
Eccleſiaſtique, or the capitall or Cardinall partes thereof. Of
the Corinthians, to whom he wrote, one ſaid, I am Pauls, another
I am Apollos, the third I am of Cephas; all boaſting in the perſonal
excellencies of their firſt Parents in Chriſt, as the Papiſts now doe
in Saint Peters and his ſucceſſours Catholique Primacie. To aſſwage
theſe carnall humours in his children, their Father that
great Doctour of the Gentiles, ſeekes more in this, then in any other
place of all his Epiſtles, to debaſe himſelfe, and diminiſh
others high eſteeme either of his owne worth, or of his calling
1. Cor. 3. verſ. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 
                  Who is Paul then? and who is Apollos, but the Miniſters by whom
ye beleeued; and as the Lord gaue to euerie man? I haue planted, Apollos
watered, but God gaue the increaſe. So then, neither is he that planteth
any thing, neither hee that watereth, but God that giueth the encreaſe,
And he that planteth, and hee that watereth are one, and euery
man ſhall receiue his wages according to his labour. For wee together
are Gods labourers: ye are Gods husbandrie, and Gods building. And
after a ſerious incitement of maſter builders to fidelitie, with the
like admonition to Gods husbandrie, or building, not to reioyce in
men, he concludes as he had begun, Let euery man eſteeme vs (ſuch
as I haue ſaid) Miniſters of Chriſt and diſpoſers of the myſteries of
God. Of whom were they ſo to eſteeme? Of Saint Paul himſelfe,
and euery faithfull Miniſter. Doth he then intimate here any ſuch
prerogatiue aboue the meaneſt of his brethren, as the Romiſh
Cleargie vſurpes ouer the whole Chriſtian World? any authoritie
to prohibit, either the diſpenſors of Gods myſteries from adminiſtring,
or men ſo carnally minded as were theſe to whom he wrote
from communicating Chriſts bloud aſwell as his bodie? So the

Trent Fathers thinke; and, as if for their wilfull deniall of the
Lords cup vnto the people, the Lord had giuen them the cup of
giddineſſe, to caſt them into a Babiloniſh ſlumber whileſt they
conſulted about this decree; and their Scribes through retchleſſeneſſe
had written, what their rauing Maſters in their ſickly or
drunken dreames, had vttered: wee finde, in the ſame Decree,
another place of Saint Paul immediately annexed, though as diſproportionable
to the former (as it is placed in their diſcourſe) as
a mans head to an horſes necke, both as vnſutable to their intended
concluſion, as a ſuper addition of finnes or feathers would be,
to ſuch a monſtrous Hippocentaurique combination. The place
is Saint Pauls concluſion of that diſcourſe concerning the Sacrament,1. Corinth. 11. verſ. 34. 
                  Other thinges will I ſet in order when I come.
               
               16 Granting (what is not neceſſarie) hee ſpake of ordering
matters concerning this Sacrament: to receiue the wine, aſwell
as the bread, was no part of their preſent diſorder, whoſe miſbehauiour
at the Lords Table did miniſter mere iuſt occaſions to
Saint Paul, then long beardes did to the Councell of Conſtance,
to denie the vſe of the cup, might Chriſts bloud and bodie, which
he had iointly rendered to all, be vpon any occaſion iuſtly ſeuered
by man in the adminiſtration of his laſt Will and Teſtament.
Whatſoeuer the number or qualitie of the gueſts bee; the great
Lords Table muſt be alwaies ſo furniſhed as it was at the firſt inſtitution;
for he hath no reſpect of perſons. If a rich ſtately Prelate
come in with a gold ring in goodly veſtiments, & a poore honeſt
Layicke in vileraiments, he ſaith not to him in Pontificiall roabes,
come ſit you here at my meſſe, where you may drinke of my wine
aſwell as eate of my bread: nor to the poore Layicke, ſtand thou
there a part, or ſit downe here vnder my footſtoole, where thou
maiſt bee partaker of the crummes which fall from my table,
though not of my cup, which muſt be kept for thy betters. High
and low, rich and poore, all were redeemed with one price, all at
this offering equal, all alike free to taſt of euery diſh, ſo they come
with wedding garments, without which euen the beſt muſt
be caſt out, as vnworthie to taſt of any part, if not of all. That
part, which the Counſels of Conſtance and Trent, vpon pretences
of reuerence to the LORDS Supper, haue detained
from Moderne Chriſtians, the Corinthians had receiued

vnworthily; yet was not the Cuppe, for this reaſon, held ſuperfluous
by Saint Paul who onely ſought to repreſſe the abuſe, as
knowing the vſe of it to bee moſt neceſſarie. The matters then
hee meant to order, when he came, was, to ſet out this Heauenly
banquet with greater decencie and ſolemnitie, not to abridge
them, of any ſubſtantiall or materiall part thereof.
               17 Nor doe the Trent Fathers, if wee may truſt them vpon
theirCited in the precedent annotation: Parag. 15. words. For they (deſirous as it ſeemes to make the whole
Chriſtian World as ſottiſh, as themſelues were impious) would
make men beleeue, they could iuggle away the Cuppe, and neuer
touch the very ſubſtance of the Sacrament; as if the wine were
not as ſubſtantiall a part of the Lords Supper, as was his bloud of
his bodie, or humanitie. An integrall or materiall part they cannot
denie it to bee; and ſuch if it bee, there Apologie is as ſhameleſſe,
as if a man ſhould let out moſt of anothers bloud, cut of his
arme, or legge, or maime him in ſome principall part, and plead
for himſelfe, I did not meddle with his ſubſtance, meaning (as the
Councell I take it heere doth) his eſſence, ſeeing he is yet as truly
a reaſonable Creature, as before.
               18 But to debarre them of that refuge,That the Cup is an eſſentiall and ſubſtantial part of the Euchariſt. it may be they ſought or
their followers may yet hope to finde in the equiuocation of this
word, ſubſtance, importing as much ſometimes as a material, or integral,
ſometimes as an eſſential part. If the cup be an eſſential and
ſubſtantiall part of this Sacrament, the Councell by their owne
confeſſion did ſouly erre, in prohibiting Communion vnder both
kindes: If no ſuch part it bee, they might by their owne rule
haue altogether denied the vſe of it ſo much as to the ſacrificer,
or conſicient: but ſo the verie vſe and end, on which the eſſence
of the Sacrament, (as of all other matters of moral practiſe) immediatly
depends, and by whoſe expiration inſtantly muſt determine,
ſhould vtterly haue periſhed. The end and vſe of this ſacred
inſtitution, as our Sauiour expreſſely teacheth, and the Councell
grants, was to repreſent the teſtators death, yea ſo to repreſent
it, as we migh be partakers of his bodie and bloud, not ſpiritually
onely, but withall, (as the Trent Fathers contend) ſacramentally.
Admitting then all they can pretend againſt the neceſſitie
of the Cuppe [That whole Chriſt were in the bread
alone;] yet this will not preſerue the true and fruitfull vſe of

the Sacrament, nor ſalue that deadly wound, the eſſence of it muſt
perforce receiue from fruſtration of the end, neceſſarily enſuing
the cuppes abſence. For this Sacrament was ordained, as to repreſent,
ſo to exhibit Chriſts bodie, vnto all faithfull Communicants
not as intire, and whole; his bloud, not as it was incloſed
in the vaines: but the one, as torne and rent, the other, as ſhedde
and powred out vpon the croſſe. This is my bloud of the new Testament,
(ſaith our Sauiour) which is ſhed for many, (for all that receiue
it faithfully) for the remiſsion of ſinnes. His bloud then, as
ſhed and powred out, is as the loadſtarre of penitent and contrite
hearts, whereon the eyes of their faith, that ſeeke remiſſion of
ſinnes in this Sacrament, muſt bee faſtened: for (as theHeb. 9. 22. Apoſtle
ſaith) without ſheding of bloud is no remiſsion. This was the complement
of that ineſtimable all-ſufficient Sacrifice, that which repreſents
his precious bloud thus powred out, the principall part
of this Sacrament, aſwell in reſpect of repreſenting his death, as in
applying remiſſion of ſinnes thereby in generall purchaſed, and
by this Sacramentall Type ſealed to euery one in particular; eſpecially
if the Trent Councels Doctrine be true, that Chriſts verie
bloud, which was ſhed vpon the croſſe, is really preſent in the
Chalice, and might be as immediately ſprinkled at leaſt vpon the
lips or dores of euerie faithfull receiuers heart, as the bloud, of the
Paſchal Lambe was vpon the doore-poſts of the Iſraelites. Thus,
as Sathan the Father of lies, ſo falſe opinion, ſuggeſted by him,
draw men with pleaſure into thoſe euils, for whoſe practiſe in the
end they become their chiefe accuſers. That opinion which firſt
brought in neglect of the Chalice, and, as the Trent Councell
preſumed, would haue warranted them in making this decree,
doth moſt condemne them: for the meaſure of their iniquitie,
could not haue beene ſo fully accompliſhed, vnleſſe they had held
a tranſubſtantiation of the wine into Chriſts bloud.
               19 What part of Scripture, can wee preſume they will ſpare,
that dare thus countermand the moſt principal of all Gods Commandements?
what reckoning may wee thinke, they make of our
Sauiour Chriſt, that aduenture thus ſhamefully to diſanull and
cancell his laſt will and teſtament, defrauding almoſt the whole
Chriſtian World, of halfe their Lord and Maiſters royall allowance,
partly without any ſhew of Scriptures, either to reſtraine,

or otherwiſe interpret theſe Soueraigne precepts; partly vpon
ſuch idle and friuolous allegations, as may further witneſſe their
ſleight eſtimate of Gods Word, ſaue onely ſo farre, as it may bee
wreſted to ſerue their turnes.
               20 But grant the places there alleaged by the Councell,That the Trēt Fathers had preferred their own authoritie aboue the Scriptures, albeit the Scriptures they alleage for this decree, were as probable as theſe we bring againſt it. did
ſo mitigate either the forme of the inſtitution, or the peremptorie
manner of our Sauiours ſpeeches in the ſixth of Iohn, as to
make it diſputable in vnpartiall iudgements, whether they did
plainely inioyne any neceſſitie of communicating vnder both
kindes: the former decree notwithſtanding would manifeſtly inferre
an vſurpation of Soueraigntie 
                     •
                  uer Gods word, quite contrarie
to the generall Analogie of faith, reaſon, and conſcience;
by all which, in caſes doubtfull, and, for the ſpeculatiue forme
of truth, diſputable with eqall probabilitie, affirmatiuely or
negatiuely; wee are taught to frame our choice, when wee
come to practiſe, according to the difference of the matter, or
of conſequences, which may enſue, more dreadfull one way, then
the other, alwayes to preferre either a greater good before a leſſe,
or a leſſe euill before a greater, though both equally probable.
Suppoſe then theſe two contradictorie propoſitions, [The deniall
of the cup is a mutilation of Chriſts laſt will and teſtament: the deniall
of the cuppe is no mutilation of Chriſts laſt will, and Teſtament,] were,
for their ſpeculatiue probabilities, in iuſt examination, equipendent;
yet the doctrine of faith deliuered in Scripture, reaſon and
conſcience, without contradiction, inſtruct vs, that to alter, abrogate,
or mutilate the ſonne of Gods laſt will and teſtament, is a
moſt grieuous, moſt horrible, moſt dreadfull ſinne; but to permit
the vſe of the Chalice, hath no ſuſpition of any the leaſt euill
in it. Had the Trent Fathers thus done, they had done no worſe
then our Sauiour, then his Apoſtles, then the Primitiue Church,
(bySeſſ. 2
                        •
                     . Cap. 2. their owne confeſſion) did. This exceſſe of euill, without
all hope of any the leaſt compenſatiue good to follow vpon the
deniall, ſhould haue ſwaied them to that practiſe, which was infinitely
more ſafe, as not accompanied with any poſſibilitie or
ſhew of danger; although the ſpeculatiue probabilitie of anie
diuine precept neceſſarily inioyning the vſe of the cup, had beene
none. Thus peremptorily to aduenture vpon conſequences ſo
fearefull, whereto no contrarie feare could in reaſon impell, nor

hopes any way comparable allure them; thus imperiouſly to depriue
the whole Chriſtian World of a good, in their valuation,
(teſtified by their humble ſupplications and frequent embaſſages
to that Councell) ſo ineſtimable, without any other good poſſible
to redound vnto the deniers, ſaue onely vſurpation of Lordly
Dominion ouer Chriſts heritage; plainly euinceth, that the
Church is of farre greater authoritie with them, then GOD:
Word, either written in the Sacred Canon, or their hearts; then
all his Lawes, either ingrafted by nature, or poſitiue, and Supernaturall.
For,
               21 Admit this Church repreſentatiue had beene fully perſwaded
in conſcience rightly examined, and immediatly ruled by
Scripture, that the former decree did not preiudice the inſtitution,
vſe, or end of this Sacrament; yet moſt Chriſtians earneſt deſire
of the Cuppe, ſo publikely teſtified, could not ſuffer them to
ſleep in ignorance of that great ſcandall, the deniall of it needes
muſt giue to moſt inferiour particular Churches. Wherefore the
rule of charitie, that mooued the Father of the Gentiles to that ſerious
proteſtation.2. Cor. 8. ve. 13. Mat. 26. ver. 27. Sacroſancta oecumenica & generalis Tridentina Synodus, in ſpiritu ſancto legitimè congregata, praeſidentibus in ea eiſdem Apoſtolicae ſedis legatis, cum de tremendo, & ſanctiſſimo Euchariſtiae ſacramento varia diuerſis in locis. errorum mōſtra nequiſſimi damonis artibus circumferantur, ab quae in nonnullis prouintijs multi a Catholicae Eccleſiae 
                        •
                     ide atque obedientia uideantur diſceſſiſſe: Cenſuit ea, quae ad communionem ſub vtra
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſpecie, & par
                        •
                     ulorum pertinent, hoc loco exponenda eſſe; qua propter cunctis Chriſti fidelibꝰ interdicit, ne poſthac de ijs aliter vel credere vel docere, vel praedicare audeant quam eſt his decretis explicatum at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      definitum, Concil. Trid. Seſſ. 21. in Proaemio.
                   
                  If meate offend my brother, I will eate no fleſh
while the World ſtandeth, that I may not offend my brother: ſhould in
all equitie, diuine, or humane, haue wrought theſe Prelats hearts
to like profeſſion, If want of their ſpirituall drinke offend ſo many
Congregations, and ſuch a multitude of our brethren, we will rather not
vſe our lawfull authoritie acknowledged by all, then vſ
                        •
                     rp any that may
be offenſiue or ſuſpicious vnto others, though apparantly iuſt vnto our
ſelues: for they could not be more fully perſwaded, this decree was
iuſt then Saint Paul was that all meates were lawfull to him.
               22 But may we thinke theſe Prelates had no ſcruple of conſcience,
whether the very forme of this decree were not againſt our
Sauiours expreſſe command,2. Cor. 8. ve. 13. Mat. 26. ver. 27. Sacroſancta oecumenica & generalis Tridentina Synodus, in ſpiritu ſancto legitimè congregata, praeſidentibus in ea eiſdem Apoſtolicae ſedis legatis, cum de tremendo, & ſanctiſſimo Euchariſtiae ſacramento varia diuerſis in locis. errorum mōſtra nequiſſimi damonis artibus circumferantur, ab quae in nonnullis prouintijs multi a Catholicae Eccleſiae 
                        •
                     ide atque obedientia uideantur diſceſſiſſe: Cenſuit ea, quae ad communionem ſub vtra
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſpecie, & par
                        •
                     ulorum pertinent, hoc loco exponenda eſſe; qua propter cunctis Chriſti fidelibꝰ interdicit, ne poſthac de ijs aliter vel credere vel docere, vel praedicare audeant quam eſt his decretis explicatum at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      definitum, Concil. Trid. Seſſ. 21. in Proaemio.
                   
                  bibite ex hoc omnes, drinke yee all of
this: For mine owne part, whiles I call to minde, what elſe where I
haue obſerued, that the Iewes were neuer ſo peremptorie in their
deſpitefull cenſures of our Sauiours doctrine, nor ſo outragiouſly
bent againſt his perſon, as when their hearts were touched in part
with his myracles, or in ſome degree illuminated with the truth he
taught: The Councels extraordinary forwardneſſe to terrifie all

controuenaries of this decree, makes mee ſuſpect they were toe
conſcious of their own ſhallow pretended proofes to elude Gods
word, whoſe light and perſpicuitie in this point had exaſperated
their hardned hearts, and weake-ſighted faith, to be ſo outragious,
in the very beginning of that ſeſſion, as if they had meant to ſti
                     •
                  fle
their conſciences, and choake the truth, leſt theſe happily might
croſſe their proceedings, or controule their purpoſes, if this cauſe
ſhould once haue come to ſober and deliberate debatement, For,
as theeues oftentimes ſeeke to auoid apprehenſion by crying loudeſt,
turne the theefe; ſo theſe wolues hoped well to ſmother their
guilt, and preuent all notice taking of their impietie by their grieuous
exclamations againſt others monſtrous impious opinions in
this point interdicting all vpon penaltie of the cauſes following,
ere they had determined ought to teach, preach, or belieue otherwiſe
then they meant to determine.
               23 Yet,Cum ſacroſancta Synodus ſuperiori ſeſſione duos articulos, al
                        •••
                      propoſitos; & tū nondum diſcuſſos, videlicet; an rationes, quibus Sancta Catholica Eccleſia adducta fuit, vt communicaret laicos, atque etiam non celebrantes Sacerdotes, ſub vna panis ſpecie, ita ſint retinende, vt nulla ratione calicis vſus cuiquā ſit permi
                        ••
                     edus: Et, An, ſi honeſtis & chriſtianae charitati conſentaneis rationibus concedendus alicui vel nationi vel regno calicis vſus videatur, ſub aliquibus conditionibus concedendus ſit, & quaenam illae ſint, in aliud tempus, oblata ſibi occaſione, examinandas, atque deſiniendas reſeruauerit; nunc, eorum, pro quibus petitur, ſaluti optime conſultum volens, decreuit, intergrum negotium ad ſanctiſſimum Dominum noſtrum eſſe reſerendum, pro vt praeſenti decreto referti, qui pro ſua ſ
                        ••
                     ulari prudentia id efficiat, quod vtile reipublicae Chriſtianae & ſalutare petentibus vſum cal
                        •
                     cis ſore iudicauerit. Concil. Trident. viceſſima ſecunda Seſſione in decreto ſuper petit: de conceſſione Calicis.
                   though the Councell accurſe all that holde communication
vnder both kindes as a neceſſarie Doctrine, it doth not
abſolutely inhibit all vſe of the Chalice, but leaues it free vnto
their Lord the Pope to grant it, vpon what Conditions he pleaſe,
either vnto priuate men, or whole Nations, vpon what conditions
then, may wee preſume, will it pleaſe his Holineſſe for to
grant it? vpon any better then Satan tendered all the Kingdomes
of the Earth vnto our Sauiour? for this fained ſeruant of Chriſt,
a true Gehazi, repining at his Lord and Maſters ſimplicitie, that
could refuſe ſo faire a profer, made after Sathan in all haſt, ſaying,
in his heart, I will ſurely take ſomewhat of him, though my Maſter
ſpared him; and, pretending, a meſſage in his name, to whom
all power was giuen in Heauen and in earth, hath got an intereſt
in the chiefe Kingdomes of the World diſpoſing ſuch as hee can
beſt ſpare, or worſt manage, to any potent Prince, that will fall
downe and worſhip him and his copartner the Prince of darkeneſſe;

who, of late yeares, haue almoſt ſhared the whole World
betwixt them; the one ruling ouer infidels, the other ouer profeſſed
Chriſtians. And ſeeing the Pope (becauſe his pompe and dignitie
muſt bee maintained by Worldly wealth and reuenewes)
dares not part with the proprietie of ſo many Kingdomes at
once, as Sathan (who onely lookes for honour) profered; hee
hath found out a tricke to ſupply his wants, for purchaſing like
honour and worſhip, by his office of keeping Saint Peters keyes,
if earthly Prouinces or Dominions faile him, Gods Word, his
ſonnes bloud and bodie, all, ſhall be ſet to ſale, at this price, Fall
downe and worſhip him. For no man, we may reſt aſſured, no Nation
or Kingdome, whom hee can hinder, ſhall euer taſt of the
Lords Cup, vnleſſe they will firſt acknowledge lawfull authoritie
in him, to grant, denie, or diſpoſe of it, at his pleaſure; which is
an homage wherewith the Deuill is more delighted, then if wee
did acknowledge him Supreme Lord of all the Kingdomes of the
Earth: for that were as much leſſe preiudiciall to Chriſts prerogatiue
royall, as a damage in poſſeſſion or goods would bee to a
perſonall diſgrace, or ſome foule maime or deformitie wrought
vpon a Princes bodie.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               Propounding what poſsibly can bee ſaid on our aduerſaries behalfe for
auoiding the force of the former arguments: and ſhewing withall
the ſpeciall points that lie vpon them to prooue, as principally, whether
their beliefe of the Churches authoritie can bee reſolued into any
diuine teſtimonie.
               1 VNto all the difficulties hitherto propoſed, I can
rather wiſh ſome learned Prieſt or Ieſuit would,
then hope any ſuch euer will directly anſwere
point by point. For the Readers better ſatisfaction
I will firſt briefly ſet downe, what poſſibly
can be ſaid on their behalfe, and, after a diſcloſure of their laſt ſecret
refuge, draw forth thence the dead & putrified carkaſſe of Romiſh
faith; which vnto the ignorant and ſuperſtitious, that cannot

vncouer the holes and clefts wherein theſe impoſtors vpon euery
ſearch are wont to hide it, may yet ſeeme to liue and breath; as
the fable went of Saint Iohn the Euangeliſts bodie, after many
yeares repoſall in the graue; or as the blinded Iewes to this day
bragge, the ſcepter of Iudah yet flouriſheth, beyond Babilon in
Media, or ſome vnknowne part of India, whither no European
is likely to reſort for a diſprouall of his relation.
               2 Vnto the demonſtratiue euidences aſwell of their errour in
expounding Scriptures pretended for, as of other Scriptures rightly
alleaged by vs againſt their former or like decrees, they will be
readie to oppoſe what Bellarmine hath * done,Cap. 10. 
                  That the Church
muſt iudge of Scriptures euidence, and priuate errours in expounding
it, not priuate men of the Churches expoſitions. Vnto the obiected
dreadfull conſequences of their decrees, (could theſe poſſibly be
erroneous) they would regeſt diſobedience to the Church; that
to diſobey it is to diſobey God, Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghoſt,
a ſinne as hanious as mangling of Chriſts laſt will and Teſtament,
as Idolatrie. On the contrarie, to obey the Church euen in
her negatiue decrees and naked deciſions, vngarded with any
pretence of Scripture, (much more where this louing Mother,
for the education of her children will vouchſafe, what ſhee
need not, to alleage ſome clauſe or ſentence of Holy writ,) we
obey not the Church onely but Gods Word alſo, though not in
thoſe particular places, which in our iudgements either contradict
the former, or like decrees, or elſe make nothing at all for
them; yet in textes produced for the Churches tranſcendent generall
authoritie. As he that adores the conſecrated hoſte in proceſſion,
becauſe his holy Mother commands him ſo to doe, or accoūts
wāt of Chriſts bloud no loſſe, becauſe denied him by her authoritie;
although vnto priuate ſpirits he may ſeeme to contradict
that Law,Deut. 6. 13. Luke 4. 8. 
                  Thou ſhalt worſhip the Lord thy God, and him onely ſhalt
thou ſerue: doth yet ſincerely obey the Holy Ghoſt, and rightly
obſerue the true ſence and meaning of theſe his dictates, Peter I
haue prayed for thee, that faith ſhould not faile, Peter feed my ſheep, Thou
art Peter, and vpon this rocke will I build my Church. From theſe places
once firmely beleeuing the Church poſſibly cannot erre, hee
muſt not queſtion, whether the practiſes by it inioyned contradict
the former lawes both being deliuered by the holy ſpirit, who

can not contradict himelfe. This I take it, is the ſumme of all, the
moſt learned of our aduerſaries can or would reply vnto the former
difficulties.
               Not to draw faſter, but rather remitting theVide Lib. 2. Sect. 4. Cap. 5. former bonds,
wherein they haue inextricably intangled themſelues, by their
circular progreſſe in their reſolution of faith; admit their late doctrine
leſt any poſſibilitie of knowing Scriptures, acknowledged
by both to bee Gods word, or of diſtinguiſhing humane teſtimonies
(written or vnwritten) from diuine: The preſent queſtion we
may draw (with their free conſent) vnto this iſſue; whether their
beleef of the Churches infallible authoritie, vndoubtedly eſtabliſhed,
as they pretend, in the fore cited places, can bee truly reſolued
into any branch of the firſt truth, or into humane teſtimonies
onely. If into the latter onely, the caſe is cleare, that abſolutely
obeying the Romiſh Church, in the former or like decrees,
(which her authoritie ſet aſide) to all or moſt mens conſciences
would ſeeme to contradict Gods principall lawes; wee beleeue,
and in beleeuing obey men more then God; humane authorities,
lawes, or teſtimonies more then diuine.
               4 The ſtrength or feebleneſſe of Romane faith will beſt appeare,
if wee trie it in any one of theſe ioynts Whether by Diuine
teſtimonie it can bee proued, that Saint Peter had ſuch an vniuerſall,
infallibe, abſolute authoritie, as theſe men attribute vnto
the Pope: Whether by like infallible teſtimonie it can bee proued,
the Popes from time to time, without exception were Peters
vndoubted ſucceſſors, heires apparant to all the preheminencies,
or prerogatiues he inioyed: Whether either the ſoueraigntie or vniuerſalitie
of their authoritie, ſuppoſed probable in it ſelfe, or to
themſelues; or particular iniunctions deriued from it can bee ſo
fully notified to all Chriſtians, as they neede not queſtion, whether
in yeelding obedience to ſuch decrees, of like conſequences
as were the former, they doe not grieuouſly diſobey Gods Word.
For though the Popes themſelues might know this truth by Diuine
reuelation, or otherwiſe, their internall aſſurance, vnleſſe
generally communicable by diuine teſtimonies, could be no warrant
vnto others, for vndertaking matters of feareful conſequences,
whereof they doubt, not onely out of ſecret inſtinct or grudging
of their conſciences, but from an apprehenſion of oppoſition

betwixt the very formes of lawes papall,Peter was no the Church. Math. 18. v. 15. and diuine.
               5. Firſt, it is improbable, that he to whom our Sauiour ſaid;
If thy brother treſpaſse againſt thee, di
                        •
                      Eccleſiae, was theBell. lib. 
                        •
                      de P
                        •
                     nt. Rom 5
                        •
                     . cap. 12. Qu
                        •
                     e d
                        •
                     cuntu
                        •
                      Petro vt vni ex fidelibus 
                        •
                     erte omnibus, fidel
                        •
                     bus dicta intell
                        •
                     guntur: vt Mat. 18. Si peccauerit 
                        〈…〉
                     . &c. By this reaſon then the Pope muſt appeale to the Church; who then are ment by the church? Reſpondemus (ſayth Bellarmin els where) illud di
                        •
                      Eccleſiae, ſignificare de
                        •
                     er ad publicum Eccleſiae iuditium. i. ad eos qui publicam perſonam in Eccleſia gerunt. Bellar. lib. 1. de Pontif. Rom c. 6. So that if any man offend the Pope, the cauſe muſt come to be decided, by himſelfe, as a publike perſon.
                   Church vnto
which all muſt, from which none may appeale: Or, if Peter,
the Pope if he will be Peters ſucceſſor muſt, in cauſes of controuerſie
appeale vnto the Church. How is he then, as our aduerſaries
contend, the Church, or ſuch a part of it, vnto whom all, euen
Peter himſelfe (were he aliue) muſt appeale? Muſt others appeale
to him, as Iudge, in his owne cauſe? or he vnto himſelfe alone?
Not as alone, but (ſo a late Papiſt, to my remembrance,
anſweres Gerſon) as accompanied with his fellow Conſull, his
Chaire, which is to him, as Caeſar was to Iulius: and ſo ſhall Gods
word be to both; as Bibulus was to Iulius Caeſar, a meere pretence,
or bare name of authority, nothing elſe. Yet if that word auouch,
that neither S. Peters, or his ſucceſſors faith, could euer faile in determining,
controuerſies, we contradict it, not the Popes deciſions
only, if we doe not in all doubtfull doctrines fully rely vpon
them.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               That neither our Sauiours prayers, for the not fayling of Peters faith:
Luke 22, ver. 32. nor his commending his ſheepe vnto his feeding:
Ioh. 21. ver. 15 proue any ſupremacy in Peter ouer the Church,
from which the authority of the Pope cannot, with probability, be deriued.
               1. IS it then probable,Our Sauiours praiers for S. Peter did not beſtow vpon him any oecumeniall Souereigne authority, abſolutely infallible in ſuch ſence as the Romaniſt, would make the Popes. our Sauiors praiers, for Saint
Peter did collate any authority vpon him, either
oecumenicall for extent, or ſouereigne for others
dependence on it; or abſolutely, and perpetually
infallible for time, without integritie
of life, or other condition: beſides ſuch cathedrall conſultation,
as is required in the Pope to ſupport it? Rather the proper effect
they aymed at, was an extraordinary aſſiſtance in the practiſe of
ſuch points, as already had been, or afterwards ſhould be reuealed

vnto him. Our Sauiour while he vttered them, did cleerely
foreſee all his followers ſhould be ſifted by Sathan, he that profeſſed
greateſt loue and reſolution more then all the reſt, in ſuch
fearefull ſort, that without this promiſed ſupportance, his faith
had vtterly fayled: which though afterwards it proued much
ſtronger, by this ſhaking, yet whether ſtronger then was any of
his fellowes, is vncertaine, moſt vnfit to be diſputed: Howſoeuer,
no circumſtance in that place prognoſticates, or aboods
ſuch extraordinary future ſtrength, rather all ſuppoſe for the preſent,
a peculiar neceſſity of his Maſters prayers for him, as foreſeeing
his tripping (to vſe the mildeſt cenſure) would be ſo dangerous,
as the memoriall of his recouery, might be a perpetuall
incouragement to all back ſliders, againſt diſtruſt of Gods mercies.
No man ſo ſit to raiſe vp ſuch as are fallen,The admirable vſe of Peters fall foreſeene by the all-ſeeing wiſdome of God. or wallow in the
filth of ſinne, as he that hath firmely apprehended grace from aboue
(or rather is ſo apprehended by it) and yet can withall, out
of a ſincere and humble acknowledgement of his relapſes, ſtoop
lower then others in ſpirituall graces his inferiors, and as it were
let himſelfe into the pit of deſpaire, wherein ſinners lie linking
their preſent frailty in his owne forepaſſed infirmities. It much
diſagrees with my temper, euer to exaggerate the ſinnes of Gods
Saints; yea, I thinke the deniall of Chriſt was leſſe ſinfull in Saint
Peter, then the like would be in many others, that haue receiued
leſſe grace, becauſe the temptation was aboue meaſureNot in reſpect of danger repreſented (which was but death) but of extraordinary licence at that time granted to the power of darkneſſe. extraordinary
permitted (no doubt) to this end, that he might be a more
faithfull comforter of his brethren; whoſe faith was feeble, crazed,
or decayed. He that hopes with fruite to reprehend, or exhort
men much daunted, or aſhamed at the fowleneſſe of their
offences, muſt as farre as truth will ſuffer him, acknowledge himſelfe
to be a ſharer in his owne reproofes; to haue been ſometimes
tainted with the originall of their preſent griefe: for ſo
the parties grieued will be leſſe iealous, and conceit the medicine
better. Thus the royall hoſt, in the Poet, cheeres vp his Princely
gueſt, amated at the mention of his infamous anceſtors;

                     Ne perge queri caſuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                        Statius lib. 1. Theb. priorum
                     Annumerare tibi: Noſtro quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſanguine multum
                     Errauit pietas, nec culpa nepotibus obſtet.
                     
                        
Tu modo diſsimilis rebus mereare ſecundis
                     Excuſare tuas.—
                  
                  
                     Did Parents ſhame their children ſtaine, ſweet Prince thy caſe
were mine:
                     For Piety, ſometimes, her courſe did alter from our line,
                     The blemiſh though did not deſcend. Let vertue be thy guide;
                     So ſhall thy ſame, thy Parents faults, though fowle and monſtrous
hide.
                  
               
               2. By theſe, and like circumſtances, may our Sauiors words,
[But I haue prayed for thee that thy faith faile not: Therefore when
thou art conuerted ſtrengthen thy brethren] be conſtrued moſt appoſitely
to his meaning. What was it then Peter was to ſtrengthen
in others?
                     Petrus non errauit circa fidē, ſed tantum aliquid ignorauit, cum audiuit: Vade Satana, & à charitate excidit non à fide, quando Chriſtum negauit. Quod in tractatu de Eccleſia ſuo loc
                           •
                         docebimus. Bellar. lib. 1. de Rom. Pontif. In thoſe books of, his de Eccleſia, the Reader ſhall finde the place alleaged totidem verbis. Bellarmine as moſt of his fellowes, denie that Peter was the Churches foundation as yet: but their readineſſe to defend the indeficiencie of his faith in this deniall, argues, they muſt of neceſſitie holde, that the Popes faith doth neuer faile, albeit he vſually manifeſted as great want of chriſtian charity and reſolution, as Peter did in that deniall; or, as great ignorance in diuine myſteries as Peters was, when our Sauiour ſayd vnto him: go behinde me Satan, vpon Peters affection at that time is the Romiſh faith, as appeares in the latter end of this chapter. That which had been defectiue in himſelfe. Was
that his charity, his faith, or both? Wee reade (ſayth Bellarmine)
Peters charity did faile, that his faith did faile wee neuer read. In
vaine then doth Bellarmine, in vaine do all his fellowes labour, to
proue our Sauiour ſhould in theſe words ratifie a perpetually indeficient
puritie of Roman faith? for Peter was to repaire in others
what had been impaired in himſelfe; to preuent, if it were
poſſible, the like fall in ſuch as did, or to themſelues did ſeeme
to ſtand; to conuert, reſtore and ſtrengthen ſuch, as in like, or
worſe ſort had denyed their Redeemer. With much greater probability,
might the Romaniſts ſeeke to eſtabliſh a perpetuall indeficient
Chriſtian charity in Peters ſucceſſors, had Peters loue,
or charity only failed. But the bad liues and manners of the Roman
Clergie, would giue too manifeſt euidence againſt them in
this attempt: In this reſpect haue theſe ſtout challengers taken
vpon them the defence, of a neuer failing faith, becauſe not ſo eaſily
confuted. For, it is a matter very hard (I muſt confeſſe) to
prooue, that faith can neuer faile, which may deny Chriſt, ſo formally
and conſtantly as Peters did, without defect. The beſt is,

that by their owne confeſſion this place can proue, the acts or exerciſes
of Romane faith to be no better, then S. Peters was in this
deniall of Chriſt. His offence, they grant, was foule, but his faith
without defect. So may Popes be monſtrouſly luxurious in their
liues, but alwaies infallible in their Doctrine. Reader, conſult with
thine owne heart, and giue ſentence (as in the ſight of God) of
the whole frame of their Religion, by the foundation; and of the
foundation (ſuch as they willingly acknowledge faith to be of all
true Religion and euerie Chriſtian vertue) by Bellarmines teſtimonie.
If Peter became (as they pretend) the fundamentall rocke, by
confeſſing: that Religion doubtles, which hath no better ground
of infallibilitie, then Peters faith not ſecured from a threefold deniall
of Chriſt, our Confeſſion, was firſt planted by the Spirit of
error, and of Antichriſt.
               3 Not to diſpute any longer, what it was, but who they were
Saint Peter was to ſtrengthen: all without exceptions. This iuſtly
may ſeeme impoſſible, ſeeing the exerciſe of his Miniſterie
could not extend to all Nations, much leſſe vnto all ages. Yet
theſe wordes bequeath no hereditarie royall iuriſdiction ouer all
perſons, but rather inioyne perſonall acts of penetencie vnto
Saint Peter, for his former perſonall offence. He had found extraordinarie
mercie at his Lord and Maſters hands; and was to communicate
the like vnto his fellow ſeruants more guiltie of his offence.
Chriſt, after his faith had failed did conuert and ſtrengthen
him againſt the like temptation; and he, conuerted, was commanded
to conuert and ſtrengthen others. Whom? Not ſuch as by
conuerſion might become his brethren, or rather his children in
Chriſt; but rather ſuch, as were hewen out of the ſame roke, and
could truly call Abraham their father, Sira their Mother, ioinct
profeſſors with him of Moſes Law and the Prophets, more then
his brethren and aſſociates, in denying him, of whom Moſes and
all the Prophets bare teſtimonie.
               4 To ſubtract all matter of calumniation from men, too
much diſpoſed to cauill without any probable cauſe, or iuſt occaſion:
notwithſtanding his threefold deniall of Chriſt, I denie not
a triple or quadruple prerogatiue in Peter, in reſpect of Chriſts other
Apoſtles; yet conſiſting, not in any authoritie more infallible
in it ſelfe, or more ſoueraigne for ſuperioritie, ouer ſuch as

were to depend vpon him as a chiefe meſſenger of the Lord of
Hoſtes, but in an extraordinarie efficacie of his ordinarie Apoſtle-ſhip.
In what reſpect then was his ordinarie Miniſterie or
Apoſtles-ſhip, ſo extraordinarily powerfull? In reſpect of the vniuerſall
Church throughout all ages, of the Iewiſh Synagogue,
for the time being onely. S. Paul confutes the former as euidently
as he plainly auoucheth the later,Gal. 2. v. 7. 8. 9 
                  When they ſaw the Goſpell ouer
the vncircumciſion was committed vnto me, as the Goſpell ouer the circumciſion
was vnto Peter (For he that was mightie by Peter in the Apoſtle-ſhip
ouer the circumciſion, was alſo mightie by me toward the Gentiles)
Iames and Cephas and Iohn, which were counted to bee pillars,
knew of the grace that was giuen vnto me, they gaue to me and to Barnabas
the right handes of fellowſhip, that wee ſhould preach vnto the
Gentiles and they vnto the circumciſion.
               
               5 Here the leſſe in ſpeech I amplifie,S. Peters extraordinary power and efficacy in conuerting the circumciſion. the more in heart and
mind I tacitely admire the vnſpeakeable power & wiſdom of our
God, that by the extraordinarie offences, or infirmities of one or
two, cauſe firmely eſtabliſh the faith of all his Saints. Albeit hee
vſed the Miniſterie of euery other Apoſtle, in reconciling the
world vnto himſelfe: yet Paul and Peter were as the two principall
intermediate elements, proportioned and qualified of purpoſe,
for the more apt connecting this mixt inferiour Globe with the
Heauenly Sphere, the ſonnes of men with the ſonne of God; the
one by ſymbolizing with the Iew, the other with the Gentile in
his ſinne, both with Chriſt in true wiſedome, in all good gifts and
graces of the ſpirit. Saint Paules offences againſt God manifeſted
in the fleſh, haue the ſame proportion to Saint Peters, that the ignorance,
infidelitie or idolatrie of the Gentiles had with the
Iewes delinquencie, or Apoſtacie from the God of their Fathers.
Saint Paul had not known our Sauiour in the fleſh, ignorant of his
wiſedom in teaching, or power in working, and in his ignorant
zeale vnto Moſes and the Law, did perſecute his followers and diſciples
after his reſurrection; hereby made a 
                     •
                  itter Symbole for reconciling
the Gentiles vnto God, whom they had not knowne, vſually
miſled in a blind deuotion to their dumbe Idols and traditions
of their elders, to hate and perſecute the Iewes, the onely profeſſors
of true Religion, the onely ſeruants till that time of the euerliuing

God. Saint Peter had long conuerſed with our Sauiour,
heard him teach as neuer man taught, ſeene him doe what no man
elſe could euer doe, his eyes had beheld the brightneſſe of his excellent
glorie, and, out of his apprehenſion of his Deitie hee had
profeſſed more then ordinarie loue,Luk. 22. 33. 
                  Lord I am readie to goe
with thee into Priſon, and to death: yet when he comes vnto his triall,
flartly denies that euer hee knew him; hereby more fitly qualified
for recouering the backſliding Apoſtaticall Iewes, who had
knowne the Lord, and all the wonders which he had wrought for
Iſrael: they had profeſſed ſuch loue and loyaltie to him, as no people
could doe no more vnto their Gods; poſteritie ſtill retaining
the proteſtations of their Religious fathers; All this is come vpon
vs, yet doe we not forget thee, neither deale we falſely concerning thy couenant.
Our hearts not not turned backe: neither our ſteppes gone out
of thy pathes. Surely for thy ſake are we ſlaine continually, and are counted
as Sheep for the ſlaughter: Yet when hee came in the ſimilitude
of man to exact obedience and a leageance at their handes, they
will not know him; but, as Samuel had foretold, caſt him off from
raigning ouer them, and openly proteſt againſt him; Wee haue no
King but Caeſar.
               6 Anſwerable to this obſeruation is the ſucceſſe of their Apoſtleſhip,
regiſtred by the Euangeliſt. We neuer read ſo manie
Iewes, at once ſo throughly conuerted by our Sauiour, or ſo ſeriouſly
affected with his Doctrine in his life time, as with that memorable

                     Act. 2. ver 15. vnto the end of the chapter. Vid. Acts 3. ver. 12. to the 13. verſe of the 4. chapter. ſermon of Saint Peter. The manner, of his reiterated
appellations, Yee men of Iudea, and yee all that inhabit Ieruſalem,
ye men of Iſrael,
                  Vide Act. 3. verſ. 25. 
                  Men and Brethren; of mentioning Gods
promiſes made to them, and to their children; of his reply; his
earneſt beſeeching and exhorting them, that had appealed ioinctly
to him, and the other Apoſtles: argue, theſe were the brethren,
he in particular was enioyned to conuert, confirme & ſtrengthen.
And like a skilful Surgeon, that knew by his own recouery how to
pricke their conſciences, without giuing them a deadly wound, he
preſſeth them in the laſt place, with crucifying the Lord of glory.
The mention whereof had beene enough in anothers iudgement,
to haue mooued them to diſpaire: but this comforter knew by
experience, that to be throughly toucht in heart, as he had beene,
for ſuch foule offences paſt, was the readieſt way to that true repentance,

which he found, and ſuch repentance the ſureſt holdfaſt
of liuely faith. But he that was thus powerful in the circumciſion,
became a ſtone of offence vnto the Gentiles, with whom he had
to deale at Antioch. For by his tripping in an vncouth way, (as
being out of his naturall element) hee made them ſtumble, iuſtly
reproued, for his amphibious conuerſation with men of tempers
ſo contrarie, by Saint Paul; vnder whoſe hand the edification of
the Gentiles did better proſper. Yet hee nothing ſo powerfull in
conuerting the Iewes,Saint Pauls extraordinarie power and efficacie in winning the Gentiles vnto Chriſt. though his zeale towardes them was no
leſſe then Saint Peters was; his endeuours, to ſow the ſeed of life
in their hearts, as great but with ſmall hope of ſeeing any fruit of
his labours. But it will bee worth the Readers paines, I am perſwaded,
to obſerue; that albeit hee preſſe the Iewes at Antioch
with the very ſame arguments, (but more forcibly and artificially
framed) wherewith Saint Peter had conuerted ſo many, yet is enforced
to make a contrarie concluſion. Peter concludes in hope
prognoſticating ſucceſſe, Amend your liues, and be baptized euerie
one of you in the name of Ieſus Christ, for the remiſsion of ſinnes, and
yee ſhall receiue the gifts of the Holy Ghoſt; For the promiſe is made
vnto you and to your children. And the ſame day were added to the
Church about three thouſand ſoules.
                  See the like ſucceſſe of his preaching. Acts 4. verſe 4. Saint Paul, for concluſion, takes
his farewell of them, as no part of his peculiar charge; onely telles
them it was his, and his fellow Barnabas dutie, to admoniſh them.
Then Paul and Barnabas ſpake boldly, and ſaid, It was neceſſarie that
the word of God ſhould firſt haue beene ſpoken vnto you: but ſeeing you
put it from you, and iudge your ſelues vnworthie of euerlaſting life, loe,
we turne to the Gentiles. For ſo hath the Lord commanded vs; ſaying
I haue made thee a light of the Gentiles, that thou ſhouldeſt bee the ſaluation
vnto the end of the World. And when the Gentiles heard it, they
were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many, as were ordained
vnto eternall life, beleeued. Thus the Word of the Lord was publiſhed
thoughout the whole Countrie: But the Iewes ſtirred certaine deuout
and honourable women, and the chiefe men of the Citie and raiſed
perſecution againſt Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their
Co
                        •
                     ſts.
               
               7 Thus it is as true of graces, as natures ordination, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  :
the power & efficacy of Chriſts chiefe Apoſtles, is reſtrained vnto
their proper and limited Sphere; God alwayes bleſſing thoſe endeuours

beſt, that are imployed within the precincts of that peculiar
charge whereto hee apoints vs. By that which hath beene
ſaid it may appeare, that Saint Peters and Saint Paules prerogatiues,
how great ſoeuer, were both perſonall, to expire with
themſelues; although a title of ſupremacie ouer the Gentiles
might be pretended, with much greater probabilitie from S. Paul
then from S. Peter, whoſe peculiar charge was the Iew; as may be
yet further manifeſted by the place moſt vrged for his, his & Succeſſors
oecumenicall iuriſdiction, bequeathed, as the Romaniſts
ſuppoſe, in theſe words,Who were the ſheepe Peter was principally appointed to feed, and what authority hee had ouer them. Peter feed my lābes, Peter feed my ſheep, &c.
               
               8 But the naturall circumſtances of that place compared with
the late expoſition of the former, deads all their blowes, thence
intended againſt vs, ere they can rightly frame themſelues to fetch
them. A little before theſe wordes were vttered, deſirous to approoue
his exceſſiue loue to our Sauiour, and manifeſt more then
an ordinrie deſire of his companie (that had appeared vnknowne
vnto him, but from Iohns notification) girt his coat about him,
and caſt himſelfe into the Sea, whiles the other Diſciples (not aboue
two hundred Cubits from Land) came by ſhip to meet him.
After a ſhort dinner paſſed, as the text ſeemes to inſinuate, in ſilence;
Ieſus ſaid vnto them, come & dine & none of the Diſciples durſt aske him who art thou? ſeeing they knew he was the Lord. Ioh. 11. 12 at leaſt not entertained with ſuch varietie of diſcourſe,
as might either interrupt ſome priuate intimation made to Peter
of future conference, or put the former occaſion of this following
exhortation out of the other Apoſtles memorie: our Sauiour
enioynes Simon the ſonne of Iona, to feed his Lambes, againe
and againe to feed his Sheep. He ſee him then like a louing Souldier,
deſirous, by his aduenturous approach vnto him, to recouer
his formerr reputation, much impaired by denying him. Whether
our Sauiour checke or cheriſh this deſires I queſtion not;
much leſſe determine. His ſpeeches, with the former circumſtances,
import thus much, Thou haſt made profeſſion of more
then ordinarie loue vnto mee of readineſſe to lay downe thy life
for my ſake, though all others, euen theſe thy fellowes, ſhould
forſake me; willing I ſee thee, by thy preſent hazard of it, to make
thy former wordes good. But wouldeſt thou haue mee yet to
ſhewe thee a more excellent way? I haue tolde thee it long
ſince thou art conuerted, ſtrengthen thy Brethren, SIMON the
Sonne of IONA, if thou deſire to prooue thy ſelfe a CEPHAS,

or teſtifie the ſincerittie of thy faith and loue, which by the powers
of darkeneſſe were of late ſo grieuouſly ſhaken, feed my Lambes,
feed my ſheepe: yea, ſeeing thou thrice deniedſt the Shepheard of
thy ſoule, I ſay vnto thee the third time, feede my ſheepe. Let
the memorie of thy forepaſſed threefolde ſinne, alſo let this
ſame my preſent threefolde admonition, excite thee vnto triple
diligence in thy charge; to ſhew ſuch pittie and compaſſion,
as I haue ſhewed to thee, vnto that loſt and ſcattered
Flocke, which haue denyed mee, or conſented to my crucifying.
Let thy faithfull performance of what I requeſt thee at my farewell,
bee the firſt teſtimonie of thy loue to mee, to be laſtly teſtified
by the loſſe of thy life, which thou didſt promiſe mee when I
gaue mine for my ſheep, but ſhalt not pay vntill thou haſt fulfilled
this my requeſt;Iohn 21. v. 18. 
                  Verily verily I ſay vnto thee, when thou waſt
yong, thou girdeſt thy ſelfe, and walkedſt whither thou would
                  Thus much it ſeemes Peter did prophecie vnaware. Iohn 13. v. 37. but failed in application of the time. So our Sauiour ſaith Thou canſt not follow mee now, but thou ſhalt follow me afterward: as well in death as in life after death. 
                  but
when thou ſhalt be old, thou ſhalt ſtretch forth thine hands and another
ſhall gird thee and leade thee whither thou woulddeſt not.
               
               9 But here Bellarmine, alwayes exceeding wittie, either to elude
Scriptures, whoſe naturall meaning is euidently againſt him,
or to collect a gulling ſence from ſuch, as nothing at all make for
him, would inferre that the poſſeſſiue,Deinde aliam rationem eam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      inſignem nobis ſuppeditat pronomen illud, Meas. Nam cum abſque vlla reſtrictione addatur ad nomen, 
                        •
                     
                     ues pronomen, Meas Manifeſte ſignificatur eas omnes Petro commendari, ad quas extenditur pronomen, Meas; certum eſt autem illud, Meas extendi ad omnes ſimpliciter. Nec enim vllus eſt in Eccleſia, qui ſe Chriſti ouem eſſe non glorietur: igitur omnes omnino Chriſtianos nullo excepto, Petro Dominus commendauit. Bellar. de Rom. Pont. Lib. 1. Cap. 16. 
                  My neceſſarily referres
Peters charge, or iuriſdiction, vnto all the flocke that called
Chriſt their Lord, owner. For ſeeing after his reſurrection there
was but one Fold; for this great Shepheard to ſay; My ſheepe,
could not diſtinguiſh one ſort from another; and therefore none
to be exempted from Peters ouerſight. But the Flocke though
one in reſpect of the owner, which had purchaſed all with one
price, did conſiſt of ſheep much different in breeding, and retaining
their ſeuerall markes; ſome were of the circumciſion, others
of the vncircumciſion; the former had beene our Sauiours peculiar
charge in his life time, (for he was not ſent but vnto the loſt-ſheep
of Iſrael;) theſe he might with note of diſtinction, call My ſheepe.
As if a Shepheard, raiſed to better fortunes, ſhould purchaſe a
great many more ſheep, then hee was wont to looke to himſelfe

and referre both ſorts to ſeuerall keepers, though both to Fold
together in the euening, he might Signanter ſay to the one, looke
well to my ſheep: though both Flockes were his by right of poſſeſſion;
but onely the one his, by a peculiar relation of former
charge or ouer ſight. And thus, as we haue ſaid before, the Iewes
were committed peculiarly to Saint Peters care. Albeit, conſonantly
to the former expoſition of both places alleadged, our Sauiour
by My ſheepe, might onely intimate his tender care ouer his
flocke, without diſtinction; that Peter might more carefully feed
as many as he could perſonally looke to, ſeeing the proofe of his
loue to his Lord and Maſter, and of his fidelitie which had failed,
did conſiſt herein. As for Bellarmines other collections, that our
Sauiour, by mentioning his ſheep, ſhould meane Prelates or Superiours;
by his little ſheep (ſo their vulgar diſtinguiſheth,) inferiour
paſtors;Vide Bellar. de Rom. Pont lib. 1. cap. 16. by his lambes, mere Layickes, ſuch as haue Fathers
but no children in Chriſt: they onely proue that in this light of
the Goſpell, there is a generation of men profeſſing Chriſtianitie,
yet as apt as groſſely to transforme Chriſts Spirituall loue, as
the Heathen did his fathers glorie, into the ſimilitude of their carnall
corrupt affections.
               10 If it may ſtand with Chriſtian ſobrietie, ſo preciſely to determine
of particular differences implied in theſe words; it is moſt
likely our Sauiour meant to include all ſorts of people, according
to the different care their diuers eſtates required: ſome were to
be tenderly handled and cheriſhed like lambes; others to be lookt
vnto like elder ſheep, and to be fed with ſtronger meate, but with
leſſe perſonall or aſſiduous attendance. There is no one kind of
argument perſwades me more, the Romiſh Church is led by the
Spirit of errour, then whiles I obſerue, how they ſtill approoue
themſelues to be Peters ſucceſſors in denying Chriſt, and going the
wrong way vnto the truth of the Goſpell; alwayes like vngracious
children, ſeeking to enter vpon the inheritance bequeathed, without
performance of what the Teſtator principally required. Our
Sauiour requeſted Peter in theſe tearmes, Feede my ſheepe (not
thine;) intimating, he ſhould approue himſelfe a faithfull Shepheard,
one that was to giue ſtrict account vnto the owner, of
whatſoeuer befell the flocke: theſe men by commiſſion pretended
from Saint Peter, would make themſelues great ſheep-maſters,

                  to kill and eate at their pleaſures. That to feede, is all one, as to
rule and gouerne, as they would haue it, is a conceipt of men
onely minding their bellies, or ſeeking to be fed by others ſpoiles.
That feeding or paſtorſhip is alwayes accompanied with rule and
authoritie, none that euer taſted any Spirituall food will denie.
That Peter was a Paſtor and a Feeder, an extraordarie Paſtor, a
principall Feeder, and therefore of preheminent rule and authoritie
ouer his flocke; wee acknowledge: but no preheminence in
him aboue his fellowes, which was not grounded vpon his eminent
care, and more then ordinarie fidelitie in feeding it; not with
Lordly iniunctions ſealed with Anathemaes, but with ſinceritie of
life and ſoundneſſe of Doctrine. There was no difference betwixt
the tenure of his and others eſtates, as if he had beene Lord
by inheritance, not obnoxious to any forfeiture by miſdemeanour;
and others but leaſe holders (during terme of good life
and manners) of the priuiledges they inioyed to returne by excheate,
or for want of ſucceſſion vnto Peters ſucceſſors. That penitentiall
exerciſe of feeding Chriſts ſheep, in ſuch ſtrict tearmes
ſo often inioyned; rather argues, that ſhould haue beene interpreted
vnfaithfulneſſe or diſloyaltie in him, which would haue beene
accounted onely neglect or want of diligence in others. And the
ingenuous Reader may if it pleaſe him, eaſily obſerue, that of all
Apoſtolicall writings now extant, none haue either leſſe intimation
of any preheminencie or ſupremacie, or more liuely characters
of their authors vnfained humilitie, and lowly ſubmiſſion of
himſelfe vnto the meaneſt of his fellow Miniſters, then Saint Peters:
as if by them he would haue teſtified his perpetuall mindfulneſſe
of that former offence, and ſtrict charge of fidelitie in feeding
Chriſts flocke thereupon inioyned.1. Pet. 5. v. 1. 2. 3. 
                  The Elders (ſaith hee)
which are among you, I beſeech, which am, what? the chiefe Apoſtle,
an Eccleſiaſtique Monarch, Chriſts Vicar generall, an Elder of
Elders? no but alſo an Elder 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , 
                     
                        •
                     nd a witneſſe of the ſufferings
of Christ▪ and alſo a partaker of the glorie that ſhall be reuealed;
Feed the flocke of God, which dependeth vpon you, caring for it, not by
conſtraint, but willingly; not for filthie lucre, but of a readie minde;
not as though yee were Lords ouer Gods heritage, but that yee may bee
examples to the flocke. Yet for any to arrogate ſuch infallibilitie,
or challenge ſuch authoritie, as hee had without perſeuerance in

the like fidelitie and ſinceritie, as Peter requeſted vpon the ſtricteſt
termes of loue vnto his Lord and Maſter, in all likelihood would
and did vſe in feeding his flocke; is ſuch a mocke of Chriſt and
this his bleſſed Saint, as none but the brood of Antichriſt could
euer haue hatched, yet inferiour to that, which accompanies the
third pretended ground of Romiſh faith, Tu es Petrus & ſuper hanc
Petram, Thou art Peter and vpon this Peter (as they would haue it)
will I build my Church.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               That Chriſt, not Saint Peter is the rocke ſpoken of Mathew 16. verſe
18. that the Ieſuits expoſition of that place demonſtrateth the Pope to
be the great Antichriſt.
               1 WHy the Latine interpreter following the Greeke,
ſhould varie the Gender, reading Tu es Petrus &

ſuper hanc Petram; not, Tu es Petra, or ſuper hanc
Petram: although the tongue wherein they ſuppoſe
Saint Mathew wrote, had but one and the ſame word, Cepha,
Bellarmine andDubitabit autem aliquis, cur ſi non Mattheus Matthaei tamen Graecus interpres illam nominum & generis diſtinctionem adhibuerit. Reſpondeo in promptu rationem eſſe, quia quamuis graece petra & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      genere maſculino 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      faeminino dicatur, tamen Petrus, quia vir erat, nō Petra faeminino, ſed Petrus maſculino nomine vocandus erat. Secundo autem loco, vbide aedificij fundamento agebatur non Petrum ſed Petram dixit, quamuis idem vtrum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nomen ſignificaret, quia in eiuſmodi aedificij nomen Petra, faemininū magis eſt vſitatū, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      enim et At
                        •
                     icum et rarum eſt. Maldonat in 16. Matthaei. Vide Bellar. de Rom. Pont. Lib. 1. Cap. 10. What the name of Cephas doth import in Saint Peter. 
                  Maldonate giue theſe two reaſons. Firſt ſeeing
Saint Peter was a man, his name was to bee expreſſed in the
Greeke and Latine by a word of the Maſculine gender. Secondly,
albeit the Greeke Maſculine 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   bee ſometimes vſed for a
rocke; yet very ſeldome, or in the Atticke Dialect onely, if at all,
when it is taken for a fundamental rocke fit to erect edifices vpon.
Thus profeſſed Commentators oftimes finde out many wittie
reaſons of like alterations in words, which the Authours neuer
dreamed of. But granting (what theſe two learned Romaniſts onely,
ſuppoſe, none can prooue) S. Mathew had written in the Syriake
tongue: neither of the two reaſons alleaged for the Greeke
or Latine interpreters variation of the Gender, can haue any
place in Saint Iohn, who wrote in Greeke, but not in the Atticke

Dialect, and yet purpoſely inſtructing vs what the Syriake word
Cepha, which our Sauior gaue as a Surname to S. Peter at his firſt
calling meant, ſaith it is by interpretation 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Petrus not
Petra; though this feminine might haue beene vſed without offence
in the interpretation of his name, ſo hee had not beene vſually
called thereby, or being ſo vſually called, it might haue
growne into a maſculine; for why ſhould Petra ſeeme a more
effeminate name in Saint Peter, then Zabarella or Carafa, in their
Cardinals, or Aquauiua, in the Generall of the Ieſuits? If Ieſus
himſelfe had giuen the gouernour of the ſocietie, enſtiled by his
owne name, this ſurname in the abſtract, Aquauiua: what would
men thinke it did portend?Iohn. 4. v. 13. that he ſhould be that well of water,
which ſpringeth into euerlaſting life? or rather that hee had beene
ſo denominate from ſome relation to ſuch water, that Claudius
Aquiuiua was as much as Claudius de Aquauiua? It is moſt likely
then, that as well Saint Iohn when he interpretes Cepha 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as
the Greeke Tranſlator of Saint Mathew, in ſaying, Tu es Petrus,
not Petra; did ſeeke to preuent that ſiniſter ſenſe, which poſteritie
might c
                     •
                  ll out of the ambiguous Syriake Cepha, ſometimes ſignifying
the rocke it ſelfe, otherwhiles implying no more then a
denomination from it. Nor was it Saint Auſtines, ignorance of
the Hebrew and Syriacke, asExistimauit Auguſtinus Petram, ſuper quam aedificatur Eccleſia, non eſſe Petrum, quia credidit Cepham non ſignificare petram, ſed aliquid à Petra deriuatū, vt ſi diceremus, Petrenam, aut Petr
                        •
                     ium, quo
                     
                        •
                     odo Chriſtianus 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſignificat Chr
                        •
                     stum, ſed 
                        •
                     l
                        •
                     quid à Chriſto deriua
                     
                        ••
                     m, quia igitur Eccleſia ſup
                        •
                     r Petram non ſuper aliquem Petrinum, vel Petr
                        •
                     m aedificanda
                        •
                      eſt, ideo exiſtimauit Auguſtinus per illam Petram intelligi non Petrum, ſed Chriſtum: de Rom. Po
                           ••
                        , l. 1. c. 10. 
                  Bellarmine obiects; but rather his
perfect knowledge of Chriſt, as the onely rocke of ſaluation,
which made him thinke that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in Greeke ſhould imply no
more then 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , one belonging to that ſure foundation wheron
the Church is built. Would God Bellarmine could plead ignorance
in theſe tongues for his excuſe; euen hee that hath no
acquaintance with the Syriacke, but by the affinity of it with the
Hebrew, or with neither but from the common analogy betwixt
them, and moderne tongues deſtitute of ſuch variety of
formations or caſes, as are facile and plentiful in the Greeke and
Latine, cannot be ignorant that abſtracts or ſubſtantiues whileſt
giuen as names to men, are vſually equiualent to the concrete or
adiectiue, whereby they are oftimes expreſſed in Latine, as in our
Engliſh we attribute the ſubſtantiue or abſtract name of Countries
vnto Earles, or of Townes vnto Barons; whom our ſoueraigne
Lord when he ſpeakes in Latine, would call Eſſexius, in
Engliſh lie cals Eſſex: ſo Roger Mortimer with vs, is Rogerus de mari

mortuo with latine Writers. Euen in the latine it ſelfe, wherein
in the diſtinction betweene abſtracts and concretes, or ſubſtantiues
and adiectiues, is obuious and apparant: the fundamentall
abſtract or ſubſtantiue is giuen oftimes by way of cognomination,
to expreſſe ſome relation betweene it, and the partie denominated
from it, in value no more then the adiectiue or denomination
in the oblique caſe; ſo Scipio taken properly, or in it direct
and primary ſignification, is a walking ſtaffe, baculum, but attributed
to Cornelius (the firſt of that honourable family called
Scipiones) implies no more then one that had beene inſtar Baculi,
                  Non aliter dicti Scipiones, niſi quòd Cornelius qui patrem luminibus carentē pro baculo regebat, Scipio cognominatus, nomē ex cogn
                        •
                     mine poſteris ded it. Macrob. Satur. lib. 1. cap. 6.
or Scipionis, inſtead of a rod or walking ſtaffe to his blind decrepite
father: ſoVide Macrobium loco citato. 
                  Scropha thereto attributed in the abſtract vnto
another family in Rome, imports not their anceſtors had beene
ſwine, or their mother a ſow, but onely ſome particular relation
to that creature. The like wee may ſay ofAſinae cognomentum Cornelijs datum eſt, quoniam princeps Corneliae gentis empto fundo, ſeu filia data marito cū ſponſores ab eo ſolenniter poſcerentur aſiuā cum pecuniae onere produxit in forum, quaſi pro ſponſoribus praeſens pignus. Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 6. Why Peter was called Cephas. 
                  Aſina and Beſtia, names
of other Romane families. And if I miſtake not, that famous profeſſor
which hight Victoria in the abſtract, was but Franciſcus 
                        •
                     
victoria, de victoria, or victorius. In like ſort, although it were true
that Cepha in the Syriacke did onely ſignifie a rocke or fundamentall
ſtone; yet ſeeing all grant that Chriſt was truly and principally
ſuch, the ſame name giuen vnto Simon the ſonne of Iona,
muſt imply no more then a denominatiue reference vnto the
rocke, ſo as if hee had beene called in latine Simon Petra, or in
Engliſh Simon Rocke, this could imply no more then Simon de
Petra or Petreus, Simon a rocke, or of the rocke.
               2 But whatſoeuer the Syriacke Cephas, or the Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in
the place cited doe import: it will be demanded, why our Sauiour
beſtowed this name on Simon the ſonne of Ione, at his firſt
comming to him? The particular references betwixt him and
the rocke it ſelfe, or chiefe ſtone, might be ſo many, as might
conuince him of curioſity, perhaps of folly, that would peremptorily
or preciſely determine, what one ſhould giue occaſion to
this denomination: Moſt probable it is, that he who knew what
was in man, did at the firſt ſight of Simon, ſee in him, or meane to
beſtow vpon him ſome extraordinary aptneſſe to apprehend the
words of eternall life, or to diſcry the gate of the Lord whereby the
righteous were to enter, or (which is equiualent) Chriſt to bee the
chiefe corner ſtone ſpoken of by the Pſalmiſt: Herein I willingly

aſſent to Bellarmine, that Saint Peter was the firſt that diſtinctly
did apprehend, or at leaſt, by confeſſion, open the great myſtery
of Chriſtianity and foundation of true religion, God incarnate in
our fleſh. Thus much the circumſtances of that place ſeeme to inferre;
For Ieſus,
                  Math 16. v. 13. 14. 15. &c. 
                  when he came vnto the coaſts of Caeſarea, he asked his
Diſciples whom doe men ſay that I (commonly knowne by the name of
the ſonne of man) am; and they ſaid, ſome ſay, Iohn Baptiſt, ſome, Elias,
and others Ieremiah; all to this effect, that hee was ſome one of
the Prophets,
                  Iohn 1. v. 49. or as Nathanael in his confeſſion meant) ſuch a ſon
of God, as they had beene. Theſe were in the way, but came not
neere the maine foundation, which Peter firſt vncouers, for when
our Sauious demands; But whom ſay yee (whom I muſt appoint,
as chiefe builders, and principall parts of that ſpirituall temple,
which is toward) that I am; Then Simon Peter anſwered and ſaid,
Thou art the Chriſt the ſonne of the liuing God. And from his firſt
diſcouery of this rocke, or chiefe corner ſtone, he might well be denominated
a rocke or ſtone, as Maximus was named Meſſala from
a towne in Sicily ſo called, which hee had taken, or, as wee might
denominate ſome famous mariner, from ſome notable place
which bee ſhould firſt diſcouer. To this effect doth our Sauiour
reply vnto Saint Peter; Bleſſed art thou Simon the ſonne of Iona, for
not fleſh and bloud, not the chiefe builders amongſt the people,
but hee that laid this pretious ſtone in Sion hath vncouered the
ſame to thee, And ſeeing thou haſt ſaid, what ſhould be ſaid and
thought of me, I onely ſay of thee, thou hadſt not thy name for
nought; rightly waſt thou called a Rocke, or ſtone, that haſt ſo
plainely opened the way vnto that very rocke, whereon I meane
to build my Church. Had our Sauiour meant Peter had been that
Rocke, or were his words to be interpreted, as in effect the Papiſts
doe; Hee had ſaid, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Tu es Petra illa ſuper quam,
&c. But ſeeing hee addes no Emphaſis to Peters name, but vnto
petra, theſe words [
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ] are but an actuall expreſſion, or
more definite ſpecification, of what had beene potentially included
in the indeterminate tranſitiue 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   reuelabit; for where
our Engliſh reades fleſh and bloud hath not reuealed it vnto thee, the
originall is verbatim, hath not reuealed to thee, to wit, that rocke
whereupon I will build my Church, the direct current then of our
Sauiours ſpeech is thus; Bleſſed art thou Simon the ſonne of Ionah,

for not fleſh & bloud, but my father which is in heauē, hath reuealed that
Rocke to thee, whereupon I will build my Church, againſt which the
gates of hell ſhall neuer preuaile, whereof thou (according to the omen of
thy name long ſince giuen by me) ſhall be the firſt liuing ſtone, by whom
all others ſhall be ſquared, ere admitted into this ſpirituall aedifice.
               
               3 That our Sauiour did not expreſly mention any other rocke
or ſtone before hee ſaid to Simon, Thou art Peter, doth nothing
preiudice this expoſition. It ſufficed that God and the Rocke of ſaluation:
                  Pronomē hanc non poteſt referri ad Chriſtum, Petram, ſed ad Petram, Petram debet enim referri ad aliquod proximum, non ad remo
                        •
                     um, proxime ante dictum fuerat non Christo ſed Petra, tu es Cephas id eſt Petra, dei
                        •
                     de licet Chriſtus dici p
                        •
                     ſſet, Petra, tamen hoc in loco non eſt vocatus petra à Petro confitente, ſed Chriſtus filius Dei viui debet autem referri, Hanc cum qui nominatus eſt Petra, non ad cum qui non eſt appellatus hoc nomine, Bellar. lib. 1. de Rom. Pont. cap. 10. Vide Deut. 32. Pſ 18. 
                        •
                     ſ. 19. vlt. Tu vero conſidera verborum Prophetae amplitudinem, poterat
                        •
                     d cere, Mi
                        •
                     tam vobis Meſſiam ſe
                        •
                      voluit tam inſigne beneficium verbis inſignibus & Metaphoricis explicare. Eſt autem tranſtatio ſumpta ab 
                        •
                     icantibus, quae verborum amplitudine minuit rei magnificentiam & maiestatem. Plinius in 28. Iſa
                        •
                     e. ver. 16. See the latter Annotation out of Bellarmine, a
                        •
                      
                     the 25. §. of this Chapter, and Mal
                     
                        •
                     onat. in Matthei 21. ver 42. 
                  Meſsiah, the chiefe corner ſtone, the Chriſt, were then
knowne, and yet are held as aequiualent, euen amongſt the learned
Papiſts, that the Diſciples to whom hee then ſpake, did no
leſſe perfectly know, more ready to acknowledge as much, as our
aduerſaries yet doe, that not Peter, but his and their maſter onely,
was to bee the chiefe corner ſtone in that Temple, they had often
heard hee ſhould, and now hee tels them hee was to build.
The preſent Dialogue would abundantly inſtruct them, that
not the ſonne of man himſelfe, howſoeuer conſidered, but in
ſuch ſort as his heauenly father had reuealed him to Saint Peter,
truely apprehended as God and Man, was a foundation competent
for ſo incomparable a ſtructure; ſuch as before this time had
gone the fartheſt; ſuch as thought hee had beene Moſes, (who had
no peere among the Prophets, greater then whom it was ſcarce
expected any ſonne of mortall man ſhould be) had not come vnto
ground firme enough to build their owne, and all mens faith
vpon, To them the gate of the Lord▪ by which the righteous were
to enter, was not fully opened, they came not to a diſtinct, direct,
& perfect view of this chief corner ſtone: for this reaſon they could
not be accounted 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſtones actually wrought, and ſo well
ſitting this precious foundation, as others might bee framed by
their patterne, and them iointly faſtned to it. This was Peters
prerogatiue, vnto whom the keyes are firſt giuen (as vnto the
firſt of all the faithfull that had paſſed this gate & power by them,
to admit as many as were, to exclude al that were not faſhionable
to this Rocke and corner ſtone.
               
               
                  
4. Seeing then neither the Apoſtles then thought, nor can
any man yet conceiue, that Peter could be an extraordinary ſtone
or ſecond foundation in the aedifice, there ſpoken of, but muſt
withall admit Chriſt to be the chiefe corner ſtone, or ſureſt fundamētal
rocke: I would appeale to my aduerſary in his ſober mood;
to any not actually drunken with the Babyloniſh cup, vnto whether
foundation, vnto what ſtone, the principall or leſſe principall,
theſe words [and vpon this Rocke will I build my Church] muſt
be referred? Wee muſt iudge of the foundation by the aedifice,
and of the aedifice by the attribute. Now, as there is no one title
wherein the ſpirit doth more delight to expreſſe the ſtrength
and praiſes of the liuing God, then this of Rocke: ſo was there
neuer any more puiſſant effect attributed to any Rocke, then the
eternall ſtability of this aedifice. What Saint Paul ſayth of the
foundation, I may truly ſay of the aedifice and the attribute. Another
aedifice more ſtrong then this Church, can no man
build; no attribute can be imagined more glorious then this:
That the gate of hell ſhall neuer preuaile, or (asOmnes quos 
                        •
                     egi praeter Hilarium exiſtimant ſenſum eſſe ſore, vt diaboli potentia Eccleſiam quidem exerceat, vunquam vero apprimat. Sed non ſolent portae vincere ſed reſiſtere, ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      non potu
                        •
                     t offendendendi vis per portas ſignificari ſenſus igitur, niſi fallor, eſt fore, vt Eccleſia ſuper Petram à Chriſto fundatae omnem diaboli potentiam expugnet; ita vt nulla arte, nullis viribus poſſit reſiſtere. Hoc enim multo maius eſt, & verbis magis conſentaneum: Portas enim inferi non praeualituras aduerſus Eccleſiam phraſis Hebraica eſt 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      non poterunt ad verſus illam, id eſt non poterunt illi reſiſtere▪
                   
                  Maldonate more
fully expreſſeth the maieſty of the Hebraiſme) ſhall not be able
to ſtand againſt it or confront it. To aſcribe the ſupportance of
ſuch a ſtructure to the ſtrength of Peters faith, not as it was in
him onely, but as it is perpetually propagated to his ſucceſſors,
is, to impeach him of diſloyalty, and rob Chriſt of his greateſt
glory. For,Vid. Maldonatum in verſum 42. cap. 21. Math. & Bellar. lib. v. de Pont. Rom. cap. 17. euen ſuch as plead, for this prerogatiue in Peters
ſucceſſors, confeſſe, that this they giue to Peter is our Sauiours
moſt vſuall ſtile; we may with the Prophet demand, Who is the
                  Pſal. 18. v. 31. v. 46. 
                  Rocke beſides our God?
                  Pſal. 19. v. 14. 
                  The Lord is the Rocke of our ſaluation: (of
ſuch ſaluation as the gates of Hell cannot oppugne) the ſame he
is the Lord our Rocke and our Redeemer.
               
               5. The former interpretation will yet further approue it ſelfe,
to be moſt conſonant to the generall analogie of faith, moſt natiue
to the place before alleaged, and in reſpect of Romiſh gloſſes,
ſuch, as is the Church of Chriſt vnto the gates of Hell, or the
Arke of olde vnto Dagon; if we obſerue (what is moſt frequently,
and perſpicuouſly taught in other Scriptures, pertinent to the

maine point in controuerſie): Firſt, that the immediate ſubiect
of Peters confeſſion [Goa incarnate or dwelling (as S. Paul ſpeaks)
bodily in Chriſt] is preſuppoſed, by all ſacred writers, as the great
myſtery of mans redemption, the fundamentall Rock of ſaluation.
Secondly, that all, and only they, which in ſincerity of heart
conceiue, and with ſtedfaſt perſeuerance, retaine this confeſſion
which Peter made, are true and liuely parts of that aedifice, which
the Sonne of the liuing God here promiſed to erect.
               6. The Reader, I know, in this fruitfull age of learned expoſitors
may finde variety of Comments, but none that can more
fully ſatisfie him, then Saint Peters owne paraphraſe vpon our
Sauiours promiſe to him, if we compare it with other Scriptures,
in ſence and meaning equiualent; That Chriſt was the only Rock
whereupon this Saint himſelfe, as a liuing member of the Church,
was built, is apparant: becauſe, intending to make his flocke,
liuely parts of the ſame aedifice, he tels them they come not to himſelfe,
as to a ſecond Rock, but vnto the Lord, as vnto a liuing ſtone, diſallowed
of men, yet choſen of God and pretious: As if he had ſayd; Not
fleſh and bloud, not the wiſeſt of men, but only our heauenly Father
did firſt reueale him vnto me for ſuch, and in the words following
(as if he had purpoſely intēded to certifie vs) that the name
of Peter did deſcend to him from this affinity with this elect and
pretious ſtone (not becauſe he was a Rocke or fundamentall ſtone
himſelfe) he addes, and ye as liuely ſtones be made a ſpirituall houſe,
a liuely Priest-hood (Prieſts as liuing, and altars as ſtones) to offer vp
ſpirituall ſacrifices, acceptable to God, by Ieſus Chriſt. Though they
were not all to haue the title or name of Peters (for ſo there could
be no diſtinction) yet ſo they would beleeue and confeſſe as he
did, that Chriſt was the liuing ſtone, they were to haue the realty
or ſubſtance, to be ſtones of that ſpirituall houſe, againſt which the
gates of hell ſhould not be able to preuaile.
               
               7. And ſeeing hee now endeuoured to faſten them vnto
Chriſt, as vnto the only ſure Rocke of their redemption; it could
not be ſo auaileable to tel them in our Sauiours owne words, that
becomming ſuch a ſpirituall houſe, and continuing in offering
vp ſacrifices acceptable vnto God, the gates of hell ſhould not preuaile
againſt them. Vntill this Day-ſtarre had more fully ſhined
in their hearts, hee knew it for the better method to kindle the

ſame hope in them, by the Prophets light, which in time would
breake forth clearer of it ſelfe: for that glorious promiſe of our
Sauiour differed from the propheticall prediction, which S. Peter
giues them for their aſſurance, but as the light which goes before,
doth from the brightneſſe following the Suns riſing: What
Chriſt had told him, was in effect contained before in thatIſa. 28. v. 16. Vide Forerium in hunc locum. ſcripture:
Behold, I lay in Sion a chiefe corner ſtone, elect and pretious, and
he that beleeueth therein ſhall not be
                  The word in the Originall ſignifieth to make haſte, & therefore any kind of haſte according to the difference of the matter, or obiect; in this place aequiualent to the latine proripiat, a word ſignifying haſte, but haſte cauſed by ſhame or feare of mens preſence from which the party aſhamed ſeeks with cō
                     fuſed ſpeed to hide himſelfe. Et cum damarē quo nunc ſe proripit ille? Tityre coge pecus tu poſt carecta latebas. This is true of faith, which the Apoſtle ſaith of loue. 1. Ioh. 4. v. 17. Herein is loue perfect in vs, that we ſhould haue boldnes in the day of iudgement: for as he is, euen ſo are we in this world. Vid. Luc. 21. v. 25. 26. of the confuſed ſtate of the wicked. 
                  aſhamed? Why not aſhamed?
becauſe his hope ſhould be moſt ſure; and Hope (as the Apoſtle
ſayth) maketh not aſhamed: he meant, It ſupporteth againſt all
ſhame or terror, the world, fleſh, or diuill can oppoſe againſt vs.
They may threaten but not ſo deiect vs, as to cauſe vs, either
through feare of diſgrace or other danger, skulke, or runne from
mens preſence, as a learned Hebrician expreſſeth the Hebrew
word rendred by the vulgar, non feſtinabit, he ſhall not haſten; or
to expreſſe the full valew of both theſe Apoſtles ſpeeches, by the
laſt and moſt potent obiect of ſhame; belieuing in Chriſt, wee
ſhall not be found naked in that laſt day, nor wiſh the Mountains
for a couering to our ſhame; but enabled by ſure hope to ſtand
before the Sonne of man: for, not aſhamed of him before men
in this life, hee will not be aſhamed of vs in that day. Then ſhall
that victory of this ſpirituall houſe ouer the impotent aſſaults of
Hell gates be manifeſted. Thus by Saint Peters owne expoſition,
The Sonne of the liuing God, whom hee confeſſed was that liuing
Stone, from whoſe ſtrength this ſpirituall houſe, whereof he and
his flock were 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  liuely ſtones becomes ſo ſtrong. To make either
Saint Peter or his ſucceſſors ioint, though ſecondary, ſupporters
of this glorious worke, were to diuide our faith betwixt
Chriſt and them: For it only ſtands by faith and confidence immediatly
faſtened vpon the foundation or ſupporters. If then we
may not ſo faſten our faith either vpon Peter, or his ſucceſſors, we
can receiue no other ſtrength from them, then wee doe from
Chriſts other Apoſtles, and that is only from their Miniſteriall
function, in ſquaring and faſtening vs vnto this liuing ſtone. To
this purpoſe, ſayth Saint Paul, Other foundation can no man lay,
then that which is laid, which is Ieſus Christ. Whoſoeuer was himſelfe
builded on him, albeit he neuer heard of Saint Peter, albeit
the doctrines hee heaped vpon this foundation were but hay and

ſtubble, or matter alike apt to take fire; yet the flame wherein
theſe idle ſpeculations of his braine were to periſh, ſhould but
ſinge his cloathes not deuoure his ſubſtance; becauſe by faith vnited
vnto that liuing ſtone, which without any other intermediate
ſconce, or fence, doth quench the flames of hell, and keepe them
from ſcorching any, euen the laſt and vppermoſt that ſhall bee
built vpon him, vnto the worlds end. For the ſame Apoſtles
rule is vniuerſall both in reſpect of time and perſons.Rom. 10. v. 9. 
                  If thou ſhalt
confeſſe with thy mouth the Lord Ieſus, and ſhalt belieue in thine heart,
that God raiſed him vp from the dead, thou ſhalt be ſaued.
               
               8. But did Saint Paul by ſpeciall reuelation vtter this, as a
myſtery altogether vnknowne before vnto the faithfull? Rather
by participation of the ſame ſpirit, which ſpake in the Prophet, he
onely vnfolds the Oracle late expounded, I muſt confeſſe without
diſtinct apprehenſion of ſo good warrant them, as is now ſuggeſted;
For the Apoſtle to proue his former aſſertion, vrgeth that
place of the Prophet,Rom. 10. v. 11. 
                  Whoſoeuer belieues in him ſhall not bee aſhamed;
So then with Saint Paul it is all one, to belieue in Chriſt raiſed
from the dead, or in the corner ſtone, reiected of men, allowed of God.
And it ſeemes the declaration made vnto Saint Peter, that Chriſt
whom he confeſſed (howſoeuer a Rocke to fall vpon to both the
houſes of Iſrael) was the ſure foundation of the fathfull, which the
Prophet foretold ſhould bee laid in Sion, made his ignorance, (to
ſay no worſe) in diſſwading his maſter from ſuffering ſuch diſgrace
and ignominy of the Elders, high Prieſts and Scribes, more inexcuſable,
becauſe it had beene ſo plainely foretold, that the corner
ſtone
was to bee baſely eſteemed of them, ere aduanced of
God. Hence our Sauiour reproues him ſo ſharpelyMath. 16. 23. 
                  Then hee
turned backe and ſaid vnto Peter, Get thee behind me Sathan, thou
art an offence vnto me, becauſe thou vnderstandeſt not the things that
are of God, but the things that are of men: As if hee had ſaid, ſhall
this Rocke become a ſtumbling ſtone vnto thee alſo, vnto whom
it was firſt reuealed? What I now tolde thee, the Prophet long
ſince foretold;Pſal. 118. v. 23 
                  It was the Lords doing, and ſhould haue beene maruellous
(not offenſiue) in thy ſight. Haſt thou neuer read how the
builders muſt firſt refuſe that ſtone which the Lord will afterwards
appoint chiefe in the corners? From remembrance of this
checke Saint Peter it may be, whiles hee paraphraſed vpon this

place, vſed not the Pſalmiſts but our Sauiours wordes, Yee come
(ſaith he) as vnto a liuing ſtone, diſallowed not by the builders, but
of men, choſen not of the Lord, but of God, howſoeuer elſewhere hee
more fully paralels theſe two, (as Saint Paul had done) [Chriſt crucified
and raiſed againe.] [the ſtone cast aſide, and conſtituted as h
                        •
                     ad
of the corner]
                  Acts 4. v. 10. 
                  Be it knowne vnto you all, and to all the people of Iſrael,
that by the name of Ieſus Chriſt of Nazaret, whom yee haue crucified,
whom God raiſed againe from the dead, euen by him doth this man
ſtand here before you whole: This is the ſtone caſt aſide of you builders,
which is become the head of the corner; neither is there ſaluation in any
other: for among men there is giuen none other name vnder heauen
whereby wee muſt be ſaued. Then is there no other, whoſe name
imported as much as a Rocke or ſtone, to ſupport men againſt
all commotions, the powers of hell could raiſe againſt
them.
               9 So our Sauiour takes [the husbandmen killing of the Lord of
the Vineyeards ſonne] and [the builders reiecting the head ſtone of the
corner] as equiualent;
                  Math. 21. 
                  Firſt, hee demaunds,
                  Ver. 40. When therefore the
Lord of the Vineyeard ſhall come, what will hee doe to thoſe huſbandmen
(that had ſlaine his ſonne)Ver. 41. 
                  they reply, hee will cruelly deſtroy thoſe
wicked men, and will let out his Vineyeard vnto other husbandmen,
which ſhall deliuer him the fruits in their ſeaſons: And this iudgement
they had giuen againſt themſelues, hee ratifies by the like
expreſſe ſentence, which the Lord already had paſt vpon them;
                  Ver. 42. &c. Read yee neuer in the Scriptures, the ſtone which the builders refuſed,
the ſame is made the head of the corner? (This was the Lords
doing, and it is maruellous in our eyes. Therefore ſay I vnto you, the
Kingdome of God ſhall be taken from you, and ſhall bee giuen to a nation
which ſhall bring forth the fruits thereof:) and whoſoeuer ſhall fall
on this ſtone ſhall be broken, but on whomſoener it ſhall fall, it wil grinde
him to powder.
               10 This may ſuffice for proofe, that Saint Peters confeſſing
the ſonne of man to be the Christ, the ſonne of the liuing God, was
all one with our Sauiours declaration, Vpon this Rocke will I builde
my Church, &c. becauſe Chriſt and the liuing ſtone which God had
promiſed to found in Sion, are vnto ſacred Writers, and all participants
of that ſpirit, by which they wrote the ſelfe ſame. Nor

is there any thing more vſuall with the holy Ghoſt, then to referre
like ſpeeches of our Sauiour vnto places of Scripture more different
in words then the two former alleadged; albeit there bee no
ſuch identity of perſons, time and place, or continuation of di
                     •
                  
                  courſe,
to manifeſt their mutuall coherence, but onely equiualency
of their inward meaning; This Method the holy Spirit
vſeth the rather, I thinke, becauſe hee would accuſtome vs 
                     •
                  o inveſtigate
his ſenſe and meaning, not ſo much by the like forme,
or character of words, as by the analogy of faith. For, as the Apoſtle
ſaith, the letter killeth, becauſe it vſually leadeth ſuch as rely
vpon it to ſtrange and vnholeſome ſenſes; as the identity of our
Sauiours and Saint Peters name in the Syriacke, or their vicinity
in the Greeke and Latine, made the Rocke of ſaluation become a
Rocke of fence vnto the Romaniſt, who by his ſtumbling at the
word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,1. Pet. 2. 7. 8. 
                  falles vpon the ſtone laid in Sion, and ſhall bee broken, yea
for this diſobedience to this eternall word, and ſeeking to lay another
foundation then what was laid already; that stone ſhall fall vpon
him and grind him (at leaſt his doctrine) to powder, as will more
fully appeare, if wee compare their expoſition of that donatiue,
they ſuppoſe he did beſtow vpon Saint Peter, with that Diſciples
doctrine whom he loued.
               11 As wee haue ſhewed from Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and
the generall analogie of faith, that Simon the ſonne of Ionah had
his name of Cephas or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , from his affinity with the Rocke of
ſaluation, or chiefe corner ſtone, hee being as the firſt wrought
ſtone in that aedifice: ſo doth Saint Iohn (whoſe doctrine pregnātly
confirmes our former expoſition of theſe words, Thou art Peter.
&c.) make that very confeſſion which Peter vttered, as the
ſureſt ſquare or line, the perfect Index whereby to try and examine
all other ſtones, whether fitting or rightly proportioned to
this euerlaſting ſtructure.1. Iohn 4 v. 1. Vide Tyram in hunc locum. 
                  Dearely beloued (ſaith he) belieue not
euery ſpirit, but trie the ſpirits whether they are of God, for many falſe
Prophets are gone out into the world. How ſhould they know true
Prophets from falſe, ſuch as were true, were of God, ſuch as were
falſe, of Antichriſt; how ſhould they know ſuch as were of God,
from ſuch as were of Antichriſt? Hereby ſhall yee know the ſpirite
of God; euery ſpirit▪ that confeſſeth that Ieſus Chriſt is come in the

                        •
                     leſh, is of God.
               
               
                  
12 But is euery ſpirit of God that can frame an orthodoxall
conceit of this great myſtery, and outwardly confeſſe what they
inwardly aſſent vnto, as vndoubtedly true? So ſhould the wicked
ſpirits be of God: for a ſpirit of an vncleane Diuell openly
ſaid as much in effect, as Peter did; what he knew by arguments
more ſure then moſt Popes doe, I know who thou art, euen the holy
one of God, yea many came out of the poſſeſſed crying, what Peter
afterwards confeſſed, Thou art the Chriſt the ſonne of God. The
myſtery it ſeemes they had conceiued aright, becauſe our Sauiour
giues them the like iniunctions his Diſciples had vpon Peters confeſſion,
the one he rebuked, and would not ſuffer to ſay, the other, hee
charged they ſhould tell no man, that he was Ieſus the Chriſt, becauſe
this Rocke was not as yet to be plainely manifeſted to the world,
Although it is moſt probable, hee would not haue the vncleane
ſpirits at any time to be proclamers of this myſtery: for vnto the
Pſal. 50. v. 16 wicked ſaid God, What haſt thou to do to declare mine ordinances,
that thou ſhouldeſt take my couenant in thy mouth, ſeeing thou hateſt to
be reformed, and haſt caſt my words behind thee? &c. If vncleane ſpirits
may not be permitted to promulge this or like diuine myſteries,
by the mouthes of men, whoſe bodily members they ſo poſſeſſe,
as to cauſe them vtter they know not what; may wee without
exception ſafely admit all their cathedrall deciſions, whoſe
ſoules and minds they haue wholly transformed into the ſimilitude
of their vncleanneſſe, for heauenly oracles, for embaſſages
of ſaluation immediately ſent from God for foundations of faith
and manners?Pſal. 50. v. 25. Chriſt by the ſame Pſalmiſt hath ſaid, To him that
diſpoſeth his way aright, will I ſhew the ſaluation of God.
               
               13 But to proceed by our Apoſtles former rule; from which,
and others of his fullyNo man hath ſeene God at anytime, If we loue one another, God dwelleth in vs, & his loue is perfect in vs. Hereby know wee that wee dwell in him, and he in vs: becauſe hee hath giuen vs of his ſpirit. And we haue ſeen and doe teſtifie, that the Father ſent the ſonne to bee the Sauiour of the world. Whoſoeuer confeſſeth that Ieſus is the ſonne of God, in him dwelleth God, and he in God. Vide cap. 2. ver. 16. Iohan.
                   paralell thereunto, it is euident, that for
a iuſt triall of a ſpirit ſpeaking by God, there muſt bee both a
platforme of doctrine rightly proportioned to the former foundation
[Chriſt come in the fleſh] and a correſpondent edification,
not of verball or ſchoole conſequences, but of reall and materiall
workes, proceeding from liuely faith and inward ſanctititie, ſo teſtifying
the habitation of Christ the liuing ſtone in the confeſſors

heart, as Chriſts owne workes and doctrine did the Godheads
bodily dwelling in him, the Apoſtle addes, Euery ſpirit which
confeſſeth not that Ieſus Chriſt is come in the fleſh, is not of God (that is)
is oppoſite vnto the ſpirit of God, but this is the ſpirit of Antichriſt,
of whom yee haue heard, how that he ſhould come, and now already hee
is in the world. A ſpirit of Antichriſt then is manifeſted, by a
contrariety in the forme of doctrine, or by an hoſtility between
the very foundations, which hee and the ſpirit of God endeavour
to lay; ſo as the edification of the one doth in the iſſue, menace
the demolition of the other. And as this oppoſition vnto Gods
ſpirit is greater or leſſe, ſo doth it argue the partie in whom it is
to participate, more or leſſe of the ſpirit of Antichriſt. In both
theſe reſpects of oppoſition or hoſtility in the foundation, or in
the iſſue or conſequences of all hereticall temples or congregations,
that hetherto haue beene, or can bee imagined as poſſibly
future, the ſtructure of the Romiſh Church, doth moſt fully anſwere
to the Idea or platforme of that edifice, which the Apoſtle
hath foretold great Antichriſt ſhould erect.
               14 For demonſtrating which concluſion, wee onely ſuppoſe,
what euery one muſt grant,In what ſenſe the Papiſt deny Chriſt to be come in the fleſh. that if the ſpirit of vncleane diuels, hee
whoſe comming is by the power of Sathan, in guile and deceit, may
without preiudice to his grand hoſtility againſt Chriſt, in formall
tearmes confeſſe the great myſtery of ſaluation. [Chriſt manifeſted
in the fleſh:] for ſeeing hee muſt be 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   oppoſite vnto
Chriſt, not by way of negation or contradiction, but by a poſitiue
contrariety or hoſtility; Chriſtian Religion and Antichriſtianiſme,
muſt as all other contraries agree in ſome one kind or
matter; and the kind or matter in matters of Religion, muſt bee
the obiect. If wee here onely ſet aſide an agreement with true
profeſſors in that generall tranſcendent obiect, that Chriſt is the
ſonne of the liuing God, the very firſt principle of Romiſh Religion,
euē the ſpecifical difference which makes it Romiſh, is as contrary
with the firſt Element of true orthodoxall chriſtian Religion,
as fire to water, heate to cold. For, if to confeſſe Chriſt come in
the fleſh, put to death, and raiſed againe, be (as is proued) all one,
as to acknowledge him the chiefe corner ſtone reiected of men, but aduanced
by God: if this bee the maine foundation of Chriſtianity,
ſo all-ſufficient, that without it, no other muſt bee laid. How

were it poſſible more to deny this truth in effect or conſequence,
more to oppugne the whole edifice of our faith, then by planting
another Rocke, another foundation, without communication
wherewith, none can bee ſupported by the former, againſt the
gates of hell.
               15 But perhaps wee miſtake, o
                     •
                   maligne the Romaniſt, in
charging him with ſhufling in another foundation beſides Chriſt,
in that ſenſe the Apoſtle denies any other1. Cor. 3. v. 11 foundation can be laid:
Wee rather by too much preſſing them with that axiome of his,
make him contradict himſelfe; for elſewhere hee ſaithEph. 2. 20. 
                  Wee are
built vpon the foundation of the Apoſtles and Prophets.
               
               I will not here diſpute whether Saint Paul in that place mean,Nor doth that place Reu. 21. ver. 14. proue any more then that by the Apoſtles miniſtery the Church was erected.
wee are built vpon the perſons: of the Prophets and Apoſtles,
they being placed nearer the rocke, or maine foundation it ſelfe,
then wee, or rather vpon the maine foundation, which both the
Prophets and the Apoſtles iointly had laid, beſides which no other
can bee laid, Chriſt crucified and glorifiea: For he is both the
foundation which wholly ſupporteth, and the corner ſtone which
onely ocupleth the whole building; in which hee is the higheſt and
the loweſt, firſt laid in humility for the diſobedient to fall vpon,
but now exalted vnto greateſt glory to fall vpon them. And as the
Apoſtle cals his owne ſcarres, the markes of Chriſt, becauſe inflicted
for Chriſts ſake; ſo may hee call Chriſt the foundation of
the Prophets and Apoſtles, becauſe the onely end whereto both
Propheticall and Apoſtolicall lawes were directed, was to lay
this ſure foundation. But granting what they take for granted.
The Apoſtle did meane, wee were builded vpon the Prophets and
Apoſtles, as vpon a ſecond foundation, or firſt row of ſtones; next
in order vnto the rocke, ſo they make Peter a rocke or foundation
onely in this ſenſe? If they doe not, hee could not bee the
Rocke on which the Church is built. If they do, let them giue vs
the right hand of fellowſhippe; for wee accuſe them, not for making
him ſuch a foundation as the other Apoſtles were, but ſuchas,
it is euident, they were not, yea ſuch indeed, and ſubſtance as
Chriſt onely is, and ſhould bee acknowledged by all the faithfull.
For in what ſenſe is Chriſt ſaid to be the foundation? Becauſe
hee is the head of his Church, both for ſupporting and directing
it. Was not Peter ſuch in reſpect euen of his fellow Apoſtles?

                  Dicuntur fundamenta omnes Apoſtoli ratione gubernationis. Omnes enim ſuerunt capita, rectores, & pastores Eccleſiae vniuerſae, ſed non eodem modo quo Petrus, Illi enim habuerunt ſummam, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ampliſſi nam poteſtatem vt Apostoli, ſeu legati, Petrus autem vt Paſtor ordinarius. Deinde ita habuerunt plenitudinem poteſtatis, vt tame Peteus eſſet caput eorum, & ab illo penderent non é contrario. Bellar. lib. 1, de Rom. Pont. c. 12. 
                  Bellarmine can aſſigne no difference betwixt them
but in theſe very tearmes. All of them hee confeſſeth had occumenicall
iuriſdiction, but not in ſuch ſort as Peter had, all were infallible,
becauſe Apoſtles and Ambaſſadors, but not after the ſame
maner he was: yea Peter was their head, on whom they did depend;
ſo did not hee on them. This makes Peter the corner
ſtone that cupleth the building. Which doubtleſſe was Chriſts
peculiar whileſt hee liued on earth, not communicated vnto
Peter as they acknowledge, vntill his reſurrection or aſcention.
That they tell vs then, they make but one primary foundation,
and therefore none ſuch as Chriſt is, as if they ſhould ſay, they admit
no more ſuch Popes as Pius primus was, becauſe there hath
neuer beene, nor euer ſhall bee any Pope Pius the Firſt but hee:
for to make Peter ſuch a Primate, is to make him a foundation or
head of the ſame rancke and order, that Chriſt was (onely his inferiour,
as ſucceſſor in time) or (to vſe their words) a foundation
in Chriſts place, So Bellarmine
                  Cephas Syriace ſignificat 
                        •
                     etrā vt nos ſupra docuimus & Hieronymus teſt 
                        •
                     
                     tue in cap. 2. Epiſtolae ad Galat. Grae
                        •
                     d autent ſignificat caput vt lib. 2. con
                        •
                     ra Pa
                        •
                     menianum annotaui
                        •
                      Optatus. de demum vnum eſt ex celeberinis Chriſti nominibus. Nihil enim frequentius in Scripturis Chriſt
                        •
                     s appellitur qùam Petra. Chriſtus ergo cum ſolo Petro ſuum ipſius nomen communicans, & nomea illud quo ipſe ſignificutur, vt 
                        〈◊〉
                      & caput Eccleſiae vniuerſae, quid aliud indicare voluit, quam ſe faccre Petrum fundamentum & caput Eccleſiae 
                        〈◊〉
                     , Ibidem cap. 17. expreſly auoucheth, where prouing
Peters Supremacy or Lordſhip from his name, hee thus inferres,
Peter onely was knowne by Chriſts owne name of Cephas or
Rocke, whereby he is called as often as by any other whatſoeuer, yea this
is the peculiar attribute, in which he is ſet out vnto vs as the foundation
and head of the Church: therefore Chriſt communicating this vnto
Peter, would haue it ſignified vnto the world that hee meant to make
Peter the foundation and head of the Church in his owne place. Why
doth Chriſt ceaſe to bee the foundation in becomming the head
ſtone in the corner? or doe they to auoid open ſuſpition of Antichriſtianiſme
acknowledge him come in the fleſh, but gone againe
to make roome for Peter and his ſucceſſors? Certainely, were the
Apoſtle to gather the meaning of Bellarmines ſpeeches, his inference
would bee thus;Heb. 8. v. 13. 
                  In that he ſayeth, a new head is come in
his place, hee abrogates the formers authority, as he was Ambaſſador
betweene God and man: nor is it now as the Teſtament
giuen by Moſes was in the Prophets time ready to expire, but already
expired by actuall ſucceſſion of another, vnto whom Chriſt
the firſt viſible head (or foundation) did at his aduancement to

higher dignity, ſeale the ſame commiſſion hee had from his
father, for tranſacting all affaires concerning the ſtate of his viſible
Church.
               18 But doth the ſpace betweene heauen and earth more exceed
Romes diſtance from the vtmoſt ends of the world, then hee
to whom all power was giuen in heauen and earth, doth the preſent
Pope in amplitude of ſpirituall iuriſdiction? Whence is it
elſe that Chriſt regiment cannot ſo fully and immediately extend
it ſelfe vnto his Church militant, whereſoeuer ſcattered vpon
the face of the earth, as the Popes may to the Eaſt or Weſt Indies,
from eyther of which he cannot receiue certaine information,
how his inſtruction ſent thither, ſucced with his flocke vnder
a yeeres ſpace at the leaſt. Euery Pope in his time is a rocke, a
The differēce betweene Chriſt and the Pope much leſſe (by the Papiſts opininion) then betweene the Pope and other Biſhops. foundation, an head in Chriſts abſence from the earth. Might
not euery one of them in like ſort admit a Pope, a Vicar generall,
an abſolute fellow Monarch, from whom in theſe remote countries,
there ſhould bee no more appeales to Rome, then are from
Rome to Chriſts throne of Maieſty: If wee ſpeake not of that
Maieſty which hee there enioyes, but of that authority which hee
ſometimes had,N
                        •
                     s non negamus, imo defendimus contra negantes, verbū Dei miniſtratum per Apoſtolos & Prophetas eſſe primum fundamentum noſtrae fid
                        •
                     i. Ideo enim credimus quidquid credimus, quia Deum 
                        •
                     d per Apostoles, & Prophetas reuelauit, ſed addimus praeter hoc fundamentum primum, requiri aliud fundamē
                     tum ſecundarium, id est, Eccleſiae teſtificationem. Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      enim ſeimus certò quid Deus reuelauerit, iniſi ex teſtimo monio Eccleſiae, & propterea ſicut legimus, Chriſtum eſſe lapidem fundamentalem, & fundamentum primum Eccleſiae, ita legimus Matth. 16. de Petro, ſuper hanc Petram aediſ
                        •
                     abo Eccleſiam meam. Ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſides noſtra adheret Chriſto, primae veritati reueclanti myſteria, & fundamento primario, adhaeret etiam Petro, id eſt, Pontifici praeponenti & explicanti haec myſteria, vt fundamento ſecundario. Bellar. de Verbi Dei, Interpret. cap. 10. Reſponſ. ad 13. or wee can imagine hee could haue in regiment
of his Church, were hee now viſibly preſent in the fleſh: it is that
Saint Peter, and his ſucceſſors may by our aduerſaries doctrine,
be more properly inſtiled compeeres to Chriſt, then the beſt man
liuing beſides vnto the worſt of them. For it muſt bee thought
that Chriſt in his abſence ratifies all their decrees without exception,
as wee may not queſtion them more then wee might
Chriſts owne, were hee viſibly reſident in his Church, yet was
the authority of Chriſts other Apoſtles ſo mightily ouertopped
by Peters Supremacy, that they could not bee infallible or occumenicall
without his approbation? If they were, Peter was not
ſuch an head to them, as his Succeſſors are to theirs, euen to all
Biſhops or inferior Miniſters throughout the world. If they were
not, the Pope, if hee will bee Peters Succeſſor, ſhould make Biſhops

or Cardinals, at leaſt eleuen, occumenicall Paſtors of authority
infallible, though with ſuch dependancy on his plenarie
power, as Chriſts other Apoſtes had on Peters. Or let them reſolue
vs in other fundamentall difficulties, which their doctrine
miniſters.
               19.Of all Peters prerogatiues thoſe moſt vrged by the Romaniſts, as alike appertaining to his ſucceſſors, are moſt perſonal. Chriſt ſayd, thou art Peter; that is, ſay they, a Rocke, an
head, a foundation in my place. Vnto whom was this ſayd? to
one of the twelue expreſſed by name, Simon the ſonne of Iona: To
whom likewiſe (ſingulariſed by the ſame expreſſe tearmes of indiuiduall
difference, and like reſtraint of preſent circumſtances or
occurrences) it was ſaid, feed my lambes, feed my ſheepe. If any of
Chriſts ſpeeches, (as the
                     Vide Bellar. lib. 2. de Romano Pontif. cap. 12. Parag. vltitimo, and the annotation, §. 21. Popes aduocates graunt many) were
perſonally directed to Saint Peter, queſtionleſſe theſe two. By
what analogie of faith, or rule of Grammer can they then extend
theſe, to euery Pope in his generation; or if any ſuch there haue
beene, or yet may be, vnto whom the foeminiue title of Petra, by
right of ſexe, may better agree then vnto Simon Bar-Iona. Yet
might the name or title infallible draw the ſupreame dignitie after
it, they are much-ouerſeene in not giuing the name of Peter to euery
Pope. Chriſt they confeſſe, is come in the fleſh, and was in
perſon made head, and foundation of the Church, and at his departure
left Peter in his ſteed: Peter, the Scriptures tell vs, was to
follow Chriſt; but (as they pretend) left Pope Linus in his place, ſo
hath euery Pope his ſucceſſor ſince that time. Yet theſe latter
mightily faile in not nominating others, whiles they themſelues
are liuing and viſible ſtones; as Chriſt without queſtion did Saint
Peter, whiles conuerſant with the faithfull in the fleſh, and Peter
Linus in his lifetime.
               20. But howſoeuer, they muſt of neceſſitie either make
Peter Linus, and theirThe Pap
                        •
                     ſts either admit many foundations, or build all the Apoſtles, beſide S. Peter, vpon their moderne Popes. ſucceſſors but one ioint permanent
foundation, and ſo the Popes ſhould not bee builded vppon
the foundation of the Prophets and the Apoſtles, but rather Chriſts
other Apoſtles vpon them; vpon whom, likewiſe, all the faithfull,
ſince the Apoſtles time, ſhould be immediatly built: Or,
if they doe not make Peter and the Popes one ioint vnſeparable
foundation, they muſt admit as many ſeuerall foundations as
Popes, ſo as the euerlaſting Rocke whereon the Church is built,
could not be truly ſaid one and the ſame, but by a perpetuall equiualency

of alteration or ſucceſſion: as we ſay corruptible elements,
fire, or water, or candles, remaine one and the ſame; becauſe
as one part conſumes, another, as good, comes in the
place. This glorious aedifice (as hath been obſerued) ſtands only
by faith, or firme adherence to the foundation: and by the Aduerſaries
owne confeſſion, to diſclaime the authority of the preſent
Romiſh Church, or Pope in points of faith, is an hereſie or
Apoſtaſie, of the ſame nature, as if a man had renounced Peter
for his ſupreame head, and this all one, as if he had cut himſelfe of
from being a member of Chriſt. Wherefore, in reſpect of vs
that are now to be edified, the authority of this preſent Pope is
equiuale 
                     •
                  t to Chriſts: our adherence to the one, in points of
faith and manners muſt be ſuch, as it ſhould haue been to the other,
had we liued in the dayes of his viſible conuerſation in the
world.
               Finally,v. cap. 8. §. 13. CHRIST, Saint Peter, and his ſucceſſors, in regiment
of the Church militant here on earth, differ, by the Roman
account, no otherwiſe then Romulus, Numa, Ancus, &c. Romulus
was firſt Founder of that kingdome, but leaſt other of kings of
the ſame ranke and order he was: onely his dignity after his departure
was acknowledged greater in another world; becauſe,
as his people were made to beleeue be aſcended aliue into heauen,
as a God. Much better might the Romaniſt deriue his
Pſewdocatholique Romane faith, fromThe Papiſts conceiue of Chriſt but as of another Romulus.
                   
                  Romulus the firſt builder
of that great City, that ſometimes ruleà ouer the Kings of the
earth; then from Chriſt, who did erect a kingdome indeed, but
not of this world; wherein none was to ſucceed him, becauſe
he remaines, Yeaſterday, to day, the ſame for euer: Whence the
Daniel 2. v. 44. Prophet ſayth, this kingdome ſhall neuer be deſtroied or giuen to another
people, but ſhall breake and deſtroy all former kingdomes, and it
ſelfe ſtand for euer. For any, eſpecially of that nation whoſe
former kings had put this immortall King to death concerning
the fleſh, to enſtile themſelues Rockes, and foundation of this euerlaſting
Empire, or abſolute ſpirituall Monarchies in this
place; doth euidently ſhew, they are the feete of that image,
moſt of which hath been, as ſhall be broken to peeces, by that
ſtone cut without hands out of the Mountaine, vntill it become
like the chaffe of the ſummer flowers, carried away with the

winde, and no place bee found for them; or, as the2. Theſ. 2. cap. 8. ver. Apoſtle
interprets the Prophet, the Lord ſhall conſume them with the
ſpirit of his mouth, and ſhall aboliſh them with the brightneſſe of his
comming.
               
               21. Would the Ieſuite then know, wherein he, and his Latian
Lord God muſt take after Saint Peter? Me thinks their formal
acknowledgement of that generall principle; Chriſt manifeſted
in the fleſh,
                  The Pope ſucceſſor vnto the checke, not to the promiſe giuē by Chriſt to Saint Peter.
                   
                  & made the headſtone in the corner, compared with their
late mentioned Apoſtacy, in ſeeking to lay another foundation;
was liuely reſembled, if not myſtically prefigured, by Saint Peter
faith, (immediatly after his glorious confeſſion) eclipſed
by interpoſition of ſuch earthly conceits, as perpetually darken
their mindes. For, vpon our Sauiours declaration, what bodily
calamity, what ignominy & reproach ſhould at Ieruſalem, ſhortly
after, befall the Rocke it ſelfe; whereupon that Church, againſt
which hee had now ſayd, the gates of hell ſhould neuer
preuaile, was founded: Peter (as Saint Mathew ſayth) tooke his
Maſter aſide, and friendly checks him, as if he had forgotten his
former promiſe,Math. 16. v. 22. &c. 
                  Maiſter be good to your ſelfe, this ſhall not be vnto
you. As if he had ſayd, if the gates of hell ſhall not preuaile againſt
your Church, or vs your poore Diſciples; I hope you are
able to priuiledge your owne perſon from ſuch diſgrace, and
ſcorne, as none but they can intend againſt you. So carnally did
this great Apoſtle vpon ignorance, conceit Chriſts ſpirituall
promiſe, as the papacy, vpon habituall or affected error, doth
to this preſent day. For one principall argument, moſt vſuall in
the mouthes and pennes of that great Heads chiefe diſciples, to
proue the Romiſh the only Church, vnto which that glorious
promiſe was made, or, at leaſt, hath been perpetually performed,
is, becauſe no temporall or ſecular power hath euer beene able,
(though many wicked Potentates, Kings, and Emperors (ſuch
titles they giue to all their enemies) haue attempted, either to deface
her externall pompe, ſtate, and ſplendor, or ſo to vſe the
Popes or Cardinalls, or other of her principall and deareſt children,
as the Iewes did our Sauiour Chriſt and his Diſciples. They
are of the world, and therefore ſpeake they of the world, and the world
heareth them. But could they, vnto any child of God, more plainly
proue themſelues heires to that checke, giuen by our Sauiour

to Saint Peter,
                  Bellarm
                        •
                     ne apphes all that is ſpoken in Peters commē dacions, vnto-his ſucceſſors, whom he will not haue ſharers in his reproofes. Ea quae dicuntui Petro in triphci ſunt differētia, quaed im enim dicuntur ei pro ſe tantum, quaedam pro ſe & omnibus 
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     istianis, quaedam pro ſe & ſucceſſoribus, id quod euidenter colligitur ex ratione diuerſa, qua ei dicuntur. Nam quae dicuntur ei, vt vni ex fidelibus certe omnibꝰ fidelibus dicta intelliguntur Vt Mat. 18. Si peccauerit inte 
                        •
                     rater t
                        •
                     us, &c. Quae dicuntur ei ratione aliquà propria perſonae ipſius, ei ſoli dicuntur, vt vade poſt me Satana. Et Terme ne
                        •
                     abis, iſta enim dicuntur ei ratione propri
                        •
                      imbe cillitatis, et ignorantiae. Quadam dicuntur ei ratione officij paſtoralis quae proinde dicta intelliguntur omnibus ſuceſſoribus, vt paſ
                        •
                     e oues meas et Bellar lib. 2. cap. 12. §. vltimo. The Romaniſt makes the Pope his God in that he makes him the Rock on which the Church is built. Compare. Exod. 17. 1. Cor. 10. 4. The Hebr. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     is taken in the ſame ſenſe. Pſal. 18. 3. Iſa. 31. 9. 
                  Goe behinde me Satans, ye are an offence, becauſe ye
vnderſtand not the things that are of God, but the things that are of
men? Could they more euidently demonſtrate, the Pope to be
that man of ſin, that muſt be inducted to the Church of God by
SatanThis obſeruation will eaſily approoue it ſelf to any that will reade the booke of Deuteronomium, and the Pſalmes.
                   
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the chiefe aduerſary or accuſer, he himſelf bearing
the name of aduerſary, likewiſe, in his titleThis obſeruation will eaſily approoue it ſelfe to any that will reade the booke of Deuteronomium, and the Pſalmes.
                   
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  —a
ſecond foundation, in ſhew ſubordinate, in deede and conſequence
quite contrary to that, which the Prophets and Apoſtles
haue laide; eternally priuiledged, if wee may beleeue his followers,
from thoſe ſpurnings of men, from which the pretious ſtone
of Syon was not exempted.
               22. To collect the ſumme of late Romaniſts comments, vpon
their Churches ſuppoſed fundamentall Charter; Their confeſſion
of Chriſt come in the fleſh, and made head ſtone in the corner,
though conceiued in forme of words orthodoxal enough, proues
only this, (but diſabundantly to all the world) that the Pope, their
ſupreame head, ſits in the Temple of God, whoſe circumference in
reſpect of men, who cannot ſearch other mens hearts, is defined
by this confeſsion. Their attributing the title of Rocks, or fun
damentall ſupportance of that ſpirituall houſe, vnto this head,
proclaimes vnto all the world, that hee ſits as God in the Temple of
God, ſhewing himſelfe that he is God. For the Hebrew 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   equiualent
to the Syriacke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in that ſence they take it, (as affording
ſuch impregnable ſupportance, or fortification againſt the powers
of hell, world, or fleſh,) is oftener by their owneThis obſeuation will eaſily approoue it ſelfe to any that will reade the booke of Deuteronomium, and the Pſalmes.
                   vulgar latine,
rendred Deus, then Petra or Rupes, which it directly ſignifies;
becauſe, conſidered with theſe circumſtances or effects, it is rather
a glorious title of the god-head, or deity it ſelfe, then a particular
attribute, taken from ſome diuine propriety, communicable
to Gods ſeruants in the abſtract.
               23. Laſtly, vnto mee their common expoſition of Chriſts
ſpeeches vnto Saint Peter, ſuggeſt this argument more then demouſtratiue,

that the Papacy is led by the ſpirite of great Antichriſt,How Romiſh Religiō denies the virtue and power of Chriſt come in the fleſh.
in that no doctrine of Diuels can more directly contradict,
or more ſhamefully deny the vertue and power of Chriſt come in
the fleſh, nor more peremptorily diſanull, or cancell his promiſe
there made vnto his Church, then Ieſuiticall comments vpon it,
doe. Chriſts promiſe was a promiſe of life and ſauing health, a
full aſſurance of eternall happineſſe, to all that ſhould bee truely
built vpon that Rocke which Peter confeſſed, or which they ſay,
Peter was They make the tenure of this glorious couenant to be
no more but this, that Peters ſucceſſors and ſuch as will builde
their faith vpon them (ſpeaking ex Cathedra) as vpon Rockes inuincible;
ſhall be indefectible in points of Chriſtian faith and
manners; howſoeuer euen theſe Rockes themſelues may be, for
life and conuerſation, as wicked as Annas or Caiphas, or other
blinded guides of the Iewiſh Sinagogue that crucified our Saniour.
               
               24 Thus by a pretended ſucceſſiue perpetuity of Peters faith,
they vtterly aboliſh that liuely faith,That Romiſh faith is that faith by which S. Peter confeſſed Chriſt.
whereby he confeſſed Chriſt,
which is alway included as a neceſſary condition, without which
none be capable of that glorious promiſe, but with it all are made
immediate heirs of ſaluation. Or to ſpeake more plainly, none may
expect the leaſt portiō of Peters bleſſing without Peters faith; nor
can that be in any, but ſuch as are borne of God: Euery one ſaieth
Saint IOHN, that is borne of God ouer commeth the world, and this
is the victory that ouer commeth the world, euen our faith. And again,
who is he that ouer commeth the world, but hee which belieueth: (what
Peter had confeſſed) that Ieſus is the ſonne of God. And our Sauiour
himſelfe, to whom his father had giuen power ouer all fleſh,
that hee ſhould giue eternall life to all, giuen him by his father; tels
vs, that this life eternall muſt grow from that root of faith which
firſt did branch in Peters mouth; but muſt be ſo planted as it grew
in him, in euery hart endued with ſure hope; much more in al ſuch
as lay challenge to ſuch preheminency, or prerogatiue of faith,
or hope, as Peter had; This is life eternall that they may know thee,
(ſayeth Chriſt ſpeaking of his Father) to bee the onely very God, &
whom thou haſt ſent Ieſus Chriſt, ſo then God manifeſted in the
fleſh, was the Rocke of ſaluation, whereupon the Church is built:

he that rightly knowes, and ſo belieues this truth, hath life eternal
dwelling in him.
               25 But ſhall ſuch a faith as may be ſeuerd from charity?That the Romiſh Church is neither that Rocke, nor built vpon that Rocke, againſt which the gates of hell cannot preuaile, becauſe their faith is vnſoūd. Mat. 4. 23. ſhall
ſuch a knowledge of Chriſt as may bee in them to whom Chriſt
ſhall ſay; Depart from mee I neuer knew you, I ſay not, make any
ſo impregnable a Rocke, but ſo faſten any to that Rocke ſo impregnable,
as the gates of hell ſhall not bee able to diſpoſſeſſe
him of eternall life? Whiles wee produce the late cited, or other
teſtimonies alike pregnant to condemne the Pontificians for denying
Iuſtification onely by faith, they thinke themſelues fully
acquitted with this ſolution, that our aſſurance of ſaluation relies
not vpon faith, as alone, but as it is the foundation of charity, and
accompanied with other chriſtian vertues. We neuer taught (as
ſhall be ſhewed in that controuerſie,) that faith, vnleſſe thus attended,
could with true confidence plead cur cauſe before God,
which yet though thus at tended, it onely pleades. But here our
aduerſaries muſt be contented to take their payment in their own
coine: For, if no man can bee iuſtified, or made heyre of ſaluation,
it is vnpoſſible any ſhould bee a liuely ſtone, or liuing member,
much leſſe a ſupreame head, or ſure foundation of that ſpirituall
houſe, alwaies victorious ouer death and hell, without a
faith ſo appointed, as in the former caſe they require, without a
faith as clearely teſtifying Chriſt dwelling in men, by workes
flowing from it, as their edification vpon him by an Orthodoxal
forme of words. Whoſoeuer is deſtitute of a faith thus bearing
fruit vnto ſaluation, is ſo farre from being a Rocke or ſure foundation
for others to build vpon, that hee himſelfe (if we may belieue
our Sauiour) buildes all h
                     •
                  s hopes vpon the ſand:Math. 7. 26. 
                  Whoſoeuer
heareth theſe my words, and doth them not, ſhall bee likened vnto
a fooliſh man, which hath builded his houſe vpon the ſand, & the rain
fell, and the ſtoudes came, and the winds blew, and beat vpon that houſe,
and it fell, and the fall thereof was great. Not euery one therefore that
ſaieth vnto our Sauiour, as Peter did, thou art the Chriſt the ſonne of
the liuing God, but he that expreſſeth his faith and hope by works,
anſwerable to Chriſts conuerſation in the fleſh, and his fathers
will, ſhall enter into the kingdome of heauen; becauſe hee onely
is built vpon that Rocke, which the floud-gates of hell cannot
vndermine or ouerthrow: For, whoſoeuer (ſayeth our Sauiour)

                  heareth of mee theſe words, and doeth the ſame, I will liken him to
a wiſe man which builded his houſe on a rocke, And the raine fell, and
the floudes came, and the winds blew, and beat vpon that houſe, and it
fell not, for it was grounded vpon a Rocke.
               
               26 Let the Ieſuite either produce any hereſie, broached ſince
our Sauiours Incarnation, or frame a conceite of any but Logically
poſſible before his comming vnto iudgement, which in outward
profeſſion, not diſclaiming the former maine foundation of
chriſtianity [God manifeſted in the fleſh] can indeed and iſſue more
euidently ouerthrow it, more diſtinctly contradict either thoſe
fundamentall precepts of ſaluation laſt cited, or more fully euacuate
the often mentioned promiſe made vnto Saint Peter, then
the foundation of Romiſh religion, as Romiſh doth; and I will doe
publike pennance in ſacke-cloth and aſhes, for laying the imputation
of Antichriſtianiſme vpon it. Our Sauiour ſaith, whoſoeuer
heareth theſe words and doth them not, doth build his houſe vpon
the ſand: They teach the contradictory as an Article of faith;
that the Pope or a councel of Biſhops aſſembled by his appointment,
inſtructed by his infallability,Praeterea Eccleſia congregata, ſiue conſilium proprijſſime est Eccleſia Chriſti, vt etiam aduerſarij concedunt: nam Eccleſi a eſt congregatio fidelium, ergo quo magis fideles ſūt congregati & vniti, eo magis proprie ſunt Eccleſia: at ſtultu eſt cum aliquid de alio abſolute pronunciatur, excipere id quod proprijſſimè per illud ſignificatur, ergo cum Chriſtus dicit, Super hanc Petram aediſicabo Eccleſiam meam, ſlultè excipitur Eccleſia vniuerſalis congregata, cum ea proprijſſimè ſit Eccleſia, Bellar. lib. 2. de Con. Auc. cap. 15. Of this Church the Pope is the foundation as hee auoucheth in the words going before. Quod eſt in domo fundamentum, eſt in corpore caput, & in grege Postor. Vt. n. fundamentū non pendet à domo, ſed domus à fundamento, ita ellam caput non pendet à corpore, ſe
                        •
                      corpus à capite, & paſtor non pendet à grege, ſed grex à paſtore. His concluſion is, Papa praeſt omnibus loco Chriſti quibus Chriſtus ipſe inuiſibiliter praeeſt, & quibus etiam praeeſſet viſ
                        ••
                     il
                        •
                     er, ſi viſibiliter adeſſet: Chriſtus aut cum praeeſt, & praeeſſet inuiſibiliter, ſi adeſſet viſibiliter, non ſolem Eccleſus particularibus ſed etiam toti Eccleſue vniuerſall, & generalibus concilijs: igitur etiam Papa preeſt Eccleſie vniuerſali. confirmed by his plenary
power, doe alwaies build vpon the ſame Rocke as Peter did; yea
that the Pope himſelfe, how wicked ſoeuer, is that very Rocke
whereupon the Church (that is in their language, the Biſhoppes
thus aſſembled) is built; the oecumenicall Paſtor that muſt keepe
them, and by them all Chriſts flocke, from going aſtray; the ſupreame
head, that by his vertue and influence muſt ſuſtaine euery
member of Chriſts body (here on earth) from falling into hereſie,
or approching the territories of hel, through any kind of error
or infidelity.
               27 Our Sauiour promiſed in ſolemne manner, ex Cathedra, the
gates of hell ſhall neuer preuaile againſt his Church. What Church?
the Catholike. What Catholike? Viſible or Inuiſible? Triumphant
or Militant? Viſible and Militant? What Catholike, viſible,

militant Church?Either is not the Romiſh Church repreſentatiue, that Church ſpoken of Mat. 10. or elſe Chriſts promiſe hath ſailed. The Romane? that conſiſts of diuers members:
In it ſome are Paſtors, ſome are ſheepe; whether haue better
intereſt in that promiſe? Paſtors. Of Paſtors, ſome are Prelates,
ſome inferiours; whether are to be preferred before the other?
Prelates doubtleſſe; for of them conſiſts the body of the Church
repreſentatiue, which is moſt properly called the Church, and
next in reuerſion vnto Peters prerogatiue. Did the gates of hell
then neuer preuaile againſt the greateſt Romiſh Prelates? I nominate
no particular perſon; I ſpeake onely of them as the
Scripture doth of Drunkards, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Dogs,
Enchanters. Many of highſt place in that Church haue for a long
time liued, and for ought their followers can, or
                     Caput Eccleſiae non poteſt quidem errare docendo falſam doctrinem, tamen poteſt errare male v
                           •
                        uendo, & malè etiam ſentiendo, vt pr
                           •
                        uatus humo, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hoc tantū videmus accidiſſe Adamo: malè enim aliquando vixit, & ſortè etiam malè de Deo ſentit, tamen non malè docuit. Bellarminus de Eccleſia militante. lib. 111. cap. 16. Some of their Popes by their owne writers confeſsion haue beene ſtrangely cut off, in the very acts of adultery, or other ſinnes by them accounted mortall. Chriſts promiſe vnto S. Peter, but a meere mockery by the Ieſuits conſtructiō. care to ſay vnto
to the contrary, died ſuch as the ſpirit of God hath excluded from
the kingdome of heauen; ſuch as Gods word tels vs, hell muſt
ſwallow vp with open mouth. Are they the Church, and may
hell gates preuaile againſt them, and yet not preuaile againſt the
Church?
               28 But if a woman, an whoriſh woman cannot be taken without
an excuſe, may wee thinke thoſe effemenate ſworne creatures
of ſeruitude to that great ſtrumper, can want an anſwere? No, this
diſtinction is alwaies at hand. Their Popes and Cardinals may
as erre, ſo goe to hell. But how? as priuate Doctors, not as oecumenicall
Paſtors, not as they ſpeake ex Cathedra: ſo to my remembrance
I haue read of a proud Romiſh Prelate, that reproued
for his ſecular pompe made anſwere, hee followed theſe faſhions
as hee was a Duke, not as an Archbiſhoppe. But the reprouers
reply hath made the Apologie (better then which no Ieſuite can
make for the Pope) moſt ridiculous euer ſince. If this be ſo, quoth
the ſhepheard (ſuch was the Paſtor God had appointed to rebuke
the madnes of this falſe Prophet) I pray reſolue mee what ſhall
become of my Lord Duke, if the Archbiſhoppe goe to the diuell.
If many, ſometimes Popes, be now in hell (as no Ieſuite I
thinke, will profeſſe any morall hope that all are ſaued:) What is
becom of the Church repreſentiue, which lodged in their brains?
Hath the number of glorified Saints been encreaſed by their departure
from earth? Were they euer a whit more happy for being
heires to that glorious promiſe; Thou art Peter, and vpon this
Rocke will I build my Church? or were their comments vpon that

place Orthodoxall? what was the comfort Saint Peter himſelfe
could euer haue reaped thence? Onely this, though Sathan may
ſo ſift thee, that thy ſoule may goe to hell before thy body deſcend
to the graue; yet reſt aſſured of this, that thy faith which in
Cathedrall reſolutions ſhall neuer faile thee in thy life time, ſhal
ſuruine in thy ſucceſſors when thou art dead; but to what purpoſe,
if notwithſtanding this prerogatiue, all may deſcend one
after another into hell?
               29 Or if their doctrine were true, to what end did Chriſt come
in the fleſh? onely to build a Church, which like a lampe or candle
may gloriouſly ſhine, whiles there is an interrupted ſucceſſion
of Popes▪ to propagate the ſplendor; but whoſe glory when that
expires, for ought that glorious promiſe addes vnto it, muſt bee
extinguiſhed; as the light goes out when the oyle is ſpent. Better
aſſurance then euery Pope for his time hath, Saint Peter by
their doctrine had none from thoſe wordes of our Sauiour. For
whatſoeuer power or prerogatiue was in them bequeathed to
him, doth deſcend by inheritance to his ſucceſſors. And would
the meaneſt Ieſuite now liuing haue gloried much in a life, graced
with no greater viſible Church dignity then S. Peters was, perpetually
expoſed to like danger, without any other ſolace to ſupport
it, ſaue onely this, that his poſterity ſhould enioy the ſame
priuiledges? But now that the glory and dignity of the Romiſh
Church is becom ſo great, & the Ieſuites portion thereby grown
ſo fat; they can bee well content to ſooth vp the Pope in his conceit,
that howſoeuer his perſon may goe to hell (a place it ſeems
not much dreaded, becauſe vnknown) yet hell gates ſhall neuer
preuaile againſt his faith; which hath brought ſuch large poſſeſſions
to the Church; both which hee may infallibly entayle to
his ſucceſſors vntill the worlds end. But (as I ſaid before) what
then ſhall become of that cathedrall faith? ſhall it augment the
quire of Gods elect, or can they make as many S. Faithes as haue
beene Popes?
               30 Herein appeares the exceſſe of theſe dayes impietie,The Romiſh Church of all Idols that are, or haue beene the moſt vaine and fooliſh. in reſpect
of former, that this imaginary Idea of Romiſh faith ſhould
be more ſuperſtitiouſly adored then any other Idoll in the world
euer was; Although that of the Apoſtle may bee more properly
ſaid of it then any other, nihil est in mundo. Other Idols repreſented

either men or beaſts, ſome permanent creature, or reall
quality: This is a fancy of a Chimaera, a ſhape of nothing; or if
by nature and eſſence ought, it is ſuch a conceit or mentall quality
as may bee in diuels. Exiſtance it hath none, but as Eclypſes
of the ſunne, by fittes or courſes, when the Pope ſhall ſpeake ex
Cathedra. What ſhall become of it, and the colours in the Rainbow,
after the day of iudgement, are two queſtions of like vſe &
conſequence: and of theſe two obiects, the one as fit to direct
mens courſes by ſea or land, as the other to conduct vs towardes
heauen. The dazled imaginations of theſe Idolaters, that can
thus conceit this faith to bee ſpirituall, and eternall by ſucceſſion,
when it cannot ſaue them in whom it is, are much worſe then
ſome fooliſh heathens dreames of an immortall fame, that was
to accompany their mortall ſoules, (as they eſteemed them) and
argue in theſe ſonnes of Antichriſt, either an incogitancy, or vnbeliefe
of Chriſt, who liues for euer, come in the fleſh, or a ſecure
worldly hope, hee ſhall neuer, or not this long time, come to
iudgement.
               31 Saint Peter hath fortold,2 Peter c. 3. v. 4. A Parallile of Atheiſticall and Papiſticall mockerie. 
                  that there ſhall come in the laſt daies
mockers, which will walke after their luſts, and ſay, where is the promiſe
of his comming? for ſince the fathers died, all things continue alike
from the begiuning of the creation. Atheiſts and Libertines
I know here are literally meant. But as the Prophets vſually prefigure
our future bliſſe by Ieruſalems preſēt glory, or other known
felicity, by which perhaps it was repreſented vnto them: So might
S. Peter ſhadow out vnto vs the myſtery of iniquity, according
to that rude draught which it had in his time. For the ſubſtance,
natiue quality, or proportion of the Atheiſts, and the moderne
godleſſe Romaniſts mockery, that are the ſame, onely the one is
more rude and rough hewen, the other more ſmoothly varniſhed
with hipocriſie, and ouerlaied with artificiall colours. The blunt
Atheiſt like a lewd debter that ſimply denies his bond, imagines
the Lord will neuer come to call him to an account. The ſubtle
Romaniſt like a crafty companion that acknowledgeth the debt,
but no ſet day of payment ſpecified, ſaue onely [tomorrow] hopes
to driue off God almighty from day to day, putting Chriſts comming
as farre from him the next three yeeres to come, as it was
the laſt three paſt; and ſo would hold on theſe hundred thouſand

yeeres, if the world ſhould ſtand ſo long becauſe Antichriſt, who
by profeſſed enmity againſt Chriſt, ſhall giue the world three
yeeres warning (according to the yeeres of an hireling) of its diſſolution,The Iew and the Ieſuite, are alike bewitched, the one in expecting Meſſias already come and crucified by his fathers, the other in looking for Antichriſt already reuealed, and adored by him as his God.
(if wee may belieue this mocker) is not yet reuealed:
Nor euer ſhall bee to him, vnto whom; ſince the Patriarkes and
Apoſtles died, continue as they did from the beginning of the new
creation, (mans redemption) without any generall Apoſtaſie or decay
of Peters faith, which remaines ſtill as freſh and liuely, as
when he firſt confeſſed Chriſt. Not the Iew more ſottiſh, in expecting his Meſſias, then this hypocrite in deferring Antichriſts
comming. And no maruell, when that which firſt cauſed the
Iew ſo grieuouſly to ſtumble, and ſince retaines him in his vnbeliefe,
is made the onely ground of the Romane Catholikes
faith. Hell, by approued experiment of the ones fall, knew well
the ſame charme would enchant the other: both being equally
tainted with a ſuperſtitious heatheniſh conceit, that their teachers
could not erre, becauſe they ſit in the ſeates of ſuch as were
infallible in their life times. And hence it is they are ſo blind, and
ſee it not, bewitched, and bewitching others with continuall reiterating
that magicke ſpell of templum Domini, the Church, the
Church, words whoſe meaning they vnderſtand no more, then
ſimple women doe waggiſh ſcholars medicines, or charmes for
the tooth ach. Their ignorance though they may put vs in mind
of another mockery, they make of our Sauiours words.
               32 For where hee promiſed hell gates ſhould neuer preuaile
againſt his Church, meaning againſt no true Chriſtian ſoule eſpouſed
to him by an indiſſoluble knot of faith and euerlaſting
loue: theſe mockers diſpoſſeſſe the Chriſtian world of this glorious
hope, by a double deluſion; firſt perſwading it, that the vniuerſall
Church militant may encampe in one mans breſt, vpon
whom, though hell ſhut her gates, the ſimple (ſuch as they would
make vs all) muſt belieue the Church is ſafe, becauſe hee came
not with them as an heretike. For ſo in the ſecond place, though
our Sauiour promiſeth in termes as ample and maieſticall as can
be deuiſed, that not Hell gates; that is, no power or force of hell,
ſhall bee able to hold play with that Church, whoſe ſafe conduct
to his heauenly kingdome hee there vndertooke, they make the
meaning of his aſſurance to bee but this: No hereſie (as if hell

gates were furniſhed with no other munition) ſhall euer make
breach vpon the Romane Conſiſtory, or approach the Popes
ſeat of dignity. Thus, to ſupport the Popes ſupremacy, they
would make Chriſt ſo to ſhufle, as if a Prince, (were it poſſible any Prince could bee ſo baſe) ſhould warrant his confederates ſafe
conduct through his territories, vpon as high tearmes, as his ſoueraignery
or ſupremacy would ſtretch vnto, and yet challenged
vpon the others miſcarriage, interpret his meaning to haue been
but this; I did warrant him he ſhould not die of poyſon, adminiſtred
by any Phyſition of mine in my dominions; that no violence
ſhould bee offered him by theeues and robbers, or other
vnruly ſubiects, I vndertooke not.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               That the Romaniſts beliefe of the Churches infallible authority cannot
be reſolued into any teſtimony better then humane, whence the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
concluſion immediately followes. That the Romanist in obeying the
Church-decrees, without examination of them by Gods word, prefer
mans lawes before Gods.
               1 SEing it hath beene manifeſted as well by oſtenſiue
proofe from Scriptures, as by deduction to
inconueniences, moſt contrary to the analogy,
and preiudiciall to the main foundation of faith,
that Saint Peter was not the Church, nor ſuch
an head as the Pope doth make himſelfe of all the faithfull: the
principall point is cleare, that the Romaniſts beliefe of ſuch a
tranſcendent, abſolute oecumenicall authoriry in the Church, as
might warrant our obedience to the former decrees, cannot bee
reſoluedinto any diuine teſtimony, or abſolute promiſe of Chriſt:
in neither of which the Pope can haue any intereſt, but onely by
right deriued from S. Peter.
               
               2 To follow them a little in their ſchoole humor, onely reckoning
the ſpeculatiue probabilities that can bee brought for them,
without computation of their blaſphemies, or other dangerous
conſequences, wherewith their doctrine heretofore hath beene,

and muſt bee farther charged; let vs trie what ſtrength the other
ioincts haue in themſelues, and ſee in the next place, what proofe
they can make their Popes are ſucceſſors to ſuch preheminences
as Peter had. Albeit euen this ioinct, as all the reſt of their
religion, is quite benummed, and vtterly depriued of ſence, by the
deadly blow lately giuen to the principall nerue, whence life and
motion muſt bee deriued to the whole body of their religion: for
if wee conſider the intenſiue perfection of that preheminence, or
eſtimation, which Peter in reſpect of his fellowes had, either with
his Lord, or with his flocke: this was founded in a correſpondent
exceſſe of his loue, his liuely faith, and diligent feeding; vnto
no one of which good qualities, the Popes profeſſe themſelues
heires infallible. Or if wee reſpect the extent or amplitude of S.
Peters extraordinary ſoueraignety, it was the ſame with Dauids
kingdome, or Chriſts owne paſtorall charge; and reached but
from D
                        •
                     n to Beerſhebah. At the vtmoſt, it and the circumciſion
had the ſame circumference: Within which, how great ſoeuer
his authority was, the Pope can haue no pretence to bee his ſucceſſor
therein. For the edification of the people committed to
him by our Sauiour, was to bee finiſhed before Ieruſalems deſtruction;
ſince which time Iſrael hath beene perpetually ſcattered amongſt
the nations without a ſhepheard, to gather them. And
when it ſhall pleaſe the Lord, as it is probable it will, to reduce
them to his fold: their Ruler ſhall bee of their own people, ſtrangers
ſhall haue no more dominion ouer them.
               
               3 Had the Pope deriued his right from Saint Thomas, Bartholomew
or other Apoſtle, which haue no writings extāt, this might
haue yeelded ſome ſurmiſes,The aduerſaries 
                        〈◊〉
                      in deriuing oecumenicall authority perpetually infallible from Saint Peter.
                   not ſo eaſie to bee diſproued, that
Romiſh traditions did containe the ſumme, at leaſt of all theſe Apoſtles
vnwritten doctrine: if from Saint Paul the great Doctor
of the Gentiles and firſt planter of faith amongſt the Romans, as
much commended by him as any other of his children in Chriſt;
the improbability had beene much leſſe then now it is in Peters
caſe, that the Biſhoppe of Rome, if any ſhould haue ſucceeded
him. But when that people beganne to grow out of loue with
the truth, faſhioning themſelues vnto this preſent world, (the diſeaſe
whereof Saint Paul
                  Rom. 12. 2. forewarned them) it was Sathans policy
to preſent vnto them, longing after ſuch a Monarchicall ſtate

as their heatheniſh Predeceſſors had, ſuch ſhewes of Peters Supremacy,
and reſidencie at Rome, as by the diuine permiſſion had
either crept into ſome of the Ancients religious cogitations, or
elſe in time of darkeneſſe haue been ſhufled by the predeceſſors of
theſe cheating mates late diſcouered, into their writings, as fitte
baites to entice them vnto this deriuation of that abſolute power
from Peter, to their greater condemnation, and our good. For
God no doubt in his prouidence ordered this their blindneſſe to
illuminate vs, as he did the fall of the Iewes to confirme the Gentiles
in faith, ſeeing of al the Apoſtles Peters prerogatiues (as hath
beene ſhewed) were moſt euidently perſonall, all to determine
with himſelfe; vnto which obſeruation his owne writings alſo
giue teſtimony. Euen a little before hee was to leaue the world,
where hee moſt manifeſted his earneſt deſire of preſeruing his
flocke, ſound in faith after his death, he giues no intimation (as
ſhall bee ſhewed more at large hereafter) of any Succeſſor, vnto
whom they were to repaire.Sect. 3. cap. 13. His preſent Epiſtle he foreſaw would
bee more auaileable to this purpoſe, then any tradition from him:
2. Pe. 1. 12. &c. 
                  I will not bee negligent to put you alwayes in remembrance of theſe
things, though that yee haue knowledge, and be eſtabliſhed in the preſent
truth. For I thinke it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to
stirre you vp,
                  S. Peter knew not his ſucceſſors ſhould bee infallible. 
                  by putting you in remembrance; ſeeing I know that the
time is at hand, that I muſt lay downe this my Tabernacle, euen as our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt hath ſhewed me. I will endeauour therefore alwayes
that yee alſo may bee able to haue remembrauce of theſe things after my
departing.
               
               4 As for peculiar direction of later times, whence perpetuall
infallibility muſt bee deriued; it cannot bee gathered from his
writings, that hee knew ſo much as his brother Paul did. Albeit
in this point, theſe two great pillars of Chriſts Church, more
famous then all their fellow Apoſtles beſides for preſent efficacy
of their perſonall miniſtery, come farre behind the Diſciple
whom Ieſus loued; whoſe written Ambaſſage was in a peculiar
ſence, to tarry till Chriſts laſt comming vnto iudgement, as hee
himſelfe did vnto Chriſts firſt comming to deſtroy Ieruſalem, and
forwarne the nations. Beſides the doctrine of common ſaluation,
neceſſary for all to know, plentifully ſet downe in this Diſciples
Epiſtle, his Reuelations containe infallible directions, peculiar

to euery age. And as in ſome one gift or other, euery Apoſtle
almoſt exceeds his fellowes:There be greater probabilities that S. Ioha ſhould haue had infallible ſucceſſors then S. Peter.
                   ſo if amongſt all, any one was to
haue this prerogatiue of beeing the ordinary Paſtor, or to haue ordinary
ſucceſſors as Aaron (thogh inferior to Moſes in perſonal prerogatiues
during his life) had after his death: this doubtleſſe
was Saint Iohn; who aſcribes that vnto the diligent expoſitors,
hearers or Readers of his bookes, which the Romaniſt appropriate
to ſuch as rely vpon the viſible Churches determinations: neuer
queſtioning whether it bee that Babylon which Saint Iohn
deciphers, or no; Bleſſed is he (ſaith Saint Iohn) that readeth; and
they that heare the words of this propheſie,
                  Reuel. 1. ver. 3. 
                  and keep thoſe things which
are written therein, for the time is at hand. Bleſſed they are that
reade it with feare and reuerence, or ſo affected as this Diſciple
was: for vnto ſuch the Lord will by meanes ordinary, by ſober
obſeruation of the euent, reueale his ſecret entent, as he did it vnto
him by the extraordinary gift of Propheſie,Reu. 19. 10. 
                  for the teſtimony
of Ieſus is the ſpirit of Propheſie.
               
               5 It is euident the ſpirit of God entended to ſhew Iohn, and
Iohn to ſhew the faithfull, all the Eclipſes that ſhould befall the
Church vntil the worlds end. His propheſies ſince his death, were
ſo to inſtruct the world of all principal euents preſent or to come,
as hyſtories do of matters forepaſt. Now as he in our times, wherin
God inſpires not men with Moſes ſpirit, is accounted the beſt
Antiquary, that is, moſt conuerſant and beſt ſeen in the faithfull
cords of time; not hee that can take vpon him to diuine as Moſes
did of the worlds ſtate in former ages: ſo ſince the gift of
propheſie ceaſed, hee is to bee eſteemed the moſt infallible teacher,
the ſafeſt guide to conduct others againſt the forces of hell,
chiefly hereſies or doctrines of Diuels, that can beſt interprete
him, who firſt deſcried them, and in his life time forewarned the
Churches of Aſia, planted by Saint Paul, and watered by him, of
the abhominations that threatned ſhortly to ouerſpread them,
and after them the whole viſible Church vntill theſe latter times,
doth the Pope then profeſſe more skill in Saint Iohns Reuelations
then any other? If hee doe, let him make proofe of his profeſſion
by the euidence of his expoſitions. But from this Apoſtle
hee pretends none at al, and we demand but any tollerable proofe
of ſucceſſion from S. Peter.
               
               
                  
6 A ſupreme oecumenicall head (ſay the Paraſites to the See
Apoſtolique) is as neceſſarie now, as in Saint Peters time: therefore
hee muſt iure diuino haue a Succeſſour.Vide lib. 2. Sect. 4. cap. 4. But neither doth
Scripture or Reaſon admit any ſuch head, as they haue molded
in their braines, either then or now. As hath beene abundantly
proued; and their owne inſtances brought to illuſtrate the probabilitie
of ſuch a deuice contradict them. For admit that Chriſt
and earthly Princes ſtood in like neede of Deputie-Gouernors in
their abſence: would the King of Spaine were he to goe on Pilgrimage
vnto his Kingdome of Ieruſalem, leaue but one Deputie ouer
all the Dominions of Spaine and Portugal, the Weſt Indies,
Sicilie, Naples, and Millaine? Or leauing but one, would indue
him with ſuch abſolute power ouer all his Subiects in theſe Nations,
as they imagine Chriſt doth the Pope ouer euery Chriſtian
ſoule throughout the whole world (what ſpirit then may wee
think) did poſſeſſe Bellarmine, when he auouched that the church
and common weales are different in this caſe? let vs heare the difference.
The Church Catholike must bee one by communion with one
head: ſo muſt the Liege people of euery Monarch be one by ſubordination
to one Soueraigne, whether reſident amongſt them,
or farre abſent.RESPONDEO, non eſſe eandem rationem Politici & Eccleſiaſtici regiminis. Siquidem orbis terrarum non neceſſario debet eſſe vnum regnum, proinde nō neceſſario poſtulat vnum qui omnibus praeſit; at Eccleſia tota vnum eſt regnum, vna ciuitas, vna domus, & ideo ab vno tota regi debet. Cuius differentiae, illa eſt, ratio, quòd ad conuerſationem Poli
                        •••
                     orum regno
                        •
                     um non neceſſariò requiratur, vt omnes Prouinciae ſeruent eaſdem leges ciuiles, & e
                        •
                     ſdens vitus. Poſſunt enim 
                        〈◊〉
                     , & perſonarum varietate diuerſis vti legibus, & inſtitutis, & d
                        •
                     irco non requiritur vnus, qui omnes in v
                        •
                     itate contineat. Ad con
                        •
                     eruationem verò Eccleſiae
neceſſè eſt, vt omnes conueniant in eadem fide, 
                        •
                     ſdem Sacramentis, 
                        •
                     ſdem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      praeceptis diuinitus traditis, quod ſanè ſierinon poteſt, niſi ſint vnus popu
                        ••
                     s, & ab vno in vnitate contineantur. Bellar. l. r. de Rom. Pont. c. 9. ſub ſinem. He acknowledgeth it were conuenient the whole world ſhould be gouerned by one ciuill Monarch. Were it poſſible to create ſurely one without bloud-ſhed of wrong, it were requiſite he or any in his behalfe ſhould reſolue vs why the whole Church might not as truly be one people by cō
                        munion with Chriſt their head, as the Tartars and Spaniards by ſubordination to one Lord, to wit, the King of Spaine, ſuppoſe he were Lord of both, & they as far diſtant each from other as they are.
                   Why may not Chriſt then, though abſent, be that
only ſupreme head, whence vniuerſally the Church receiueth vnitie?
or why may not hee rule in it, though diſperſed through
many Nations, as effectually by his Angels, and ordinarie Miniſters
of the Goſpell, as the Pope doth by his Nuncioes, fallible
Legates, or other inferiour Prelates?
               7 But though reaſon and Scripture faile them, yet Councels,
Hiſtories, and Traditions, may be muſtered to their aide. Theſe
are the firſt Springes of theſe many Waters, whereon the great

Whoore ſits. From what hiſtorie therefore doe they beleeue the
Pope is Peters ſucceſſour? from hiſtorie canonicall or diuine? no
Secular, Monkiſh, or Eccleſiaſticall at the beſt, vpon which the
beſt faith that can be founded is but humane: and their profeſſed
villanie in putting in and out whatſoeuer they pleaſe, into what
writing ſoeuer, (Gods word only excepted) makes it more then
doubtfull, whether many ancient Writers did euer intimate any
ſuch eſtimate of the Romiſh Church, as is now fathered vpon
them; or rather, this foule iniquitie late reuealed, whileſt ſome
haue beene taken in the manner, hath beene long time concealed
as a myſterie of the Romiſh ſtate. But they beleeue not this ſucceſſion
from expreſſe written hiſtorie, but from Tradition partly.
From Tradition, of whom? Of men, what men? Men obnoxious
to error, and parties in this preſent controuerſie: yet neither partiall,
nor erroneous while they ſpeake ex Cathedra, ſaith the Ieſuit.
But who ſhall aſſure vs what they haue ſpoken ex Cathedra concerning
this point? The Councels, What Councels? Councels
aſſembled by the Pope; Councels of men for the moſt part, as ill
qualified as carnally minded, and ſo palpably carried away with
faction, that to attribute any diuine authoritie vnto them, were to
blaſpheme the holy Spirit.The vncertaintie of Popiſh councells or traditions. Councels which the Papiſts themſelues
acknowledge not of ſufficient authoritie, vnleſſe they follow
the Popes inſtructions; from whom likewiſe they muſt receiue
their approbation. The Pope muſt aſſure vs the Councell
(which perhaps elected him, reiecting a Competitor euery way
more ſufficient) doth not erre. But that the Pope is lawfully elected;
that ſo elected, he cannot erre in this aſſertion, who ſhall
aſſure vs? hee himſelfe or h
                     •
                  s Predeceſſors. This then is the laſt
reſolution of our faith, if it relie vpon the Church.
               8 We muſt abſolutely beleeue euery Pope in his owne cauſe:
Firſt, that he himſelfe is; ſecondly, that all his Predeceſſors vp to
Saint Peter were infallible. When as many of them, within theſe
few hundred years late paſt (by their owne followers confeſſion)
were ſuch, as whatſoeuer muſt deriue it pedigree from them, may
iuſtly be ſuſpected to haue firſt deſcended from the father of lies;
ſuch as not ſpeaking ex Cathedra, were ſo far from the eſteeme of

abſolute infallibility, that ſuch as knew them beſt did truſt them
leaſt in matters of ſaecular commodity, and if they were found
vnfaithfull in the wicked
                  Luke 16. v. 11 
                  Mammon, who will truſt them in the true?
NotHe that is vniuſt in the leaſt is vniuſt alſo in much, ſaieth our Sauiour in the ſame place v. 10. Papiſts themſelues, vnleſſe they ſpeake ex Cathedra. Then
belike our Sauiour did not foreſee this exception from his generall
r
                     •
                  ie: or Iudas by this knacke might haue proued himſelfe
or any other knaue, as faithfull a Paſtor as S. Peter.
               
               9 But if a Pope ſhall teach ex Cathedra, that he is Peters lawfull
ſucceſſor and therefore of diuine infallible authority, in expounding
all the former places,A Popes teſtimony of himſelfe or his predeceſſors is authenticke. wee muſt notwithſtanding our
Sauiours caueat, belieue him. Why? Becauſe it muſt bee ſuppoſed
he hath diuine teſtimony for this aſſertion. As what, either
diuine hiſtory, diuine tradition, or diuine reuelation? Diuine hiſtory
thy diſclaime, nor can impudency it ſelfe pretend it. It may
bee hee hath the perpetuall traditions of his predeceſſors. But
here againe wee demaund what diuine aſſurance they can bring
forth, that euery Pope from Saint Peter downewards, did giue expreſſe
cathedrall teſtimony to this perpetuall ſucceſſion in like
authority. Suppoſe (what no Ieſuite dare auouch, vnleſſe hee
firſt conſult his ſuperiours, whether hee muſt not of neceſſity ſay
ſo, for maintenance of the Popes dignity) that this aſſertion had
beene expreſly conueyed from Saint Peter to the preſent Pope,
without interruption; yet if any one of them did receiue it from
his predeceſſor, hauing it but as a priuate man, or vpon his honeſty,
hee might erre in deliuering it to his ſucceſſor, ſo might the
third in belieuing him. For no beliefe can bee more certain then
it proper obiect, or immediate ground. If That bee fallible, the
beliefe muſt needs be vncertaine, obnoxious to error, and at the
beſt humane. No better is the Popes teſtimony, vnles giuen ex
Cathedra: and no better is the ground of his owne beliefe, of what
his Predeceſſors told him, vnleſſe they tolde it him ſo ſpeaking.
Wherfore though this preſent Pope ſhould teach ex Cathedra, viua
voce, that hee is Peters lawfull ſucceſſor; yet vnleſſe hee can
proue that none of his predeceſſors did euer neglect ſo to auouch
the ſame truth, it is euident that hee ſpeakes more then hee can
poſſibly know by any diuine teſtimony, either of hiſtory, or vnwritten
tradition. It is euident againe, hee bindes vs to beleeue
that by diuine faith which hee cannot poſſibly know himſelfe, but

onely by faith humane. For the onely ground of his aſſertion,
is this ſuppoſed perpetuall tradition: and this is but humane,
vnleſſe it bee perpetually deliuered ex Cathedra.
                  Popes bind vs to belieue by diuine faith their reports of matters forepaſt which they cannot belieue by any other faith, but humane and fallible. No is there any
other meanes poſſible vnder the ſunne, nay either in heauen or
earth, for to know matters of this nature forepaſt, but either the
teſtimonie of others, that haue gone before vs, who either were
themſelues, or tooke their relations vpon truſt from ſuch as
were preſent, when the things related were acted, or elſe by reuelation
from him who was before all times, and is a preſent ſpectatour,
an eye witneſſe of euery action.
               
               10 Our knowledge of matters forepaſt by the former means,
(though Popes themſelues be the relators, vnleſſe their relation
bee cathedrall) as hath been proued, are but humane and fallible,
Things known by immediate reuelation from God are moſt certaine,
becauſe the immediate Relator is moſt infallible. Doth the
Pope by this meanes know,He that will be reputed a Prophet of times forepaſt, muſt ſhew himſelfe a prophet of things to come. what his Predeceſſors, or Saint Peter
thought concerning this perpetuall ſucceſſion, or generally
all matters concerning this point long ſince forepaſt? He may as
eaſily tell vs what any of his ſucceſſors ſhall doe or ſay an hundred
yeers hence. And thus much if this preſent Pope will vndertake,
the Chriſtian people then liuing, may ſafely belieue, what the
Pope then being ſhall ſay of this; or both of their predeceſſors.
But to belieue man, as an infallible prophet of things paſt, which
cannot approue himſelfe a true foreteller of things to come, were
to inuert Gods ordinance, and mocke his word. For it hath been
a perpetuall law of God, that no mā ſhould euer be belieued more
then man, or by any faith, more then humane, though in matters
preſent, whereof hee might haue beene an eye witneſſe: vnleſſe
he ſhewed his participation of the diuine ſpirit, by infallible praediction
of things to come, or euidencie of miracles fully anſwering
to the prediction of Gods word already written, as ſhall bee
ſhewed at large in the next ſection.
               11 If wee put together the firſt elements of Romiſh faith, as
they haue beene ſounded apart, they make no ſuch compound,
as the ſimple and ignorant Papiſts, (who in policy) are taught to
read this leſſon, as little children vntaught, will by geſſing at the
whole in groſſe, without ſpelling the parts, belieue they doe.
Firſt, their prerogatiues they giue to Peter are blaſphemous. Secondly,

their allegations, to proue that their Popes ſucceede as
full heires to all Peters prerogatiues, are ridiculous. Whence it
muſt needes follow, that their faith is but a compoſt of folly &
blaſphemy. This pretended perpetuity of tradition, or ſuſpitious
tale of ſucceſsion from Peter, is the beſt warrant they haue, the
Church doth not erre in expounding the places alleadged for
her infallability, and their beliefe of their infallibility in ſuch expoſitions,
the onely ſecurity their ſoules can haue, that obeying
the former decree of worſhipping the conſecrate hoſt, of cōmunicating
vnder one kind, they doe not contemptuouſly diſobey
Gods principall lawes, mangle Chriſts laſt Will and Teſtament,
vilifie his pretious body and bloud. Seeing then they themſelues
confeſſe the places brought by vs againſt their decrees to
be diuine; and we haue demonſtrated that mens beliefe of that
infallible authority in making ſuch decrees, to bee merely humane:
the former concluſion is moſt firme, that whileſt men
obey theſe decrees againſt that naturall ſenſe and meaning, which
the former paſſages of ſcripture ſuggeſt ſo plainly to euery mans
conſcience, that the Churches pretended authority ſet aſide, none
would euer queſtion whether they could admit any reſtraint, they
obey men more then God, humane lawes more then diuine, and
much better belieue the traditions of humane fancy, of whoſe
forgery for others worldly gaine there bee ſtrong preſumptions,
then the expreſſe written teſtimony of the holy ſpirit, in the eſpeciall
points of their owne ſaluation.
               12 Or if vnto the teſtimony of Gods ſpirit,The preſent Popes authority is greater then hiſtory, traditions or councels, or ought that can be pretended for it. recorded in Scriptures,
wee adde hiſtory, tradition, Councels, or former Popes
decrees or whatſoeuer poſſibly may be pretended to proue the
preſent Popes authority, it muſt ſtill bee ſuppoſed greater & better
knowne, then all that can be brought for it or againſt it, as
will appeare, if we apply our argument vſed before. That authority
is alwayes greater which may trie all others, and muſt bee
tried by none, but ſuch is the Popes declaration, or determination
of all points in controuerſie, whether about the canon or
ſence of Scriptures, ouer thoſe which are brought for it, whether
about the truth, true meaning or authority, or vnwrittē traditions,
whether about the lawfulnes of councels, or their authentique interpretations:
in one word, his determinations are monarchical, &

may not be examined, as S. Auſten or others of the ancient fathers
writings may by any law written or vnwritten. SoAliud eſt interpretari legem more doctoris. aluid more iudicis, id explicationem more doctoris, requiritur e
                        •
                     uditio, ad explicationem more iudicis requiritur authoritas. Doctor enim non proponit ſententiam ſuam vt neceſſario ſequend
                        •
                     m, ſed ſolum quatenus ratio ſuadet: at iudex propon
                        •
                     t vt ſequendam neceſſario. Aliter accipimus gloſſas Bartholi & Baldi, aliter declarationem Principis. Auguſtinus igitur & ceteri Patres in Commentarijs fungebantur offic
                        •
                     o Doctorum: at Concilia, & Pontifices funguntur officio iudicij à Deo ſibi cōmiſſo. Bellar. de verbi Dei interpret. lib. 3. cap. 10. reſpon. ad 16. 
                  Bellarmine
ſuteable to the Trent Councell, expreſly auoucheth: The Fathers
were onely Doctors or expoſitors, the Pope is a iudge, What
then is the difference betweene a Iudge and an expoſitor: To explane
as a Iudge, there is required authority, to explane as a Doctor, or expoſitor,
onely learning is requiſite. For a Doctor doth not propoſe his
ſentence as neceſſary to bee followed, but onely ſo farre as reaſon ſhal
councell vs: but a Iudge propoſeth his ſentence to bee followed of neceſſity.
Whereof then will the Pope bee Iudge? Of expounding
Scriptures: theſe places of Scripture which make for his pretended
authority. Muſt his ſentence herein of neceſſity be followed?
By Bellarmine it muſt, albeit wee ſee no reaſon for it, either
out of Scripture or nature. It is for Doctors to bring reaſons for
their expoſitions; but the Pope needs not except hee will: nor
may wee exact it of a Iudge. So hee addes more expreſly, We admit
not of Bartolus, or Baldus gloſſes, as wee doe of Empecours declarations.
Auſtine and other Fathers in their Commentaries ſupply
the places of Teachers, but the Councell and Popes exerciſe the function
of Iudges, whereunto God hath deſigned them. But how ſhall we
know that God hath committed all iudgement vnto them, ſeeing
wee haue beene taught by his word,Ioh. 5. 22. 23. 
                  that hee hath committed all
iudgement vnto his ſonne, Becauſe all men ſhould honour the ſonne as
they honour the father? We reade not of any other to whom the
like authority is giuen by God, or his ſonne; yet of one, whoſe
very name ſhall import the vſurpation of like authority, that is,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Chriſts Vicar generall, vnto whom the Sonne as muſt
bee ſuppoſed, doth deligate the ſame iudiciary power the Father
deligated vnto him.
               13. But may a Princes declaration in no caſe be examined by
his ſubiects? Yes, though in ciuill matters, it may, ſo farre as it
concernes their conſciences; as whether it be conſonant to Gods
word or no, whether it make more for the health of their ſoules,
to ſuffer what it inflicts vpon the refuſers, or to act what it commands.
To controle, contermaund, or hinder the execution of it,
by oppoſition of violence or contrary ciuill power, ſubiects may
not. But for any, but man, to vſurpe ſuch dominion ouer his
fellow creatures ſoules, as earthly Princes haue ouer their ſubiects

goods, lands, or bodies, is more then Monarchicall, more
then tyrannical, the very Idea of Antichristianiſme. And what
I would commend vnto the Reader, as a point of eſpeciall conſideration,
this aſſertion of Bellarmine, concerning the Popes abſolute
authoritie, directly proues him, as was auouchedCap. 7. §. 18. & 20. Bellarmine to prooue tho Pope is abſolutely aboue the vniuerſall Church vſeth theſe words, Omnia nomina, quae in ſcripturis tribuuntur Chriſto, vnde conſtat eum eſſè ſupra Eccleſiam, eadem omnia tribuuntur: Pontif. Bellar. de conciliorum auct. Lib. 2. cap. 17. before,
to be a ſupreame head or foundation, of the ſelfe ſame ranke and
order with Chriſt, no way inferiour to him in the intenſiue perfection,
but onely in the extent of abſolute ſoueraigntie. For,
greater ſoueraignty cannot be conceiued then this, That no man
may examine the truth, or equity of commands, or conſequences
immediately deriued from it, though immediatly concerning
their eternall ioy or miſerie. No Prince did euer deligate ſuch
ſoueraigne power to his Vice gerent, or deputy: nor could he,
vnleſſe for the time being (at leaſt) he did vtterly relinquiſh his
owne ſupreame authority, or admit a full compere in his kingdome.
Chriſtum caput eſſe Eccleſiae vniuerſae libentiſme conſitemur, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vllum hominem, ac ne angulum quidem illi aequamus; quod eſſet propr
                        •
                      duo capita in Eccleſiae corpore conſtituere, at quin ſub Chriſto ſuo capite Vicarius eius in terris caput vt ſic dicam, miniſteriale non principale rectè nominetur, negari nullo modo poteſt; Siquidem vt in republica temporali caput omnium principale Rex eſt, ſub Rege deinde capita ſunt Prouinciarū, ij qui dicuntur Proreges & ſub Proregibus capita ſuat vrbium ſingularum, certi quidam Praetores, & ſub praetoribus quaelibet familia ſuum habet caput, ipſum videlicet Patrem familias: Ita quoque in Eccleſia, Dei ſummum caput omnium hominum & Angelorum Chriſtus eſt: ſub Chriſto in terris caout omnium Chriſtianorum est Pontifex maximus: ſub illo Epiſcopi Parochi capita ſunt Chriſtianae multitudinis. Bellar. de ſummo Pont. ſiue lib. 2. de tranſ. Imp. cap. 24. His ſimilitude falls in this that they admit of no appeale from the Pope to Chriſt, no examination of his decrees by Gods word: Nor is the Pope by their doctrine ſubordinate in ſuch ſort vnto Chriſt, as all other Biſhops are to the Pope. 
                  Bellarmines diſtinctions, of a primary and ſecondary foundation,
of a ministeriall and principall head of the Church, may hence
he deſcribed to be but meere ſtales ſet to catch guls. Their conceit
of the Popes copartnerſhip with Chriſt, is much better reſembled,
and more truly expreſſed, by the Poets imaginations of
Iupiter, and Auguſtus Caeſars fraternity,
Diuiſum imperium cum Iove Caeſar habet:
                  
                     
                        Ioue and Caeſar are Kings and Gods:
                     But Ioue of heauen; thats the onely ods.
                  
That Chriſt ſhould retaine the title of the ſupreame head ouer
the Church militant, and the realitie of ſupremacie ouer the
Church triumphant, ouer aduerſaries are not offended: Becauſe,

there is ſmall hope of raiſing any new tribute from the Angels,
and Saints in heauen, to the Romiſh churches vſe; and as little
feare that Chriſt ſhould take any ſecular commodity from it,
which aunciently it hath enioyed.
               14. But though it were true, that we were abſolutely bound
to obey an abſolute Monarchie, of whoſe right none doubts: yet
may we examine whether euery Potentate that challengeth Monarchicall
iuriſdiction ouer others, or giues forth ſuch inſolent edicts
in ciuill matters, as the Pope doth in ſpirituall, do not goe
beyond his authority in theſe particulars; albeit his lawfull prerogatiues
in reſpect of others, be without controuerſie many and
great, yet limited both for number and magnitude. For ſuppoſe
King Henry the eight, after hee had done what he could againſt
the Pope, ſhould ſtill haue profeſſed his good liking of Romiſh
religion, oppoſing only this to all his Popiſh Cleargie, that had
challenged him of reuolt: Am not I defender of the faith. The Pope,
whom I trow you take for no falſe Prophet, hath giuen me this
prerogatiue amongſt Chriſtian Princes, as expreſly, as euer Saint
Peter bequeathed him his ſupremacy aboue other Biſhops. It is
as impoſſible for me to defend, as for his Holineſſe to teach, any
other beſides the true Catholique faith. Let the proudeſt amongſt
my Prelates examine my expoſitions of his decrees, and
by S. George, he ſhall fry a fagot for an heretick, Would this or
the like pretence (though countenanced by royall authority)
haue been accepted for a iuſt defence, that this boiſterous King
had not contradicted the Pope, but the tatling Monkes, or other
priuate expoſitors of his decrees? would this haue ſatisfied the
Popes agents, vntill the King and his Holineſſe had come to perſonall
conference, for finall debatement of the caſe? yet for
Chriſts ſeruants thus to neglect their maſters cauſe, is no ſinne in
the Romaniſts iudgement, yea an hereſie is it not to deale ſo negligently
in it. For a ſinne of no lower ranke they make it, not to
ſubmit our hearts, minds, and affections, vnto the Popes negatiue
decrees, though againſt that ſence of ſcripture, which conſcience
and experience giue vs. Vnto all the doubts, feares, or
ſcruples theſe can miniſter, it muſt ſuffice; That the Pope ſayth
he expounds ſcripture no otherwiſe then Chriſt would, were hee
in earth, but onely controls all priuate gloſſes or expoſitors of

them. But can any Chriſtian heart content it ſelfe with ſuch deluſions,
and defer all examinations of doctrine, vntill that dreadfull
day come vpon him, wherein the great Shepheard ſhal plead
his owne cauſe, face to face, with this pretended Vicar and his
aſſociates? Do we beleeue that Chriſt hath giuen vs a written
law, that he ſhall come to be our Iudge, and call vs to a ſtrict accompt
wherein we haue tranſgreſſed or kept it; yet may we not
try by examination, whether theſe Romiſh guides lead vs aright
or awry? Whether ſome better or clearer expoſition may not
be hoped for, then the Pope or Councell, for the preſent, tenders
to vs? What if the Pope ſhould prohibite all diſputations about
this point in hand, [whether obeying him againſt the true ſence
of ſcripture, (as we are perſwaded) wee yeeld greater obedience
vnto him, then vnto Scriptures;] may we not examine the equity
of this decree, or his expoſition of that Scripture which happely
he would pretend for this authority, his amplius, fili mi, ne
requiras? No: by their generall tenent, andLib. 2. ſect. 2. cap. 5. par. 8. 
                  Valentians expreſſe
aſſertion, it were extreame impiety to trauerſe this ſence, or expoſition,
vnder pretence of obſcurity, &c. By the ſame reaſon, for ought
I can ſee, it would follow, that, if the queſtion were, [whether, obeying
the Pope more then God, we did obey man more then
God] we might not examine, at leaſt not determine, whether the
Pope were man or God, or a middle nature betwixt both, which
came not within the compaſſe of that compariſon.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               In what ſence the Ieſuites may truly deny they beleeue the words of man
better then the words of God: In what ſence againe our writers
truly charge them with this blaſphemy.
               1. IF we reuiew the former diſcourſe, we may find,
that equiuocation, which Bellarmine ſought (as
a knot in a bulruſh) in our writers obiections,
to be directly contained in their Churches deniall
of what was obiected. Whileſt they deny
that they exalt the Churches authority aboue ſcriptures, or

mans word aboue Gods; this deniall may haue a double ſence.
They may deny a plaine and open profeſſion, or challenge of
greater authority in their Church then in Scriptures: Or they
may denie, that in effect and ſubſtance they ouerthrow all authority
of Scripture, ſaue onely ſo farre as it makes for their
purpoſe.
               2. That the Pope ſhould openly profeſſe himſelfe competitor
with God,Antichriſt muſt not be a profeſſed or open enemie but a ſecret vnderminer of true Religion. or, in expreſſe tearmes, challenge greater authority
then Scriptures haue: was neuer obiected by any of our writers.
For all of vs know, the man of ſinne muſt be no open, or
outward enemy to the Church, but Iudas like, a diſciple by profeſſion:
his doctrine, indeed, muſt bee a doctrine of diuels, yet
counterfeiting the voice of Angels; as he himſelfe, though by
internall diſpoſition of minde a ſlaue to all manner of filthineſſe,
and impurity, muſt bee enſtiled ſanctiſsimus Dominus, the moſt
holy Lord. If the poiſon of his iniquity were not wrapt vp in the
titles of diuine myſteries, it would forth-with be diſliked by many
ſilly ſuperſtitious ſoules, which daily ſuck their bane from it, becauſe
perſwaded that the ſcriptures, which they neuer haue examined,
whoſe true ſence they neuer taſted, but from ſome reliques
of heatheniſh zeale, idolatrouſly worſhip in groſſe, do fully
warrant it. When our Writers therefore obiect, that the Papiſts
exalt the Popes lawes aboue Gods; (had not theſe holy Catholicks
an eſpeciall grace to grow deafe, as often as wee charge
their mother with ſuch notorious and knowne whoredomes, as
they ſee might euidently be proued vnto the world, if they ſhould
ſtand to conteſt with vs) their meaning is plaine; that the Pope,
in deed, and iſſue, makes the Scriptures, which in ſhew he ſeemes
to reuerence,The Pope and his followers haue good reaſon to magnifie Chriſts authority in words or outward ſhew for their owne gaine and glory could not otherwiſe be ſo great. of no authority, but onely with reference to his
owne. That he, and his followers ſhould in words much magnifie
Gods word, written or vnwritten, we do not maruell; becauſe
the higher eſteeme men make of it, the higher ſtill hee may
exalt his throne, being abſolutely enabled, by this deuiſe, to make
all that belongs to God, his Word, his Lawes, his Sacraments,
the pretious Body and Bloud of his Sonne, bleſſed for euer, meere
foot-ſtooles to his ambition. For, if the authority of Scriptures,
or ſuch traditions as he pretends, be eſtabliſhed as diuine, and he
admitted, ſole, abſolute, infallible Iudge of their meaning; it

would argue either Antichriſtian blindneſſe not to ſee, or impudency
of no meaner ſtocke, not to acknowledge that the Pope by
this meane might appropriate vnto himſelfe the honour due vnto
God, and play vpon his Creator in ſuch ſort, as if a corrupt Lawyer
hauing euidences committed to his truſt, ſhould by vertue of
them take vp rents, and let leaſes to the Landlords dammage, and
Tennants ouerthrow. And (what is moſt villanous) vnto whatſoeuer
prerogatiues, though moſt preiudiciall to the diuine maieſty;
his Paraſiticall Canoniſts ſhall blaſphemouſly entitle this
moſt holy Father the ſonne of God, and his faithfulleſt ſeruants,
(Apoſtles or Prophets) muſt be brought forth to abette the forgery,
as if euidence giuen in Court by infamous Knights of the
Poſt, ſhould in the finall day of hearing bee produced, vnder the
hands and ſeales of free Barons, or other chiefe Peeres of the
Land: for, as was intimated before, whatſoeuer the Pope though
in his owne cauſe, ſhal ſay, it muſt by this doctrine, be ſuppoſed,
that Chriſt doth ſay the ſame. Yea, if it ſhould pleaſe his Holines
to auouch ex Cathedra, that theſe words, Thou art a Prieſt for euer
after the order of Melchiſedech, are truely and literally meant
of himſelfe as Chriſts Vicar, or of perpetuall ſucceſſion in Peters
chaire: the euidence muſt be taken as vpon the Almighties oath;
who in that place hath ſworne as much as theſe words import; but
what that is the Pope muſt iudge. That then he permits Chriſt
the title of his ſoueraigne Lord, and vrges others to ſubſcribe vnto
his lawes as moſt diuine, is iuſt, as if ſome Polititian ſhould ſolicite
the whole body of a kingdome, ſolemnely to acknowledge
one, otherwiſe lawfull heire vnto the Crowne, for their Monarch
moſt omnipotent and abſolute, (whoſe will once ſignified muſt
bee a law for euer inuiolable, to all his ſubiects) not with intent
that hee ſhould in perſon retaine ſuch perpetuall ſoueraignety ouer
them, but that hee might haue abſolute power to diſpoſe of
his kingdome, as he pleaſed vnto the worlds end; or to nominate
others, as abſolute in his place, whileſt he ſpent his dayes as a ſoiourner
in a forraine land. Finally, not the moſt treacherous and
deteſtable plot, the moſt wicked Pope that hath beene, is or ſhall
be, could deſire to effect, but may by this deuice be countenanced,
with as great and ſacred authority, as were the beſt actions

our Sauiour euer vndertooke which (as may better appeare from
what ſhall be ſaid in the nextCap. 10. 11. Section) is to make euery Popes
authority as much greater then our Sauiours, as their liues and
actions are worſe then his was.
               3 Suppoſe ſome Diuell ſhould poſſeſſe the Popes place in ſimilitude
of a man,The ſame plea the Ieſuites make for the Popes abſolute infailibility, the Diuell himſelf might vſe with as great probability, were he formally elected in his place. (as ſome Papiſts thinke the great Antichriſt,
who ſhall challenge as great authority as the Pope doth, ſhall be
a Diuell incarnate, or the ſonne of a Diuell,) might he not hold
his dignity by the ſame plea the Ieſuites make for their Lord and
Maſter? Could hee not be content to pretend Chriſts name, or
ſucceſſion from Saint Peter, (as Simon Magus might hee haue
obtained what hee deſired, would haue done) for his owne aduantage?
Could hee not vrge the authority of Gods word to
confirme his owne ouer it, and all that is called Gods? If in
ſuch a caſe it might not be permitted men to examine his allegations
out of Scriptures, how could the diuell himſelfe bee conuinced
by Scriptures, or depoſed from his ſupremacy, thence
pretended? And can wee doubt, whether hee which makes no
other plea, then the Diuell were hee in place might, is not that
Filius Diaboli, The great Antichriſt? Were we not taught that
the ſonnes of this world are wiſe onely in their owne generation,
wee might iuſtly wonder that any men indued with naturall wit,
could be ſo blind, as at the firſt ſight not to deſcrie the politique
ſophiſmes vſed by the Romaniſt to coſen Chriſt of his kingdom.
As their whole Religion is but the image of the old Romane policy;
ſo their maine plot of Templum Domini, Templum Domini,
the Church, the Church, as if all were rebels againſt Chriſt, that
will not ſweare abſolute fealty to the Church Romiſh, may bee
moſt fully paralelled by the like practiſe of ſuch cunning Statesmen,
as hauing alwaies one eye to the aduancement of their own
priuate fortunes, liue vnder an abſolute Monarch, of himſelfe
royally minded, but not much intermedling in the affairs of greateſt
moment. Oportunity of high place vnder a king, vpon what
occaſion ſoeuer thus ſequeſtred, that poore mens complaints
cannot poſſeſſe his eares, tempts polititians to effect their owne
purpoſes, vnder pretence of his right, to condemne all of treaſon
or diſloyalty, that will not obey their deſignes directed in

their Soueraignes name, though moſt abhorrent from the diſpoſition
of his royall heart, were hee acquainted with ſuch lamentable
grieuances of his poore Subiects, as are the vſuall conſequents
of Princes gracious fauours vpon great ones. The more
abſolute ſuch a Princes lawfull authority, the greater his natiue
ſubiects loue vnto him is, the more both, may both bee abuſed
by ſuch vnthankefull officers. As it is the ſoueraigne conceit all
men haue of Chriſts kingdome, which keepes the ſilly in ſuch
ſeruility vnto the Pope, his pretended agent.
               4 This is the onely difference in theſe two caſes otherwiſe
moſt like. An earthly Prince may liue and die deluded of his Machiauillian
ſtates-men, ouer whom hee hath no power, after he
himſelfe is once ſubiect. But Chriſt liues and raignes a King for
euer; and though his throne bee in the higheſt heauens, beholds
the things are done on earth; hee ſees, and yet ſuffereth his pretended
officers to retaine ſuch as loue darkenes more then light,
in groſſeſt ignorance and blind ſubiection to the Prince of darkeneſſe,
and his aſſociate, the Prince of darkeneſſe; hee ſees and yet
ſuffers them detain all ſuch as delight in lies more then in truth,
from acquaintance with his holy ſpirit; Hee ſees, and yet ſuffers
their fouleſt villanies to be countenanced by his ſacred lawes; hee
ſees, and yet ſuffers his holy name to be abuſed, to the eſtabliſhing
of Antichriſtian hereſies; hee ſees and yet ſuffers his glory made a
ſtale for maintenance of their ſecular pompe. Hee is the keeper
of Iſrael, and cannot ſo ſlumber, as any abuſe ſhould eſcape his
notice; his indignation ſhall not ſleepe for euer, but in due time
he will rouſe himſelfe as a Lion awaked, to take vengeance vpon
all the workers of iniquity, on them aboue others, who haue thus
vſurped his throne on earth, taking that iudgement during the
time of his ſuppoſed abſence wholly into their handes, which
belongs onely vnto him: Euen ſo come Lord Ieſu, holy and
true, and with the breath of thy mouth deſtroy him that hath
deſtroyed trueth and ſincerity from amongſt the ſonnes of
men.
            
         
         
            
            SECT. III.
            Containing the ſecond degree of great Antichriſts exaltion, in making
his authority more abſolutely infallible then any the viſible or
repreſentatiue Church of the Iewes, Moſes or the Prophets euer
had: Finally, in making it greater then Christs or his Apoſtles
was.
            THat the Church of Rome doth aduance her decrees aboue the
lawes and ordinances of the Almighty, her wordes that in
this kind is called Gods, aboue all diuine Oracles, written and
vnwritten, is apparant out of their owne poſitions hitherto diſcuſſed;
yet is this but the firſt degree of great Antichriſts exaltations.
            The ſecond is the exalting the Popes aboue any perſonall authority
that euer was either practiſed or eſtabliſhed on earth.
This in briefe is the aſſertion, which (by Gods aſſiſtance) wee
are in this preſent ſection to make euident; The authority which the
Ieſuites and Ieſuited Prieſts giue, and would bind others vpon paine of
damnation to giue vnto the preſent Church or Pope, throughout euery
age, is greater then any authority that euer was challenged ſince the
world began, by any man or viſible company of men, the man
Chriſt Ieſus not excepted.
            This concluſion followeth immediately out of three poſitions
generally held,Romiſh poſitions whence the inconuenience propoſed muſt bee reduced. and ſtifly maintained by that Church.
            The firſt, that the Pope (liue hee as hee liſt) cannot erre in
matters of faith and manners, when hee ſpeaketh ex Cathedra:
that we are bound infallibly to belieue whatſoeuer he ſo ſpeakes,
without examination of his doctrine by Gods word, or euident
externall ſigne, or internall experiment of Gods ſpirit, ſpeaking
in him.
            The ſecond, that wee cannot aſſure our ſelues the Scriptures
are the Oracles of God, but by the infallible teſtimony of the
Viſible Church.
            The third, that the true ſenſe and meaning of Scriptures, in
caſes doubtfull, or controuerſed, cannot be vndoubtedly known
without the infallible declaration of the ſame Church.
            
               
               CHAP. I.
               What reſtraint, precepts for obedience vnto the Prieſts of the Law,
though ſeeming moſt vniuerſall for their forme, did neceſſarily admit:
And how vniuerſall Propoſitions of Scriptures are to be limited.
               1 SEing wee vndertake to proue, that no ſuch authority
as the Romiſh Church doth challenge,
was euer eſtabliſhed on earth: The anſwering
of thoſe arguments drawne from the authority
of the Prieſtes in the olde Teſtament, may to the
iudicious ſeeme at the firſt ſight needleſſe, yet becauſe ſuch as they
ſet the faireſt gloſſes vpon, if wee looke into the inſide or ſubſtance,
are fulleſt fraught with their owne diſgrace and ignominy;
It will not be ſuperfluous to acquaint the Reader with ſome
particulars, prefixing ſome generall admonitions to the yonger
ſort, for more commodious anſwering of all that can be brought
of like kind.
               2 Their common places of conſening the world, eſpecially
ſmatterers of Logicke, or ſchoole learning, with counterfeit
proofes of Scripture, is either from ſome vniuerſall precept of
obedience to the people, or generall promiſes of infallibility
made to the Prieſts in the old Teſtament. Such as come vnto the
Scriptures, hauing their mind dazled with notions of vniuerſale
primum, or other Logicke rules true in ſome caſes, thinke the
formerprecepts, being for their forme vniuerſall, may admit no
exception, limitation, or reſtraint, otherwiſe the holy Ghoſt
might breake the rule of Logicke: when as they admit many reſtraints,
nor alwayes from one,Obedience may bee complete though not abſolute. but ofttimes from diuerſe reaſons;
from theſe following eſpecially. God ſometimes inioynes
obedience (as wee ſay) in the abſtract, to ſet vs a patterne of
ſuch true accurate obedience; as men ſhould performe vnto
authority it ſelfe, or vnto ſuch gouernours, as neither in their
liues, nor in the ſeat of iudgement, would decline either to the
right hand or to the left, but ſquare all their proceedings to the
exact rule of Gods word. Vnto ſuch gouernours continuall and
compleat obedience, was to bee performed; becauſe the parties
gouerned vpon examination, ſhould alwayes finde them iumpe

with the law of God, vnto which abſolute obedience, as hath
beene ſhewed, is due. Nor doth the word of God in ſetting out
ſuch exact obedience, lie open to that exception, which Polititians
take againſt Philoſophers; as if it (as Philoſophers doe) did
giue inſtructions onely, for happy men of Ariſtotles making, or
for the Stoickes wiſe men, who can no where bee found but in
Platoes common-wealth, whoſe Metropolis is the Region of Eutopia.
For the ancient Iſrael of God had this prerogatiue aboue al
the nations of the earth, that their Prieſts lips whileſt they themſelues
were clothed with righteouſneſſe and bare holineſſe vnto
the Lord in their breaſts, ſhould ſtill preſerue knowledge, and bee
able to manifeſt the will of God vnto the people, not onely by interpreting
the generall written law, but by reuelations concerning
particular facts of principall moment, as may bee gathered
from that law,Exod. 28. 30. 
                  Alſo thou ſhalt put in the breaſt plate of iudgement
the Vrim and the Thummim, which ſhall be vpon Aarons heart, when
hee goeth in before the Lord; And Aaron ſhall beare the iudgement of
the children of Iſrael vpon his heart before the Lord continually.
               
               3 To omit the various interpretations, and diuers opinions
of this breſt-plates vſe; why it was called the breaſt plate of iudgement:
                  Ioſeph. lib. 3. antiquit. c. none. 
                  Ioſephus and Suidas in my mind come neereſt the truth.
That the Reuelation by it was extraordinary, that Gods preſence,
or iuridicall approbation of doubts propoſed, was repreſented
vpon the pretious ſtones, that were ſet therein is probable, partly,
from the aptneſſe of it to allure the Iſraelites vnto Idolatry, partly
from that formality which the
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Diodorus Siculus, l. 1. c. 3. And a little after, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Suidas ex incerto quodam authore haec refert, as ſaith Fagius, Ephod, (inquit) nomen eſt Hebraicum, quod ſi interpreteris, ſignificat manifeſtationem aut redemptionem (Vides autem 
                        •
                     um authorem ex quo Suidas hoc exſcripſit, Hebraeae linguae ignarum fuiſſe. Ephod enim longd aliud ſignificat. Fortaſſis pro Ephod dicere voluit Hoſchen) Erat autem forma eius, textura palmaris, vario artificio inſtar pectoralis, ex aureis filis confecta. Ac in medio habebat quaſi ſtellam omnino auream. Ex vtra
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      autem parte duos Smaragdos, in quorum vnoquoque ſculpta erant ſex nomina, vidilicet, duodecim nomina Tribuum Iſrael. Porro inter Smaragdos continebat lapidem Adamantem. Cum ergo Sacerdos ſciſcitaturus erat de re quadam oraculum à Deo, ligabat Ephod in ſuper
                     
                        •
                     umerali ad mediū pectoris, & ſubijcieb
                        •
                     t manus ſuas ſub ipſum, quas cum retraheret, deprehendebat eas quaſi colore quodam infectas. Petebat autem à Deo reſponſum defixis in Ephod oculis. Ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſi Deus annuebat ad id quod petebatur, conſeſtim micabat lapis Adamas Si autem negabat, nihil ad priſtinum & proprium lapidis ſulgorem accedebat. Quod ſi Deus voluit populum ſubijcere gladio. 
                        •
                     apis reddebatur cruentus. Si autem imminebat mors, lapis ficbat niger. Fagius in caput 18, Exod. quem plur. Vido ib. de Rationali. vid. & Delrium Diſquiſit. Magic. lib. 4. quaeſt. 2. Sect. 1. Egyptians in imitation of the

Ephods ancient vſe amongſt the Iewes, retained long after in declaration
of the truth in Iudgement. For Diodorus tels vs that the

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or chiefe Iudge in that famous and venerable Egyptian
high Court, or Parliament, did weare about his necke in a
golden chaine, Inſigne, a tablet of pretious ſtone, or (if the Reader
bee diſpoſed to correct the tranſlator) 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
which they called (as the Septuagint did Aarons breaſt-plate)

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , on which hee ſtedfaſtly looked while matters were debating,
(as Suidas ſaith the High Prieſt did on his breaſt plate, whileſt
they asked counſell of God;) and whileſt hee gaue ſentence
turned it vnto the beter cauſe (exhibited as the faſhion was in that
Court, in writing) in ſigne the truth it ſelfe did ſpeake for it, that
the Vrim or Thummim were more then an Embleme, yea an Oracle
of iuſtice and right iudgement, is apparant out of Scripture:
When Ioſhua was conſecrated to bee Iſraels chiefe gouernour in
Moſes ſtead, he was to ſtand before Eleazar the Prieſt, ordained
to aske counſell for him by the iudgement of Vrim before the Lord:1. Sam. 23. 95.
So didNumb. 27. 21. 
                  Abiathar certifie Dauid of Sauls malitious reſolution againſt
him, and the Lords of Keylahs treachery, if hee ſhould truſt
vnto them.1. Sam. 30. 7. 8. So againe Dauid is aſſured of victory, by the iudgement
of Vrim and I Thummim, if he would follow the Amalakites
that had burnt Ziglag.
               
               4 Such Prieſtes as theſe, were to bee abſolutely obeyed in anſweres
thus giuen from the mouth of God. And it is moſt probable,
that the parties whom theſe anſweres did concern, had perfect
notice of the Reuelation made to the Prieſts, howſoeuer the truths
of ſuch anſweres being confirmed by experiment in thoſe dayes,
they were to vndertake what the Prieſts appointed, and to obey
his aduice at leaſt by cautelous obedience,That Gods promiſe vnto the Prieſt or people of Iſrael for their direction by Vrim and Thummim, or otherwiſe was not abſolute but conditionall. vntill the euent did
proue the truth. But neither was this certaine manifeſtation of
Gods will ſo abſolutely promiſed vnto the Prieſts, but not liuing
according vnto the direction of Gods law, hee might faile in his
Oracles; Nor was this peoples prerogatiue aboue others without
all limit; that if they liued no better then others did, they
ſhould as often as they asked counſell of God, infallibly know,
whether the anſwere were from him or no, albeit there were no
defect in the Prieſt. For this reaſon the Lord anſwered not1. Sam. 28. v. 6 
                  Saul,
when hee asked counſell of him, neither by dreames, nor by viſions,

nor by Vrim, nor by the Prophets, for Saul was now caſt off
by God, not willing to vouchſafe an anſwere vnto his demaunds:
which argues, that the reuelation made to the Prieſtes, was alſo
manifeſted to the party, ſolemnely and in ſincerity of heart propoſing
the queſtions,The Prieſts infallibility did depend vpon their continency & integrity. whereof hee deſired to be reſolued.
               5 That the Prieſt had no ſuch priuiledge, or abſolute promiſe
of Gods infallible preſence, as the Pope challengeth, is apparant
from the law of temperance preſcribed.Leuit. 10. ver. 9. 10. 
                  And the Lord ſpake vnto
Aaron ſaying, thou ſhalt not drinke wine, nor strong drinke, thou
nor thy ſonnes with thee, when yee come into the Tabernacle of the
congregation; leſt yee die. This is an ordinance for euer throughout
your generations, that yee may put difference betweene the holy and
vnholy, and betweene the cleane and vncleane, and that yee may
teach the children of Iſrael all the ſtatutes the Lord hath commanded
thee by the hand of Moſes. If theſe Prieſts themſelues were vnholy
and vncleane, they could not infallibly diſcerne betweene
the holy and vnholy, betweene the cleane and vncleane: if they
liued not according to this, they could not teach the children of
Iſrael the reſt of Gods expreſſe lawes, much leſſe could they infallibly
manifeſt vnto them his will in all doubts and controuerſies.
But the Pope (ſo abſolute is his prerogatiue, which the Ieſuites
attribute vnto him) muſt bee thought to bee infalliby aſſiſted
by the holy ſpirit, albeit hee lead a moſt vnhallowed, vnclean,
polluted life.
               6 But for the promiſe made vnto Leui, and his ſeede, God
himſelfe by his Prophet
                  Malach. 2. 1. 2. Malachy moſt expreſly interpretes the
meaning of it; And now O yee Priests, this commandement is for you,
if yee will not heare it, nor conſider it in your heart, to giue glory vnto
my name, ſaith the Lord of hoſtes, I will euen ſend a curſe vpon you,
and will curſe your bleſsings, yea, and I haue curſed them already, becauſe
ye do not conſider it in your heart, behold I will corrupt your ſeed,
and caſt dung vpon your faces, euen the dung of your ſolemne feaſtes,
and you ſhall bee like vnto it, and yee ſhall know, that I haue ſent this
commandement vnto you, that my couenant which I made vnto Leui
might ſtand, ſaith the Lord of hoſts. My couenant was with him of life
and peace, and I gaue him feare, and hee feared me, and was afraide before
my name, the law of truth was in his mouth, and there was no iniquity
found in his lippes, hee walked with mee in peace and equity, and

did turne many from iniquity; for the Prieſts lips ſhall preſerue knowledge,
and they ſhall ſeeke the law at his mouth. As if hee had ſaide;
Such Prieſts I haue had in former times, and ſuch might your
prayſes from my mouth, and your eſtimation with men haue
beene, had you framed your liues according to the rules which
my ſeruant Moſes had ſet you. But were theſe Prieſtes, againſt
whom hee here ſpeakes, infallible in their doctrine ſtill; becauſe
Gods promiſe was ſo ample vnto Leui? If they were not, why
doth Bellarmine bring this place to proue the Popes infallible authority,
in teaching diuine vntruthes? If they were, why doth
the Lord complain in the words immediately following? But ye
are gone out of the way, ye haue cauſed many to fall by the law, yee haue
broken the couenant of Leui, ſaith the Lord of haſtes, Therefore haue
I made you alſo to bee deſpiſed, and vile before all the people, becauſe
you keepe not my wayes, but haue beene partiall in the law.
               7 This place alone (though many others might be brought)
clearely euinceth Gods promiſe vnto Leui and his poſterity, during
the time of their prieſthood, to haue been condititionall, not
abſolute. And as Gods promiſe of infallibility was vnto him & his
ſeed, ſuch was the obedience due to thē & their authority, not abſolute,
but conditional & where the precepts may ſeem vniuerſal,
yet are they to be limited oftimes by the conditiō of the prieſts life.
               8 But ſundry propoſitions there bee in Scriptures for their
forme vniverſall, which are alſo abſolutely true in their proper
ſubiect,Vniuerſall propoſitions in Scripture are to bee limited by their proper ſubiect, the end of the prece
                        •
                      or other circumſtance. whoſe full extant or limits notwithſtanding are not alwayes
euident. Whence many miſtake in ſtretching them too
farre; others ſeeing them faileS in ſome particulars, which ſeem
comprehended vnder the vniuerſality of their forme ſuſpect the
abſoluteneſſe of their truth; and account them rather morally
probable, or conditionally true, then neceſſary and certaine;
yet are they moſt abſolutely neceſſary and certaine, onely
their vniuerſality is to bee limitted by their proper ſubiects.
This is a common difficulty in all arts, though leſſe apparent
in the Mathematickes, or Metaphyſickes, or other like abſtract
contemplatiue ſciences. But in Philoſophie, as well naturall
as morall, many generall rules there bee moſt true and euident
to ſuch as know the nature or quality, either of the ſubiect,
or matter whereunto they are applied, or of theſe particulars,

whence the induction was gathered; and yet are obſcure and
doubtfull vnto others, who marke the vniuerſality of their form,
not ſo well acquainted with the nature of thoſe ſubiects, in which
their tru his principally, and moſt euidently ſeene, nor ſo able to
diſcerne the identity or diuerſity, the proportion, or diſproportion
which other ſubiects may haue with the former; but of the
triall of rules in arts (if God permit) elſewhere. I will now inſtance
in Scripture onely; what propoſition could bee for the
forme more vniuerſall, what precept conceiued in words more
generall, then that of ſanctifying the Sabaoth. In it thou ſhalt do
no wanner of workees,
                  Exod. 20. v. 10 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Non facies vllum opus? The
Scribes and Phariſies putting a Religion in the letter of the Law,
(as the Ieſuites now doe,The precept concerning the Sabaoth then which none can bee more vniuerſall did not extend to all manner of workes. when it may make for their aduantage)
did conclude from the generality of this precept, that our Sauiour
brake the Sabaoth, when hee healed the ſicke vpon it: Their pretences,
if we reſpect the vniuerſality of the propoſition onely,
were farre more probable then the Papiſts can picke any for their
purpoſe: Yet Iewiſh skill, in that they conſider not the end of the
Sabaoth, which might haue limited the vniuerſall forme of the
precept, and reſtrained it vnto ſome kind of workes onely; for not
all, but onely all thoſe workes which were repugnant to the end
of this precept were forbidden. The end of the Sabaoth was to
ſanctifie themſelues vnto the Lord; to ſet forth his praiſe both in
words and workes. Such workes then onely are here onely forbidden
as did diſtract the mind, or make men vnapt to heare, read,
or meditate on heauenly matters; all workes of ſecular vocation,
or priuate conſequence, which might hinder mens endeauours
for procuring the health, or wel-fare of others; not works of charity,
or preſent neceſſity, not works tending to greater publike
good, or to the auoidance of greater harmes, which could not be
preuented but by preſent working; for men are to read, heare,
and meditate vpon Gods word, that by it they may bee fruitfull
in good deeds by which Gods name is more immediately glorified,
then onely by ſpeaking well, and not doing ſo. Wherefore
our Sauiour Chriſt did better obſerue the Sabaoth by working
vpon it, to ſaue mens liues, or recouer their health; then the
Phariſees did by abſtaining from ſuch workes of mercy, as might
haue glorified Gods name more immediately, then any ſpeculalatiue

or preciſe rules, how it ſhould bee kept: Yea, by not working
theſe good workes, when faire occaſion was offered, they did
the workes of Satan, euen murther it ſelfe, as our Sauiour Chriſt
implies in that queſtion propoſed vnto the Scribes and Phariſees
which ſought an accuſation againſt him:Luk. 6. v. 9. 
                  I will aske you a queſtion,
whether it is lawfull on the Sabbaoth dayes to do good or to doe euill,
to ſaue life, or to deſtroy it?
               
               9 The like limitations this precept had in caſe of neceſſity, or
for the auoidance of ſome great extraordinary calamity, not otherwiſe
auoidable, then by doing ſuch works, as vpon ordinary
and dayly occaſions were vnlawfull to be done vpon the Sabaoth
day. It was an opinion receiued (as it ſeemes) amongſts the Iewes,
that they might not fight, nor build the breaches or places wherby
their enemies did hope for entrance vpon the Sabaoth. In this
perſwaſionMac. 2. 36. 36. 38. about the number of a thouſand Jewes did lay down
their liues. But when Matthias heard of this his people, and Country
mens maſſacre (more generall then it needed to haue beene,
but for this their ſtrict and preciſe interpretation of the former
generall commandement, he and his friends wiſely reſoluedMac. 2. v. 4
                        •
                     . 
                  Whoſoeuer
ſhould come to make battell with vs vpon the Sabaoth day, we will
fight againſt them, that wee die not all as our brethren that were murdered
in the ſecret places. Which they might haue ſtopped, but would
not, for feare of violating the Sabaoth. The reaſon of this their
reſolution (contained in the 40 verſe) was moſt ſtrong, drawne
from the end of the Sabaoth; For they ſaid one to another, If wee all
doe as our brethren haue done, and fight not againſt the heathen for our
liues and for our Lawes, then ſhall they incontinently deſtroy vs out of
the earth. And if the whole Iewiſh nation had beene at that time
vtterly rooted out; who ſhould either haue ſanctified Gods Sabaothes,
or preſerued his lawes from the iniurie of times, or fury
of the heathen? Nature had taught the heathen, that it was fooliſh,
propter vitam viuendi perdere cauſas: much more might religious
diſcretion teach all men, how prepoſterous a courſe it
were for the pre
                     •
                  iſe keeping of one, to croſſe, or ouerthrow the
end of all Sabaothes.
               10 Yet our Aduerſaries I am ſure cannot bring any precept ſo
peremptory or generall, for abſolute obedience vnto the High
Prieſts, and gouernours, as the former was for not working vpon

the Sabaoth. And yet this wee ſee hath its reſtraint from the
end, and holds onely abſolutely true in certaine kind of workes,
not in all. The like reſtraint, either from the end, or from the
circumſtance, may all thoſe places likewiſe ſuffer, which ſeeme to
bee moſt generall for abſolute obedience vnto Gods meſſengers
or ſpirituall gouernours.
               11 The end of obeying Gods meſſengers is,Vniuerſall precepts for obeying Gods meſſengers muſt be limited by the end of obedience. that men thereby
may obey God himſelfe. Suppoſe then God had ſaid [Thou ſhall
obey the Prieſt in all things whatſoeuer he ſhall command thee:]
a Wiſe man notwithſtanding all this would thus reſolue; ſuppoſe
the Prieſt command mee to doe that, in doing which I ſhall diſobey
God, or to omit that continually, in performing of which I
ſhould obey God: am I bound to obey him in all ſuch commands:
ſo ſhould I fruſtrate the end of the law, and commit the
ſame offence by this my blind obedience, which others doe by
preſumptuous and willfull diſobedience vnto ſpirituall gouernours.
But it will bee replyed, who ſhall iudge whether the ſpirituall
gouernour commaund thee ſuch ſeruice, as argues diſobedience
vnto God, or no? If the caſe bee doubtfull, and I be commanded
by my lawfull Paſtor, I haue anſwered already in what
ſenſe obedience muſt bee performed. But if the caſe be euident,
men muſt openly diſobey their Paſtors, before they certainly diſobey
God. But who ſhall iudge of the euidence? Euery mans
conſcience. Shall that then bee euident which euery man ſhall
ſay is euident vnto him? No, but what indeed and conſcience
is, and ſo ſhall appeare in his iudgement that ſearcheth the heart
and reines. Such as do not feare his cenſure will make no conſcience
of diſobeying men pretending authority from him: Such
as with feare and trembling expect the ſonne of mans appearance
will not much eſteeme, how they bee iudged by men further then
in reaſon they may be perſwaded; their ſentence ſhall bee ratified
in the laſt day of iudgement. And becauſe God hath endued ſpirituall
gouernours with power of retaining and remitting ſinnes;
euery one that feares him which gaue, will feare to diſobey
them to whom this power is giuen; leſt if they retaine, hee will
not remit; and retaine they iuſtly may, or rather muſt, the ſinnes
of all ſinnes, as adde thirſt to drunkenneſſe, contempt of Gods
meſſengers, ſummons to repentance vnto actuall breaches of his

law. This is as open rebellion vpon a riot, perhaps firſt attempted
vpon ignorance of the Law, inconſideratenes or fooliſh paſſion,
but continued after proclamation made in the Kings name,
by a publike magiſtrate authorized for ſuch purpoſes: The parties
admoniſhed vpon ſuch high tearmes, to deſiſt from any ſuſpitious
enterpriſe (though no more) muſt bee certaine of the
Princes, or chiefe Lawgiuers future approbation of what they go
about, if they perſiſt, otherwiſe diſobedience to a lawfull Magiſtrate
or inferiour officer, will be found rebellion againſt the ſtate
or ſoueraignety.
               12 Though it bee moſt true what hath been before deliuered,
that vnto Paſtors conditionall obedience is onely due,Conditionall obedience of two ſorts. yet is not
the condition precedent to all acts of obedience, but ſubſequent
at leaſt to ſome, and to bee inferted by way of limitation or caution,
for deſiſting vpon diſcouery of farther danger, rather then interpoſed
as a ſtoppe to breed delay, or prohibition of all obedience
vntill euident proofe be made, that it is expreſly due in the
particulars enioyned. The want of this diſtinction betweene a
condition precedent, and a condition ſubſequent, or annexed
vnto actuall obedience, hath beene the originall (I am perſwaded)
atwel of the Papiſts error in demanding abſolute obedience, without
all condition of limitation, as of many Proteſtants granting
leſſe then is due to Paſtors, that is obedience onely vppon this
condition; If they ſhew expreſſe warrant of Scriptures for the
particulars enioyned. Nor is the condition betweene the Paſtor
and his flocke like vnto that betweene man and man in legall
contracts, or in controuerſies of debt, wherin all are equall, & nothing
due vnto the plaintife, before the performance of the condition
bee proued: but ſuch as is betweene a priuate man, and a
Magiſtrate, (both ſubordinate in their ſeuerall places to one ſoueraigne,
vnto whom onely abſolute and complete obedience is
due, though vnto his officers ſome obedience is abſolutely due,
at the leaſt to be dicto audiens, to heare him with patience, reuerence,
and attention, not to contradict, or neglect his commands,
but vpon ſuch euident reaſons as the inferiour party dare
aduenture to trie the cauſe inſtantly with him before the ſupream
Iudge. The acts of obedience which are abſolutely due from
the flocke to ſpirituall magiſtrates, or Chriſts meſſengers, and

precedent to the condition interpoſed or inſerted,In what acts abſolute obedience is due to Paſtors. are the vnpartiall
examinations of their owne hearts and conſciences, the full
renouncing of all worldly deſires, earthly pleaſure, carnall luſtes
or concupiſcenſes, becauſe theſe vn
                     •
                  enounced haue a command
ouer our ſoules, and detaine them from performing ſeruice, beſt
acceptable vnto God, or yeelding that ſincere obedience, which
is abſolutely due vnto his ſacred word. For this end and purpoſe
the flocke ſtand abſolutely bound to enter into their owne hearts
and ſoules, to make diligent ſearch and ſtrict enquirie, what rebellious
affection, or vnruly deſire is harbored there, as often as
their ouerſeers ſhal in Chriſts name charge them ſo to doe: otherwiſe
their neglect or contempt will be in that dreadfull day a witneſſe
of their rebellion in this life, a barre to keepe ſinne in, and
ſhut grace out.
               13 But if any man out of the ſincerity of a good conſcience,
and ſtedfaſt reſolution of a faithfull heart, (which hath habitually
renounced the world, fleſh and Diuell, that it may be alwaies
ready to ſerue Chriſt) ſhall refuſe his Paſtors commandement,
though threatning hell paines to his diſobedience in ſome particulars,
hee doth yet better obſerue the former precept by this
his deniall, then others doe by performance of abſolute blind obedience
without ſtrict vnpartiall examination of their conſciences,
for he doth herein obey God, whom to obey with heart and
mind thus freed from the dominion of Sathan, and the worlde, is
the very end and ſcope, the finall ſeruice whereunto all performance
of obedience vnto ſpirituall gouernours is but as a trayning
of Chriſts faithfull Souldiers. And in theſe acts of obedience,
is that ſaying of our Sauiour moſt generally and abſolutely
true;Luk. 10. 16. 
                  Hee that heareth you, heareth mee, he that deſp
                        •
                     ſeth you,
deſpiſeth me. That precept of denying our ſelues, and renouncing
all, is the foundation of all the reſt, concerning obedience: without
performance of this, neither can our vndertaking any other
acts be ſincere, nor our refuſall (lawfully admoniſhed) ſafe: our
beſt obedience, not hereon grounded, is non chriſtian, our diſobedience
vnchriſtian, and rebellious. For which cauſe we are
abſolutely bound vnto habituall performance of this, ere wee
can bee admitted as lawfull auditors of Chriſts other precepts.
All other our reſolutions, or deliberate intendments; whether

for performance of any action commended for good and honeſt,
or for maintaining any doctrine propoſed by lawfull paſtors
for true and orthodoxall, muſt bee limitted by their proportion.
or diſproportion to the end of obedience enioyned vnto ſpiritual
commanders; which as wee ſaid before, was to obey God in
all. Thoſe acts then muſt bee vndertaken, which vpon examination
appeare not preiudiciall to that oath of abſolute obedience,
which wee haue taken vnto our ſupreame Lord: theſe omitted,
which out of this generall reſolution of renouncing all, and
denying our ſelues, and this vnpartiall examination of our ſoules
in particular doubts, may ſeeme to derogate from that abſolute
loialty which we owe to Chriſt. No miniſter may expect obedience,
but vpon theſe conditions; & he that ſincerely obeieth in the
forementioned fundamentall act of renouncing all, and denying
himſelfe, & yet diſobeyes in other particulars, vpon ſuch grounds
and motiues as wee haue ſaid, doth perfectly fulfill that precept,
(if any ſuch there were) obey your ſpirituall ouerſeers in all things.
               
               14 Bee our bond of duty to ſuch gouernours, whether by ordinary
ſubiection to their calling, or voluntary ſubmiſſion of our
iudgements, to their perſonall worth, neuer ſo great; yet ſeeing
they command onely in Chriſts name, and for the adunacement
of his kingdome, to imagine ſpirituall obedience ſhould bee due
to ſuch iniunctions, as vpon ſober and deliberate examination
ſeeme to croſſe the end they propoſe, would argue ſuch ſpirituall
madneſſe, as if a man ſhould aduenture to kill (by all probabilitie
of preſent occurrence, his father or mother, becauſe he had formerly
vowed (without conſideration of any homicide, much leſſe
pa
                     ••
                  icide) thence likely to follow, to kill the firſt liue creature hee
met. In ſuch a caſe asPhilo de ſpecialibus legibus. 
                  Philo acutely obſerues, a man ſhould not
forſweare himſelfe, or breake his vow, yet ouerthrow the very end
and vſe of all vowes, which were inſtituted as bridles to make vs
refraine all occaſions, or prouocations to euill, not as halters to
lead or draw vs to ſuch vnnaturall villanies.
               15 Theſe rules hitherto mentioned ritely obſerued, there is
no greater difficulty in reſtraining vniuerſall precepts of obedience
to the Church; then in limitting generall commandements
of kings to their Deputies or Vice-gerents. Now, if a King ſhould
charge his ſubiects to obey his Lieutenant in all that hee ſhould

command: any reaſonable man would take the meaning to bee
this; That hee ſhould bee obeyed in all things that belong vnto
the King; ſeruice, becauſe this is the end of his appointment, and
the proper ſubiect of this precept. No man in this caſe would
bee ſo mad, as to take the Princes word for his warrant, if by his
Lieutenant and he ſhould be put into ſome ſeruice, which here more
then ſuſpitious to bee traiterous, or apparently tending to the
Kings deſtruction. If a Ieſuite ſhould ſee the Popes agent or
nuncio (whom he were bound to obey by the Popes iniunction
deliuered in moſt ample termes) tampering with the Popes open
enemies; either conſorting with vs in our Liturgie, or communicating
with vs in our Sacraments; receiuing penſion from
forrainers, or ſecretly conferring with ſuch of their Counſellors
as had more wit then himſelfe; could hee diſpence with his oath
of abſolute allegeance to the Pope, vpon theſe or like euaſions?
This is ſuſpitious indeed; but how ſhall I know whether the
Popes Agent in doing this, doe diſobey his Holineſſe? If he ſay
no, muſt I not belieue him? muſt I not obey him, and doe as hee
doth, whom the Pope commands mee to obey in all things? The
Ieſuites are not ſo ſimple in the Popes cauſe, as they would make
all other in Gods: they could tell how to limit ſuch commands,
though deliuered in moſt vniuerſall and ample termes. This is
the matter then which ſo vexeth their denoute hearts, and ſets
them beſide themſelues with furious zeale in this argument; that
any Chriſtian ſhould be as wary and circumſpect, leſt hee ſhould
proue diſloyal
                     •
                   vnto the Creator and Redeemer of mankind, as
they are, leſt they ſhould diſobey the aduancer and ſupporter of
their order.
               16 But to come nearer the point,Precepts of obedience vnto maſters or parents thogh moſt vniuerſal for their forme are limited by their ſubiect. & inſtance in ſome precepts
of obedience deliuered in moſt generall forme: Might the literall
or Logicke note of vniuerſality carry away ſuch abſolute ſoueraignety
as they contend for: farre greater reaſon there is, why
euery father or miniſter ſhould be an abſolute Pope ouer his own
family, then why the Pope of Rome ſhould bee a father of all chriſtian
congregations, an abſolute Iudge of Scripture, or maſter ouer
mens faith.Collo. 3. ver. 20. Vide Bellar. l. 2. de Mona
                        •
                     h. cap. 21. Saint Paul commands children to obey their fathers
in all things, for that is well pleaſing vnto the Lord, which is as much
as if he had ſaid, in obeying them you obey the Lord. Again, he

commands ſeruants to bee obedient vnto them that are their maſters
according to the fleſh in all things, not with eye-ſeruice as men pleaſers,
but with ſingleneſſe of heart fearing God. Both theſe precepts
are conceiued in tearms, as generall, as any precept for obedience
to ſpirituall gouernours. In the precept concerning wiues obedience
to their husbands, the note of vniuerſality is omitted: for
he ſaith wiues ſubmit your ſelues vnto your husbands, as it is comely in
the Lord, not in all things had the Apoſtle made any mention of
obedience vnto ſpirituall gouernours, or were there any hope to
comprehend Paſtors vnder the name of fathers or maſters, it
would quickely bee inferred, the note of vniuerſality was purpoſely
added by our Apoſtle in theſe latter precepts, that men might
know abſolute obedience without limitation or examination, was
due vnto the Pope.
                     So Aquinas expounds it as Bellar. acknowledgeth it: Quod vero B. Paulus ait Col. 3 Filij obedire parentibus per omnia, vel ita intelligi debet, vt illud (per omnia) ſignificat per omnia, ad quae ſe extendit patria poteſtas, vt rectè docet Sanct. Thom. in 2. 2. quae. 104. ar. qu
                        •
                     madmodum, ſi quis diceret, opo
                        •
                     tere milites obedire Imperatori per omnia, exponendum eſſet per omnia, quae ad militiam perttinent, vel certè tenentur filij per omnia pareatibus obedire, ſed dum paruuli ſunt. Bellar. l. 2. de Monach. c. 21.
               
               17 But the holy men of God, whoſe mouthes alwayes ſpake
out of the abundance of their hearts, as the ſpirit gaue them vtterance,
and were not curious to caſt their words in ſuch exact ſcholaſtique
mouldes, as men addicted to artificiall meditations, hauing
their braines more exerciſed then their hearts in Gods
word, vſually doe, euen where they ſeeme to ſpeake moſt vniuerſally
for the former, are to bee vniuerſally vnderſtood onely in
that ſubiect or matter, which for the preſent they mind moſt. As
when our Apoſtle commands ſeruants and children to obey the
one, their maſters; the other, their parents in all thinges: the
meaning is, as if hee had ſaid, yee that are chriſtian ſeruants, be ye
moſt willing to yeeld all obedience that is due vnto maſters; yee
that are Chriſtian children, to yeeld all obedience vnto your parents,
which is conuenient for any children to yeelde to theirs:
So that the vniuerſall note doth rather inioine a totality of heartineſſe
and cheerefulneſſe, a perfection of ſincerity, in performing
that obedience which other children ought to their fathers, or ſeruants
to their maſters, then any way extend the obiect of chriſtian
childrens or ſeruants obedience to more particulars, then others
were bound vnto, at the leaſt hee doth not extend the obiect
of their obedience to any particulars which might preiudice
the ſincerity of their obedience due vnto other commanders; whileſt
hee enioyneth ſeruants to obey their maſters in all things, he
reſerues their allegiance intire vnto Princes and higher powers.

Such muſt bee obeyed both by maſters and ſeruants, by fathers
and ſonnes. Much more doth God when hee inioynes obedience
in moſt ample forme vnto Kings or ſpirituall gouernors, reſerue
obedience due to himſelfe moſt intire and abſolute.
               18 Yet intire and abſolute it cannot be, vnleſſe it depend immediatly
& abſolutely vpon his lawes;That vniuerſall abſolute obedience vnto men is incomparable with true loyalty vnto Chriſt. vnleſſe it be exempt from the
vncontrolleable diſpoſall, or infallible direction of other authorities.
Nor can Chriſt be ſaid our ſupreme Lord, vnleſſe our obedience
to him and thoſe lawes which hee hath left vs, doe limit
and reſtrain all other obedience due vnto any authority deriued
from him or his lawes, more then a Prince could bee ſaid to
bee that ſeruants ſupreame Lord or Soueraigne, which were
bound abſolutely to obey his Maſter in all points, without examination,
whether his deſignements were not contrary to the
publike lawes and ſtatutes of his Prince and Country. Wherfore
as the oath of Allegeance vnto Princes doth reſtraine the former
precepts; Seruants obey your Maſters in all things, that is, in all
things that are not repugnant to publike lawes, nor preiudiciall
to the Crowne and dignity of your Soueraigne: ſo muſt that ſolemne
vow of fidelity made vnto Chriſt in Baptiſme, and our dayly
acknowledgement of him for our Soueraigne Lord, reſtraine
all precepts in ioyning performance of obedience to any power
on earth, and ſet theſe immoueable bounds and limits to them;
Obey thy King and Gouernour in all things, that is, in all things that
are not repugnant to the lawes and ordinances of the Great King, thy
ſupreame Lord and Gouernour. Whileſt thou obeyeſt him, thou
doeſt well, in diſobeying them, as well as that ſeruant that takes
Armes againſt his Maſter in the Kings defence, whileſt thou diſobeyeſt
him, all other obedience is rebellion; Yee are bought
with a price (ſaith our Apoſtle) bee not yee the ſeruants of men;
Seruice according to the fleſh hee elſewhere approues, he ſtrictly
inioynes: for that is freedome in reſpect of this ſeruitude of
minde and conſcience, in being wholly at any other mans diſpoſition.
               19 Nor is it more difficult for Chriſts ſeruants to diſcern when
gouernours ſollicite them to diſloyalty againſt him, then for ſeruants
according to the fleſh, to know when their maſters ſeduce
them vnto rebellion; ſo Chriſtian men would feare God, as

much as naturall men doe earthly Princes. Such as feare God,
are ſure of a better expoſitor of his lawes for fundamental points
then ſeruants can haue for their Princes. The tranſgreſſion of
both are eaſie to diſcern in the beginning of reuolts or apoſtaſies;
but the latter more difficult, when traitors or vſurpers are grown
ſtrong, and can pretend faire titles vnto ſoueraigneties, or coine
falſe pedegrees, yet is it not impoſſible for ſober and obſeruant
ſpirits in ſuch a caſe, to foreſee what party to follow; vnto ſuch
the ſignes of the time, and carriage of the ſeuerall cauſes will bewray
who haue the true title. But this difficulty is none in our
ſpirituall obedience, challenged by the Church of Rome: for
that Church in words confeſſeth Chriſt to be the true King and
ſupreame Lord, no vſurper, which is as much as to ſay, the Pope
is an vſurper, and a rebell, that dares in deeds and ſubſtance chalenge
the ſoueraignety from him (as you heard in the former
diſpute, by making claime to this vnlimited, vnreſerued obedience.
Vpon what grounds eſpecially wee are now to examine, by
theſe rules hitherto diſcuſſed.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               The authority of the Sanhedrim not ſo vniuerſall or abſolute amongſt
the Iewes as the Papiſts make it, but was to bee limited by the former
Rules.
               1 
                     ONe eſpeciall place on which they ſtand, is from
that Law in
                  Deut. 17. v. 8. 9. &c. 
                  Deuteronomy, If there ariſe a matter
too hard for thee in iudgement, betweene bloud &
bloud, betweene plea and plea, betweene plague and
plague, in the matters of controuerſie within thy
gates, then ſhalt thou ariſe, and goe vp vnto the
place which the Lord thy God ſhall chuſe, And thou ſhalt come vnto
the Priestes of the Leuites, and to the Iudge that ſhall be in thoſe daies,
and aske, and they ſhall ſhew thee the ſentence of iudgement, and thou
ſhalt do according to that thing which they of that place (which the Lord
hath choſen) ſhew thee, and thou ſhalt obſerue to doe according to all
that they informe thee: According to the Law which they ſhall
teach thee, and according to the iudgement which they ſhall tell thee

ſhalt thou doe, thou ſhalt not decline from the thing which they
ſhall ſhew thee, neither to the right hand nor to the left: And
that man that will doe preſumptuouſly, not hearkning vnto the
Prieſt (that ſtandeth before the Lord thy God to miniſter there) or vnto
the Iudge, that man ſhall die, and thou ſhalt take away euill from Iſrael,
ſo all the people ſhall heare and feare, and doe no more preſumptuouſly▪
               
               2 This precept admits of many reſtrictions, any one of which
doth take away all the force of our aduerſaries obiections; Firſt,
it may (without preiudice to our cauſe) bee granted; although it
cannot out of theſe words bee neceſſarily inferred; that God here
preſcribes obedience in the abſtract, ſuch as was to bee performed
vnto thoſe Prieſts and Iudges that liued, according to that patterne
which hee had ſet them. Thus may this precept of obedience
for the extent be vniuerſall, and concern all cauſes whatſoeuer,
ſpirituall or temporall; doubts of conſcience or matters
of this life: in all which ſuch gouernours wereto bee obeyed;
but conditionally [if they were ſuch as God in his law required
they ſhould be] vnto ſuch (as you heard before) hee gaue illuminations
extraordinary, ſuch as the parties that were to obey,
might haue perfect notice of. But how great ſoeuer the extent
of this precept be: not one fyllable in it makes more for abſolute
obedience vnto ſpirituall, then vnto ciuill gouernors; for it is
ſaid indefinitelyVer. 10. a Obijcit Brentius, hoc loco non ſolùm ad Sar
                        •
                     ce dotem, ſed ad Iudicem etiam remitti eos, qui dubitant, iudicē autem fuiſſe politicum principem. RESPONDEO, nomine Iudicis poſſe tum intelligi Principem Sacerdotum, nam in Hebraeo eſt: Aſcende ad Sacerdotes, & ad Iudicem: quaſi diceret, ad Concilium Sacerdotum, & eorum principem, ſummum Sacerdotem. Dico ſecundò, ſi intelligamus nomine Iudicis politicum principem, tum eſſe diſtincta oſſi
                        •
                     ia. Nam Sacerdoti tribuitur ſententia definitiua, iudici antem exequutio in contumaces: Qui ſuperbierit, inquit, nolens obedire Sacerdotis imperio, ex decreto Iudicis moriatur. Bellar.de verb. Dei interpret. l. 3. c. 4. 
                  thou ſhalt doe according to that thing which they
(eyther ſpirituall or temporall) of that place which the Lord hath
choſen ſhall ſhew thee. And againe, the words are diſ
                     •
                  unctiue, That
man that will doe preſumptuouſly, not hearkening vnto the Prieſt or
vnto the Iudge, that man ſhall die; whether the Prieſt were to be
ſupreme Iudge or no, it is not ſaid, at the leaſt the High Prieſt was
not the chiefe man alwayes in the Councell, for hee was not alwayes
admitted into the ſupreme Conſiſtory or Sanhedrim, which
is eſtabliſhed in this place, yetThis diſtinction is quite contrary to the words of the Text, for the Hebrewes cal ſuch as execute ſentence 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in oppoſition to the word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , vſed in this place which
ſignifieth ſuch a magiſtrate as giueth definitiue ſentence Vid. Fagu. in 16. Deuteronem.
                   
                  Bellarmine  will haue the b definitiue

ſentence belong vnto the Prieſt, and the execution of it to
the ciuill magiſtrate: ſo indeed the preſent Romiſh Church in
ſpirituall caſes would bee iudge, and make Chriſtian Princes her
hangmen,The Law of God, Deut. 17. did concerne temporall cauſes, either only, or eſpecially. but their practiſe muſt not be taken for an infallible expoſition
of that Law, whence they ſeeke to iuſtifie their practiſe
quite contrary to the practiſe of the Iewiſh Church and Synagogue.
Nor doth Bellarmine or any other, beſide the baſe paraſiticall
Canoniſts, or the Popes trencher chaplaines, deny, but that
in many ciuill cauſes, the Prince or temporall Magiſtrate hath a
definitiue ſentence; can hee then gather out of any circumſtance
of this place, that onely ſpirituall cauſes are here meant? nay, hee
confeſſeth that the law is generall concerning all doubtes that
might ariſe out of the law; yea it is moſt probable, that it onely
concernes ciuill controuerſies, and Bellarmines reaſon to proue,
that it includeth ſpirituall cauſes, or matters of religion, is moſt idle.
The occaſion of this Law (ſaith hee) was for them that did
ſerue other Gods as appeares, out of the beginning of the Chapter;
now the ſeruice of other Gods is a point of Religion. But
what though Moſes in the former part of this Chapter ſpeake of Idolaters,
muſt this law therefore concerne Idolaters. In the former
part hee ſpeaketh onely of Idolaters, but this law is not onely
for them by Bellarmines confeſſion. Yea the circumſtances of the
place, and the expreſſe law againſt Idolaters mentioned before,
euince, that in this Chapter, as in the former, he firſt ſets downe
lawes concerning the true ſeruice of God, and in the latte
                     •
                   part
giues precepts for the obſeruation of the ſecond Table, the maintaining
of loue, by the finall compoſition of all controuerſies that
might ariſe betwixt neighbours. In the former law Idolaters are
ſentenced to death, and Idolatry (ſaith Bellarmine) is a point of
Religion; Was the Prieſt alone then to giue ſentence, and the
ciuill Magiſtrate onely to execute it. There is not the leaſt pretence
for it out of this Text. Any ordinary Magiſtrate might execute
him that was lawfully conuicted of this crime, nor was it ſo
hard a matter to iudge, who was an Idolater amongſt the Iewes,
as it is to determine what is an hereſie amongſt the Romaniſts.
This was to be proued by witneſſes, not by Logicall proofe or
force of ſpeculatiue reaſon: Had the cunningeſt Ieſuite in the
world been taken amongſt them kneeling down before an Image

and praying to it, all the diſtinctions in the maſter of ſentences, or
Aquinas or both their Commentators could not haue redeemed
him, againſt two honeſt men that would haue ſworne hee would
haue done thus much; there had beene no appeale from any City
in Iudah, vnto any higher Court; his doome had been read in the
gates, and without them hee ſhould (as Homer ſpeakes) haue put
on a ſtony coat.
               3 That the Kings of Iudah were only to execute the Prieſts definitiue
ſentence in all hard controuerſies, is a poſitiō wel deſeruing
execution without appeale at Princes hands. And no doubt but
it did ſo amongſt the Iewes. The former Court as is moſt probable,
was to ceaſe, when they had a King amongſt them. And Moſes
in the former Chapter, after he had giuen the other law for ending
controuerſies, giues the law for the election of their king, if
ſo bee they would haue one: as if the former Court had then
ceaſed to bee the ſupreme Tribunall; ſeeing all Subiects might
appeale vnto the King from it, in which this Soueraignty did before
reſide, as being the ſupreme Tribunall, whence there could
be no appeale.
               4 The King in the Law concerning his qualification, is commanded
to haue the Law of his God written out.Deut. 17. 19. 
                  And it ſhall
bee with him, and he ſhall read therein all the dayes of his life, that hee
may learne to feare the Lord his God, and to keepe all the words of his
Law, and theſe Ordinances for to doe them, that his heart bee not lifted
vp aboue his brethren, and that he turne not from the commandement
to the right hand, or to the left. Was hee to take all this pains, onely
that hee might learne to execute the Prieſtes definitiue ſentence?
This any heathen might haue done. But the Kings of Iſrael, albeit
they were not to meddle in the execution of the Prieſts office,
were notwithſtanding to bee ſo well skilled in Scriptures as
to bee able to iudge, whether the Prieſt did according to that Law
which God had ſet him to follow, and to controle his definitiue
ſentence, if it were euidently contrary to Gods word, which both
were abſolutely bound to obey.
               5 It may perhaps here be obiected, that the King had no ſuch
aſſurance of infallibility in iudgement as the Prieſt had, & therefore
it was requiſite he ſhould rely vpon the Prieſtes definitiue
ſentence. What conſtruction then can any Ieſuite make of theſe

words; A diuine ſentence ſhall bee in the lips of the King, his mouth
ſhall not tranſgreſſe, he ſaith not, in execution of iudgement giuen
by the Prieſts, but in iudgement giuen by himſelf, ſeeing it is an abomination
to Kings to commit wickednes, for the throane is eſtabliſhed
by iuſtice. And againe,
                     Prou. 16. 10. That the infallibility of kings may bee defended with as great probability of Scriptures as the infallibility of prieſts. Prou. 16. 13. 
                  Righteous lips (ſuch the Prieſts ſhould as
and might haue beene, but vſually were not) are the delight of
Kings, and the King loueth him that ſpeaketh right things. This place
if wee reſpect either the abſtract forme of precept, or plenitude
of Gods promiſe for abiliment to performe it, is more plaine and
peremptory for the Kings, then any can bee brought for the high
Prieſts infallibility, in giuing definitiue ſentence; yet doth it not
neceſſarily inferre, Kings ſhall not; but rather ſhewes that they
ſhould not, or that they might not at any time erre in iudgement,
ſo they would ſtedfaſtly follow thoſe rules which God had preſcribed
them. For when God ſaith; A diuine ſentence ſhall bee in the
lips of Kings; this ſpeech doth no more argue a perpetuall certainety
in giuing righteous ſentence, then if he had ſaid; A corrupt
or erroneous ſentence ſhall not be in the lips of Kings, or his
mouth ſhal not tranſgreſſe in iudgement. For as that which God
ſaith, ſhall not be done, oftimes is done: ſo may that which God
ſaith, ſhall bee done, bee oftimes left vndone. Who is hee then
would make this collection: God ſaith, Thou ſhalt not ſteale, that
is no man ſhall ſteale, ergo there can be no theeues, no theft committed,
yet is our aduerſaries collection as fooliſh, The Prieſts lips
ſhall preſerue knowledge, Ergo they cannot erre in giuing definitiue
ſentence, or againe, The ſpirit ſhall lead you into all truth, they ſhall
be all taught of God; therefore the Church ſhall be infallibly taught
by the ſpirite, and ſhall as infallibly teach others, liue they as
they liſt.
               6 Theſe places ſhew what ſhould bee done, and what God for
his part will infallibly performe (ſo men would be obedient to his
word) but neither doe theſe, or any of like nature, include any infallibility
of not erring without performance of due obedience in
practiſe of life; nor doe they neceſſarily conclude, that men alwayes
ſhall performe ſuch obedience. The moſt which they inferre,
is this, that Gouernours by duety are bound to performe,
that performing ſuch obedience in practiſe of life, they might bee
freer from error, in their doctrine or definitiue ſentence. And it

was abſtinence and integrity of life that was to preſerue ſincerity
of iudgement in Princes as well as Prieſts lips, for which reaſon
Princes had their precepts of temperance, anſwerable to thoſe
rules preſcribed for the Prieſts. So Salomon teacheth kings,Pro. 31. ver. 3. 4. 5. 
                  Giue
not thy ſtrength vnto a woman, nor thy wayes, this is to deſtroy Kings. it
is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drinke wine, nor for
Princes ſtrong drinke, leſt he drinke and forget the decree, and change
the iudgement of all the children of affliction. This place euidentlie
ſhewes, that if their Princes were of riotous or intemperate liues,
they had no promiſe that they ſhould not peruert the iudgement
of the children of affliction. The Concluſion hence ariſing is; all
the places that can bee brought, either for the King or Prieſts authority,
rather ſhew what manner of men they ſhould be both in
life and iudgement, then aſſure them of any infallibility of iudgement,
if they be diſſolute in life. This was a point neuer dreamt
of by any, before the Popes notoriouſly infamous liues, did diſcredite
the titles of ſanctity and infallibility (which from a conceit
of their predeceſſors integrity they haue vſurped) and inforced
their paraſites to frame a diſtinction of ſanctity in doctrine ſeparated
from ſanctity in life.
               7 It is queſtionable, whether both Prieſtes and Princes of Iudah
had not an extraordinary priuiledge aboue all other nations,
both for being infallible in their definitiue ſentences whileſt they
liued according to the lawes which God had giuen them, and alſo
for their more then ordinary poſſibility of liuing according to
ſuch lawes. Gods bleſſings (as is moſt probable) in both theſe
reſpects, were extraordinary vnto their Princes and Prieſts: yet
not ſo infinitely extraordinary, that either of them might without
preſumptuous blaſphemy hope for ordinary integrity (ſuch as the
more ciuill ſort of heathens had) much leſſe for any abſolute infallibility,
if they were extraordinarily wicked in their liues, or vnfaithfull
in their other dealings. Euen the peoples wickedneſſe did
impaire the force and vertue of theſe extraordinary bleſſings promiſed
to their Kings and Prieſts, God gaue them prieſts as well
as Princes in his anger, ſuch as ſhould be plyable to their humor,
not ſuch as ſhould infallibly direct them againſt the ſuggeſtions
of the world and fleſh for their ſpirituall good. So that theſe gracious
promiſes both for their ſpirituall and temporall gouernors

ſincerity in iudgement, did depend in part vpon the condition of
this peoples life.
               
                  8 The vſuall Prouerbe was moſt true (though the words thus
inuerted) like people, like Prieſts. Thus did the wiſe ſonne of Sira
                     •
                  h
interpret Gods promiſes both to Prieſt and Princes
                  Eccleſ. 45. v. 23, 24. 25. Becauſe
Phineas the ſonne of Eleazar had zeale in the feare of the Lord,
and ſtood vp with good courage of heart, when the people were turned
backe, and made reconciliation for Iſrael; therefore was there a couenāt
of peace made with him, that hee ſhould be the chiefe of the Sanctuarie,
and of his people, & that he and his poſterity ſhould haue the dignity of the
Prieſthood for euer. And according vnto the couenant made with Dauid,
that the inheritance of the Kingdom ſhould remaine to his ſonne of
the Tribe of Iudah, ſo the heritage of Aaron ſhould bee to the onely ſon
of his ſonne, and to his ſeed. God giue vs wiſdome in our heart to iudge
his people in righteouſneſse, that the good things that they haue be not
aboliſhed, and that their glory may endure for their poſterity.
               9 For what wee haue ſaid it is moſt euident, that the precepts
inioyning obedience vnto ciuill Magiſtrates, are as large & ample
as any can be found for obedience vnto ſpirituall gouernours, and
what limitations ſoeuer the one did, the other might admit, during
the time of the Law. The promiſes of Gods extraordinarie
fauour, for directing both in their proceedings, were equall to both
alwayes conditionall in both caſes.
               10 As for this Law, Deut. 17. the very nature of the Text and
circumſtances annexed thereto,That this law of Deut. doth iuſtifie our Engliſh lawes for executing prieſts and Ieſuites, or all ſuch as acknowledge the Pope ſupreme Iudge in cauſes Eccleſiaſticall. inferre no more then this; That
God would haue a ſupreame Tribunall amongſt the Iſraelites,
wherein all con
                     •
                  rouerſis which could not be ended in inferiour
Courts, were to bee finally determined, leſt priuate contentions
might grow to publike diſſentions, or wranglings for petty damages,
turne to the ouerthrow of the ſtate by diſturbance of
common peace. It may bee admitted then that abſolute obedience
is here enioyned, but not vniuerſally abſolute, nor in all cauſes,
but in cauſes of controuerſie betwixt man and man, not in
cauſes betwixt men and their owne conſciences. And although
the ground of controuerſers plea might bee from ſome ſpirituall
law, (as concerning ſucceſſion in the Prieſthood, &c.) or haue
ſome ſpirituall matters annexed as conſequent, the Iudges cenſure

was to extend onely vnto mens ciuill carriage, in ſuch controuerſies,
and the Plaintiffes were to proſecute their right or title
(were it matter of wrong, of inheritance, ſpirituall or temporall)
no farther then the ſentence of his Court did permit. All were
bound vpon paine of death to ſit down with their priuate loſſe,
rather then raiſe tumults or endanger the publike forme of gouernement
eſtabliſhed in Iſrael. Euen when they knew the Iudges
ſentence in particular to be erroneous, they were to doe or
ſuffer as hee commanded, to remit their right, to let goe that
hold and intereſt which they thought they had in matters of temporall
conſequence (though perhaps of ſpiritual title) and vndergoe
what corporall penalty ſoeuer the Prieſt or Iudge (whetherſoeuer
were ſupreme magiſtrates) did inioyn them; but they were
not bound to thinke as the Prieſt or Iudge thought, nor to holde
their ſentence was alwayes agreeable to the law of God. Albeit
much eaſier it was for the Sanhedrim, then for the moderne Romiſh
Conſiſtory, to reſolue more controuerſies brought vnto them
by this diuine rule. Becauſe the ancient Iſraelites did not vſe to trouble
their Prieſts or Iudges with ſuch quirkes and quiddittes, as coined
for the moſt part by Schoole-men, haue bred greateſt contention
in the Chriſtian world, ſuch as neuer could haue beene decided
by the iudgement of Vrim or Thummin, not by Prophets, viſions
or dreames: Hee that had deſired any, muſt haue gone to
Endor for reſolution, Sam. 1. c. 28. v. 7. In Ieruſalem or Shiloh (whiles
they flouriſhed) the propoſers of ſuch controuerſies ſhould haue
bin puniſhed for their curioſity, which amongſt the Iſraelites had
beene as hatefull as the ſinne of Witch-craft. The want of ſuch a
Tribunall as this, for puniſhing contentions and curious ſpirites,
hath cauſed ſuch fruitleſſe contentions, and nice queſtions,
as cannot poſſibly bee reſolued, once ſet abroach or proſecuted,
but might eaſily haue beene preuented by the religious
care and induſtry of ſuch a ſupreme Conſiſtory in euery kingdome.
               What hath beene ſaid concerning the meaning of this place,
Deut. 17. is confirmed by the practiſe of the Iewes and their ancient
Records; Firſt, that not onely conditionall, but abſolute
obedience is here inioyned, is not probable out of thoſe wordes,

                  v. 11.Tria genera doctrinarum & ſententiarum veteribus fuerunt. Primum rece
                        •
                      tum credebatur a Moſe ac Prophetis, quod Cauala nominatur. Secundum, quod opinatione iudicum conſtitit, vt in Scripturae locis enarrandis, quae ad Occonomiam pertinebant. Ex quo intelligitur cauſa, quam 
                        •
                     b rem ſub priore templo & prioribus annis poſterioris, tanta concordia Iudaeorum Eccleſia adminiſtrata ſit, donec enim magnum iudicium viguit omnia certo deſinita, ſummo conſenſu recipiebantur. Exinde in ſententia facienda, & reſpondendo de lege ſaepiſſimè coniectu
                        •
                     is connix
                        •
                      ſunt, Et tamen quod ſic erat pronuncia
                        •
                     ū, pro lege recipibaturl Tertiam genus quod ſ
                        •
                     atuunt vltra legē, quo illa defenditur, ſeu obiecto ſepimento, vt prius v
                        •
                     olandum ſit hoc, quam in lege a
                        •
                      quid ſoris admittatur. Hoc Chriſti domini aetate inuerterunt, Nam propter traditiones reliquerunt legem Dei. 
                        〈◊〉
                      interim duo genera, alia perpetuo eſſe voluerunt alia tempora
                        •
                     ia. Fag
                           •
                        us in hunc locum.
                   
                  [according to the Law which they ſhall teach thee:] not onely
the written law of God (as ſome will haue it) but ſuch cuſtomes
as were receiued in this Court, thogh but probably deduced from
the written law, or otherwiſe inuented by their magiſtrates in
caſes omitted by the Law-giuer. All ſuch cuſtomes, decrees, or
ordinances were to bee obeyed abſolutely in ſuch matters as did
concern mens temporall loſſes or commodities, there was not
appeale to any other Court on earth, for the reuerſing of any ſentence
giuen in this; to haue attempted thus much, by this law,
had beene preſent death; and by the ſame all Chriſtian Princes
iuſtly might, yea ought to put death all ſuch, as in any cauſe ſpirituall
or temporall, vpon any occaſion whatſoeuer, ſhall appeale
to Rome from the chiefe Tribunall allotted for the hearing
of ſuch cauſes in their natiue Country: for by nature and Chriſtian
duety, all are bound to abide the ſentence of that Tribunall;
though not to approue it, yet not to reſiſt it, or oppoſe violence
vnto it, though it offer violence to them: for God onely
muſt take vengeance of their abuſing of that authority, which hee
had giuen them for others good, not for their harme. Would
God all Chriſtian Princes would put this law in practiſe, and fulfil
Gods word in the forementioned place, that al might die which
doe thus preſumptuouſly: that ſo euill, and (the miſchiefe of
miſchiefes) all appeales to Rome, might bee taken away from Iſrael;
that ſo all Chriſtian people hereafter might heare and feare, and doe no
more preſumptuouſly.
               
               Secondly, that the high Prieſt was not the infallible Iudge,
nor aboue Kings in giuing definitiue ſentence, is moſt euidently
confirmed by conſent of IewiſhSed nec rex in Sanhedrim admittebatur, eo quod prehibitum ſi contendere eum eo. Sacerdòs vero magnus recipieba
                        ••
                     a modo
                        ••
                     pientiae praeditus eſſet. Fagius in cap. 
                           •
                        6. Deut. ex Hebraeis.
                   antiquity; for the High Prieſt
was not admitted into their chiefe Conſiſtory but vpon this condition,
if he were a wiſe man, and being admitted, yet was hee not to
ſway al as he pleaſed, for ſo is it ſaid in the ſame place, that the king
was not to be of the
                     Vide Fagium in cap. 10. Deut. and the annotations vnto the 9. §. of the next Chapter. 
                  Sanhedrim, becauſe they were forbidden to
contend with him, with the High Prieſt they might. But the Prophets
of God did alwayes in their doctrine withſtand either the
Prieſts, Prophets, Kings or Iudges, as often as they went * contra
ſtationes Montis Sinai.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               That our Sauiours iniunction of obedience to the Scribes and Phariſees,
though moſt vniuerſall for the forme, is to be limited by the former
Rules, that without open blaſphemy it cannot bee extended to countenance
the Romiſh cauſe: that by it we may limit other places brought
by them for the Popes tranſcendent vniuerſall authority.
               1 ANother place there is, which, as it ſeems hath
beene too much beaten heretofore, becauſe
ſome of the cunningeſt Anglers for Peters
tribute, beginne of late to relinquiſh it. The
place is Math. 23. verſe 2. 3. The Scribes and
Phariſees ſit in Moſes ſeat. All therefore whatſoeuer
they bid you obſerue, that obſerue and do,
but after their workes doe not, for they ſay, and doe not. Bellarmine in
his firſt attempts, is more forward to fortifie this hold then any other;
to what purpoſe, I cannot diuine, vnleſſe to terrifie ſuch as
view it only a far off; but it ſeems he felt vpō beter experience, the
maintenance of it once cloſely beſieged, would not quit the coſt;
for elſewhere, hee yeelds as much expreſly, as will inforce him to
ſurrender vp this, if it bee inſtantly demanded. Perhaps he hoped
his premunitions might worke ſome ſecret diſpoſition in moſt
mens minds more preiudiciall to our cauſe, then wee out of our
honeſt ſimplicity could at firſt ſight ſuſpect. It will not therfore be
amiſſe, partly to preuent the poſſible danger of his concealed concluſion,
by ſhewing the expreſſe folly of his premiſes; partly, to
examine the place it ſelfe, becauſe the euidence of it failing, will
bee a preſumption againſt all they pretend of like kind, and may
afforde ſome farther light how we may reſtraine propoſitions
for their forme moſt vniuerſall, by the matter or circumſtances
concomitant.
               2 The fortreſſes which hee erects for defence, are three. His
firſt, that our Sauiour in this very ChapterMat. 23. wherein he reprehends
the Scribes and Phariſees moſt ſharpely, yet giues this caue
at to ſuch as are weake in faith, leſt they ſhould neglect their

doctrine for their bad liues and hypocriſie The note,Nota 3 PRIMO loto illo capite 
                        〈…〉
                      colligere, non
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      capitis 
                        〈…〉
                      eorum 
                        〈◊〉
                      SECVNDO, nota cum 
                        〈◊〉
                      ano lib. 4 Epiſt. 9 Nunquam Dominum, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Apasto
                        •
                     s in tota Scriptura reprehendiſſe Pontifices et Sacerdotes Iudaeorum, nominando eos Pontifices vel Sacerdotes, ſed ſolùm ſub nomine Scribarum et Phariſcorum, ne videretur roprchendere cathedram et Sacerdotium, et vt intell ge
                        ••
                     
                     mus, ſemper deberi honarem Sacerdot
                        •
                     o et Pontificatui, etiam ſi ſortè perſona quae in Cathedra ſede
                        •
                     , ſit minus 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Ex quo intell gimus hareticos hu
                        •
                     us temporis, qui 
                        •
                     eaſſim in Epiſcopos et Sac
                        •
                     rdotes & praecipuè in ipſum 
                        •
                     ummum Eccleſiae Pontificem inuehuntur, nihil habere commune cum moribus Domini, & Apoſtolorum. TERTIO nota, quod Dominus de Cathedra Moſis dicit, intelligi à fortiori de Cathedra 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Bel. de interp. ver. Dei. l. 3. c. 5. conſidered
in it ſelfe, is not amiſſe, but brought to countenance their bad
cauſe, or elſe to preiudice the truth of ours, by rayſing a ſuſpition
in the ignorant of our bad dealing, as if wee taught the contrary.
               3 His ſecond fortreſſe is, that neither our Sauiour Chriſt, nor
his Apoſtles did euer taxe the Prelates, or inferiour Prieſts, by theſe
names directly, but alwayes vnder the name of Scribes and Phariſes,
leſt they might thereby ſeeme to reprehend the Prieſthood
or ſeat of authority. And this they did, that men might know, honour
and reuerence to bee due vnto the Prelacy or PrieſthOod, although
the Prieſts or Prelates in their liues and perſons were not
ſo commendable. The conſequence is not amiſſe; albeit his reaſon
bee not ſo firme, and the corollary, which hee hence deduceth,
moſt malitious. Hence (ſaith hee) wee are giuen to vnderſtand, that
the heretikes of this age, which vpon euery occaſion inueigh againſt
Biſhops, Prieſts, eſpecially the Pope, doe but ill conſent in manners with
our Sauiour and his Apoſtles. But did neither our Sauiour Chriſt,
nor his Apoſtles taxe the Prieſts & Prelates by their proper names
for that reaſon which Bellarmine brings?
                     Bellarmines idle and malirious collections out of our Sauiours words refuted. Wee may ſuppoſe I
truſt without offence, that Gods Prophets did not go beyond their
commiſſion, in taxing the chiefe offences or offendors of their
times; that our Sauiour or his Apoſtles might vpon the like or
greater occaſions, haue vſed the ſame forme of reprehenſion the
Prophets did, or other more perſonall. The true reaſon why ſo
they did not, was, becauſe they had no ſuch reſpect of perſons or
titles, as Bellarmine dreames of, but aimed chiefly at the faireſt, for
ſuch vſually gaue greateſt countenance to fouleſt ſins. And who
knowes not, now in the Synagogues latter dayes, the glorious
titles of Scribes and Phariſes had, in a ſort drowned the names of
Prieſts; as the reputation of Ieſuites hath of late yeeres much eclipſed
all other titles of inferiour miniſters, heretofore more famous
in the Romiſh Church? It was likewiſe the high eſteeme of
theſe two Saint like ſects, which ſeduced moſt ſilly ſoules throghout
Iewry, to follow traditions contrary to Gods lawes, as the
Ieſuites late ſame hath drawne moſt of the blind Churches children

(which goe more by eare then eye ſight) to account villany
piety, and falſhood ſubtlety. As our Sauiour and his Apoſtles reprehended
the Rabbies or Prieſtes in their times, not vnder the
names of Prieſtes and Leuites, but vnder the glorious names
of Scribes and Phariſies, then reputed the onely guides of
godlineſſe: ſo would they, were they now on earth (as wee
in imitation of them) taxe the Romiſh Clergy, eſpecially vnder
the names of Ieſuits, or other more famous orders in that church.
But the Sect of Scribes and Phariſes being not knowne in Malachies
time, nor any other order ſo glorious then, as the order of
Prieſts,Mala. 2. 
                        •
                     . he tels them their owne in their proper names; And now
O yee Prieſts this commandement is for you. So did Micah and Zephania,
and euery Prophet, as their demerites gaue occaſion.
               4 His third fortreſſe is, that whatſoeuer Chriſt ſaith of Moſes
chaire, muſt he conceiued to make more for Saint Peters, and ſuch
as ſate therin. Why our Sauiours admonition ſhould make more
for the Popes authority within his owne territories then it did
for the Scribes and Phariſes, or High Prieſts authority in the land
of Iewry; I ſee no reaſon that it may concerne the people, liuing
vnder the Pope, and Clergy of Rome, as much as it did the people
of Iewry then ſubiect to the High Prieſt, Scribes and Phariſes, I
will not deny; for ſuch Iudges as they were, the Popes of Rome in
their ſeuerall generations may bee, nay, would God they were
not. Let vs ſee then, what infallibility in giuing definitiue ſentence,
Bellarmine can proue out of the fore-mentioned place. The
words are plaine, Whatſoeuer they bid you doe, that doe. What, all
without any exception? nay, you doe the Papiſts wrong, if you
collect ſo; Whatſoeuer they ſpeake ex Cathedra. Then the propoſition,
though moſt vniuerſall for the forme is reſtrained by our
aduerſaries themſelues, vnto ſuch doctrines onely, as they taught
ex Cathedra. And iuſtly, ſeeing this reſtraint hath more apparent
ground in the Text then any other. Therefore it is ſaid, they ſit in
Moſes ſeat, they are infallible, not alwaies, becauſe they ſomtimes
ſit; but whiles they ſit in Moſes ſeat, or giue ſentence out of it; what
is it then to giue ſentence out of Moſes ſeat? to pronounce ſentence
ſolemnly, and vpon deliberation? If vnto all their doctrines
or definitiue ſentences ſo prononnced, men had beene bound in
conſcience to yeeld obedience: the Pope (as ſhall bee ſhewed anone)
had neuer ſate in Peters chaire; yea, Peter himſelfe had been

in conſcience bound to be an Apoſtata from Chriſt.
                     Maldonates reſtraint of the former iniunction. But what is
the meaning of theſe words? They ſit in Moſes ſeat, all therefore
whatſoeuer they bid you, that obſerue, and doe? That is, all that Moſes
firſt ſaid, and they recite, This is a ſtrange interpretation indeed,
will the ignorant or illiterate Papiſt reply, yet (to omit many others
of their owne,) a lateCum iubet ſeruare, ac facere quae Scribae & Phariſaei, dum in Cathedra Moyſis ſ
                        •
                     deat, licunt non de ipſ
                        •
                     rum, ſed de legis, ac Moyſis doctrina loquitur, periade enim eſt, ac ſi dicat, omnia, quae lex & Moyſes vobis dixerint, Scribis & Phariſaeis recitantibus ſeruate ac facite, ſecundum autem opera eorum nolite facere, vt Hila. Hieron. videntur intellexiſſe. Cur ergo, dicet aliquis non dixit, quaecun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      
                     Moyſes dicet, 
                        •
                     eruate ac 
                        〈◊〉
                     , ſed quaecun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Scribae & Phariſaei dixerint? Duplex reddi cauſa potestcaltera: quod voluerit Scribarū et Phariſaeorū hypocriſm arguere: non autem artguiſſet niſi dixiſſet eos aliter docere. Altera quod toto capite accrbè eos eſſet reprehenſurus, & conueniebat aliquantulum eos prius laudare, ne omnia ex affect
                        •
                     , & ſine iudicio improbare videretur. Maldonatus in c. 23. v. 3. Math. S. Auſtins anſwere, [Non ſequitur de Phariſaeis, niſi in Cathedra Moyſis ſedentibus, tunc autem Cathedra ipſa coegit eos vera dicere.] He thus reiects [Quis dubita
                        •
                      illa ipſa falſa, quae docebant, in Cathedra ipſa, ſi in Cathedra ſedebant, aut in Syaagoga & Schola. 2. Moyſis docuiſſe? Seeing the Ieſuite thus reiects the diſiunction of ſpeaking ex Cathedra, or as priuate men, what reaſon haue we to acknowledge the Popes publike or infallible ſpirit, whilſt he ſpeakes ex Cathedra, when by their owne confeſsion he may be worſe then an Hereticke of Infidell if wee take him as a priuate man.
                   Ieſuites whole skill in expounding
Scriptures (ſaue onely where doting loue vnto their Church, hath
made him blind) none of theirs, few of our Church haue ſurpaſſed, [Cum iubet ſeruare, ac facere quae Scribae & Phariſaei, dum in Cathedra Moyſis ſ
                        •
                     deat, licunt non de ipſ
                        •
                     rum, ſed de legis, ac Moyſis doctrina loquitur, periade enim eſt, ac ſi dicat, omnia, quae lex & Moyſes vobis dixerint, Scribis & Phariſaeis recitantibus ſeruate ac facite, ſecundum autem opera eorum nolite facere, vt Hila. Hieron. videntur intellexiſſe. Cur ergo, dicet aliquis non dixit, quaecun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      
                     Moyſes dicet, 
                        •
                     eruate ac 
                        〈◊〉
                     , ſed quaecun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Scribae & Phariſaei dixerint? Duplex reddi cauſa potest:altera, quod voluerit Scribarū et Phariſaeorū hypocriſm artguere: non autem ar guiſſet niſi dixiſſet eos aliter docere. Alters quod toto capite acerbè eos eſſet reprehenſurus, & conueniebat aliquantulum eos prius laudare, ne omnia ex affect
                        •
                     , & ſine iudicio improbare videretur. Maldonatus in c. 23. v. 3. Math. S. Auſtins anſwere, [Non ſequitur de Phariſaeis, niſi in Cathedra Moyſis ſedentibus, tunc autem Cathedra ipſa coegit eos vera dicere.] He thus reiects [Quis dubita
                        •
                      illa ipſa falſa, quae docebant, in Cathedra ipſa, ſi in Cathedra ſedebant, aut in Syaagoga & Schola. 2. Moyſis docuiſſe? Seeing the Ieſuite thus reiects the diſiunction of ſpeaking ex Cathedra, or as priuate men, what reaſon haue we to acknowledge the Popes publike or infallible ſpirit, whilſt he ſpeakes ex Cathedra, when by their owne confeſsion he may be worſe then an Hereticke of Infidell if wee take him as a priuate man.
                   
                  When hee commands to obſerue, and doe all that the Scribes & Phariſes
ſay, whileſt they ſit in Moſes ſeat, hee ſpeakes not of theirs, but of
Moſes his doctrine. the meaning is, as if hee had ſaid, whatſoeuer the
law or Moſes (recited by the Scribes and Phariſes) ſhall ſay vnto you,
that obſerue and doe, but doe not yee according to their works.] This he
takes to bee Saint Hilaries, and Saint Hieroms expoſition of the
place. If any man yet further demand, why our Sauiour did not
ſpeake more plainely, [Whatſoeuer Moſes ſaith, obſerue and doe] rather
then [Whatſoeuer the Scribes and Phariſes ſay, obſerue and doe:]
Maldonat in the ſame place giues two reaſons: The first, becauſe
our Sauiour did now purpoſe to taxe the Scribes and Phariſes hypocriſie
which hee had not taxed, vnleſſe hee had ſhewed, that they taught otherwiſe
then they liued. The ſecond, that in this Chapter hee intended
to reprehend the Scribes and Phariſes ſharpely, and therefore it was
expedient, hee ſhould firſt commend them for ſome things, leſt
all his reproofes might ſeeme to proceed from paſſion, or want
of iudgement. Thus farre Maldonat, vnto whoſe anſwere wee
may adioyne, that our Sauiour Chriſt (as Maldonat alſo wel hath
noted) did ſpeake theſe words vnto ſuch as had ſeene his miracles,
and heard his doctrine, and yet could not bee his dayly auditors
with his other Diſciples: but were to repaire to the Scribes
and Phariſes, as vnto their ordinary teachers, and inſtructers in
the Law. Here, if wee conſider the humor of rude and ignorant
people for ſuch may wee ſuppoſe moſt of his auditors were as

yet) it was very likely they would either be ſlow to heare, or ready
to diſtaſt any doctrine that ſhould proceed from the Scribes and
Phariſes mouthes, whom they had heard ſo much diſcommended
by that bleſſed mouth, which ſpake as neuer mans did. For it is
a worke of great iudgement▪ nay of the ſpirit ouerruling the
fleſh, to make men relliſh their doctrine, whoſe liues & conuerſations
they loath. And ſuch as are but ſchollars (though neuer
ſo meane) to an excellent maſter, will vſually be puft vp▪ with a
conceit of themſelues, from other mens conceit and commendations
of him, and in this humor ſcorne to learne of any more
meanely qualified, or of leſſe eſtimation in the ſame profeſſion.
Againe, there is a iealouſie in moſt illiterate minds, that their
Preacher, if hee follow not ſuch leſſons in his life, as hee giues
them, doth not teach them as they ſhould bee taught, nor inſtruct
them ſincerely as hee thinkes, but rather in policy inioynes
them ſtrictneſſe of life, that hee himſelfe may follow his pleaſures
without partners.
               5 Hence vſually are many wholeſome ſpirituall medicines
diſproued,The originall of iealouſies in the ſlocke, or needleſſe exceptions againſt the wholeſome admonitions of Paſtors. ere proued or taſted, becauſe the parties vnto whom
they are tendred, haue no conceit or relliſh of any good, but
what is pleaſant to ſenſe, or profitable for ſecular purpoſes; ſuch
as none that truely thinke, or call good, but will ſo entertaine it
in action and reſolution, neuer willingly preferring the leſſe before
the greater, both being of the ſame kind. If a man ſhould
make choice of that bargaine, which he would perſwade as leſſe
commodious vnto others; none would belieue hee ſpake ſincerely
as hee thought, but rather cunningly to preuent others, or
to effect his owne gaine without a ſharer. But whileſt ſecular
good ſtands in competition with ſpirituall, albeit wee approue
the one as truely good, and condemne the other as euill; yet euen
the beſt of vs is often enforced to take vp that complaint; To
will is preſent with me,
                  Rom. 7. 18. 19. 
                  but I finde no means to performe that which is
good for I doe not the good things which I would, but the euill which I
would not, that doe I. Rude and illiterate mindes, ignorant of this
difference betweene ſenſitiue and ſpirituall good, as altogether vnacquainted
with the one, out of their owne cuſtom alwayes to act
what they intend, ſuſpect their Paſtors, whileſt they commend
wholeſome food vnto them, do not thinke becauſe they do not as

they ſay. From this ſourſe iſſue theſe or the like mutterings amongſt
themſelues, Tuſh, if our Parſon were of the ſame minde
out of the Pulpit, as he makes ſhew for in it; why ſhould bee not
frame his life accordingly? Doth he loue vs (trow we) better then
himſelfe? nay, I warrant him, hee is old inough to know what is
good for himſelfe: and if he knew that which he bids vs do, to be
as good for him, as hee would make vs belieue it is for vs; what
a Gods name, hinders him from doing it? he hath little elſe to doe
beſides, much leſſe I am ſure then any of vs.
               6 To meet perhaps with all theſe, but eſpecially with this laſt
temptation, our Sauiour giues his auditors this preſeruatiue; The
Scribes and Phariſes ſit in Moſes chaire, all therefore whatſoeuer they
bid you obſerue, that obſerue and doe, but after their workes doe not]
As if hee had ſaid, Though their liues bee hypocriticall and bad,
yet bee not too iealous of their doctrine: They deliuer that ordinarily
vnto you, which Moſes did teach your forefathers. The
doctrine is exceeding good, howſoeuer theſe curſed hypocrites do
not follow it: But this is Gods iudgement vpon them, that they
ſhould ſee the truth with their eyes, and not vnderſtand it by laying
it to their hearts.
               7 This I ta
                     •
                  e it,The true reſtraint of the former iniunction. is the drift of our Sauiours ſpeech, whence the
vniuerſall no
                     •
                  e [whatſoeuer] muſt bee reſtrained to ſuch materiall
doctrines, as the Scribes and Phariſes themſelues, either expreſly
deliuered out of Moſes, or whiles they interpreted him, commended
to others as good in the generall, howſoeuer they ſhrunk
backe or ſhufled, when they came to the practiſe of ſuch particulars
as croſſed their humors; or vnto theſe precepts of good life,
whoſe truth and equity their auditors might eaſily haue acknowledged,
either from their conſeruancie with the principles of nature,
or other vndoubted mandates of Moſes law, or from the authority
of bad, yet lawfull teachers, whoſe aduiſe is alwayes to be
followed as good, vnleſſe there be iuſt ſuſpition of euill, or ſiniſter
reſpects, of which their bad liues are then onely iuſt preſumptions,
when they handle particulars that concerne themſelues, as
making for their gaine, credite, glory, Apologies in bad courſes,
or auertment of deſerued diſgrace.
               8 If we take this whole vniuerſall affirmatiue, [Whatſoeuer they
bid you, that obſerue and do] in that ſenſe our Sauiour meant it: it

is but equiualent to this, or the like vniuerſall negatiue, [Leaue
nothing vndone that either Moſes, or ſuch as ſit in his ſeat commandes
as good] or your conſcience cannot iuſtly witnes to bee euill, albeit
they which commend it to you for good, are euill, and cannot
teach themſelues to doe it. Few Preachers in any well ordered
Church, are ſo vnlearned, or bad of life, but what they ſolemnely
one time or other deliuer out of Moſes and the Prophets,
might be a ſufficient rule for their hearers internall thoughts, and
outward actions: did not the flocke prepoſterouſly make their
Paſtors doings, the rule of their thoughts and ſayings; alwayes
ſuſpecting that, as not good, which they ſee left vndone, and
accounting all lawfull for themſelues to doe, which they ſee
done and practiſed by their leaders. When as not the Paſtors liues
or doings; but their ſayings are to bee made rules of other mens
liues and actions. And our Sauiour enioynes the former obedience
vnto the very Phariſes; who ſpake as well, and did as ill as
any could doe; very patterns of hypocriſie. In expounding Moſes,
hey could not but often inculcate the orthodoxal doctrine of
good workes, of almes deedes, and liberality; yet retained they
the rootes of auarice in their hearts, whoſe bitterneſſe would bewray
it ſelfe vpon particular occaſions,Luc. 16. v. 14. 
                  All theſe things heard the
Phariſes, ſaith Saint Luke, which were couetous, and they mocked him.
They often exhorted others to circumciſe the heart, to be humble
and meeke as Moſes was, yet remained proud themſelues, ambitious
of higheſt places in the Synagogues,Luc. 11, v. 39. 
                  inwardly fully of rauen and
wickedneſſe. They often taught others as Moſes had done, to walk
vprightly as in the ſight of the Lord their God; and yet did all their
works to bee ſeene of men. They had often taught their auditors
to honour father and mother, and learnedly diſcourſed vpon the
equity of this precept in generall: yet could vpon priuate reſpects
diſpenſe with it in ſundry particulars. They ſaid well in the former,
and did ill in the latter. And albeit they iuſtified their practiſe
by tradition of the elders (as the Pontificians doe theirs,
when they abſolute ſubiects from the bond of duet, to their ciuil;
or children; to their naturall parents, that they may bee more
ſeruiceable to the Church their mother,) yet their ſayings in theſe
Apologies were but acceſſary to their doings; not comprehended
vnder▪ that vniuerſall affirmatiue [All whatſoeuer they bid you,

obſerue, and doe,] but vnder the negatiue [After their works do not]
for they were more deſirous to be honored as Rabbies and Fathers
of the congregation, then to honour the parents of their fleſh:
albeit they vſually taught others ſo to do, ſaue onely when their
treaſurie might bee enriched, or their owne honour enlarged by
diſpenſations, which the people eaſily might haue diſcerned for
contrary, as well to the Law of God and nature, as theſe diſpenſators
owne doctrine, when themſelues were not parties.
               9The authority of th
                        •
                      Keyes not vniuerſall, but to be limited as the former precept or iniunction hath been. From the reſtraint of this vniuerſall precept, wee may eaſily
limit that ſpeech of our Sauiour vnto Saint Peter, which
Bellarmine labours to make more then moſt vniuerſall, becauſe the
ſureſt ground in their ſuppoſals of the Popes tranſcendent authority,
[Math. 16. v. 19 
                  I will giue vnto thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, and
whatſoeuer thou ſhalt bind vpon earth, ſhall bee bound in heauen, and
whatſoeuer thou ſhalt looſe on earth, ſhall be looſed in heauen.] By theſe
keyes ſaithPer iſtas claues non ſolum intelligitur poteſtas ſoluendi à peccatis, ſed etiā ab omnibus alijs vinculis & impedimentis, quae niſi tollantur, non poteſt intrare in regnum caelorum, ſiquidem promiſſio generalis eſt, nec dicitur, Quemcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſolueris, ſed quod cun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſolueris, vt intellig mus modos omnes, ſeu legum diſpē
                     ſando, ſeu peccatorum et paenarū relaxando, ſeu dogmatum, et controuerſiarum explicando à Petro eiuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , ſucceſſoribus ſolui poſſe Bellar. de verbi Dei interpret. lib. 11. cap. 37. 
                  Bellarmine, is vnderſtood a power of looſing, not onely ſins,
but all other bonds or impediments, without whoſe remouall there is no
poſsibility of entrance into the Kingdome of heauen: for the promiſe is
generall; nor is it ſaid, Whomſoeuer, but whatſoeuer thou looſeſt, &c.
giuing vs hereby to vnderſtand, that Peter and his ſucceſſors may looſe
all knots or difficulties, of what kindſoeuer, if of lawes, by diſpenſing
with them, if of ſinnes, by remitting them, if of controuerſies, or opinions,
by vnfolding them. Thus farre would this cunning Sophiſter
improue the vniuerſall [Whatſoeuer] aboue it ordinary and ancient
value in Scripture phraſe: further then the condition of the
partie, to whom the promiſe was made (being Chriſts ſeruants,
not his equall) will ſuffer. For what greater prerogatiue could
Chriſt himſelfe challenge, then ſuch as Bellarmine (for the preſent
Popes ſake) would make Saint Peters? The vniuerſall note in this
place, as the like before, includes onely an abundant aſſurance of
the power bequeathed; a full and irreuocable ratification of the
Keyes right vſe, ſuch a ſhutting as none can open, ſuch an
opening as none can ſhut; as often as ſentence is either way giuen
vpon ſufficient and iuſt occaſions. The proper ſubiect that
limits the vniuerſall forme of this more then princely prerogatiue,
is the denyall or confeſſion of Chriſt, either in open ſpeech,
in perpetuall actions or reſolution; as ſhall bee (by Gods aſſiſtance)
made euident againſt Romiſh aſſertions) without derogation

from the royalty of Prieſt-hood, which within theſe territories
is much more dreadfull and ſoueraigne, then worldlings
will acknowledge, vntill they bee made feele the full ſtroke of the
ſpirituall ſword, in theſe our dayes, for the moſt part borne in
vaine.
               10 Whatſoeuer reaſons elſe they can from any other places
of Scripture pretend for abſolute infallibilitie in the High Prieſts,
or Church repreſentative vnder the Law, fall of their owne accord,
theſe fundamentall ones being ouerthrowne. But before
I proceed to euince the Iewiſh ſupreme tribunall moſt groſly erreneous
de ſacto: I muſt requeſt the ingenious Readers, as many
as vnderſtand Latine, and can haue acceſſe vnto theſe great Doctors
writings, to be eye-witneſſes with vs, or if it pleaſe them,
publike Notaries of their retchleſſe impieties. Of which vnleſſe authentique
notice bee now taken, and propagated to poſterity by
euident teſtimonies beyond exception: his impudent generation
in future ages, when theſe abominations grow old, and more
ſtirred in beginne ſo to ſtinke, that for the Churches temporall
health, the bookes of moderne Ieſuites muſt be purged, will ſurely
deny that euer any of their grand Diuines were ſo mad with inceſtuous
loue of their whoriſh mother, as to ſeeke her maintenance
by ſuch ſhameleſſe,That no argument 
                        〈…〉
                      from the former pla
                        •
                     e to proue the Churches infallibility, but 
                        〈◊〉
                      as 
                        〈…〉
                      of our Sauiour. groſſe, notorious, palpable written
blaſphemies, as vngracious Iudes would rather haue choaked
with an halter in their birth, then haue granted them entrance
into the world through his throat. Hee in compariſon of theſe
Antichriſtian Traitors, ingenuouſly confeſſed his ſoule offence in
betraying innocent blood. But euen the flower of Romiſh Doctors
Biſhops, and Cardinals, are not aſhamed to iuſtifie him, in
betraying; and the Scribes and Phariſes, in ſolemnely condemning
our Sauiour; For, if the one ſort did not erre in iudgement,
the other did not amiſſe in executing what they enioyned:Tria genera 
                        〈…〉
                      hoc loco lex d
                        •
                     cūtur, Puta ordin
                        •
                      a
                        •
                     ones, edicta, vel traditiones & conſuetudines legitimae, quibus in multitudine publica honeſtas continetur. Hinc eſt quod Prophetae conſtantiſſimè refragati ſunt, quoties contra ſtationes montis Sinai, vt vocant, aut reges, aut Iudices, aut populus aliquid admiſerat. [Of which ſee the Annotations to the laſt §. ſaue one of the former Chapter.]
                   yet by
that very conſiſtory of Prieſtes, and Elders, brought in by Bellarmine,
as chiefe ſupporters of the Churches infallibility, was the
life of the world cenſured to death for an hereticke, or refractarious

Sciſmatique; and theIn Talmud ſcribitur dominum noſtrum illis damnatum. Caeterum accuſationem falſo 
                        〈…〉
                      nunquam voluit Pontifi
                        •
                     ū & Phariſa orum tanquam iudicum authoritatē eſſe conuulſ
                        •
                     m, ſed ſtab
                        ••
                     tam potiu
                        •
                     . Matth. 23. Fagius in Deu. 17. 
                  
                     
                        •
                     al
                        •
                     udiſts, taking that Conſiſtories
authority but for ſuch as the Ieſuites ſuppoſed, conclude directly
from principles common to the Synagogue and the Romane
Church, that hee deſerued no leſſe, becauſe hee would not ſubſcribe
vnto their ſentence, nor recant his opinions.
               11 Againe; if wee vnderſtand that other place [The Scribes
and Phariſes ſit in Moſes ſeat, all therefore whatſoeuer they bid you, that
obſerue and doe,] vniuerſally as moſt Papiſts doe, and Hart out of
his tranſmarinall Catechiſme, would gladly haue maintained it: any
Iew might thus aſſume; vnto the Scribes and Phariſes ſolemnly
bid Iudas and others to obſerue our Sauiour as a ſeducer, or
traitor, and charged the people to ſeeke his bloud: therefore they
were in conſciences, and vpon paine of damnation, bound ſo to
doe. Doe I amplifie one word, or wrong them a iot in theſe collections?
I appeale vnto their owne Writers. Let Melchior Canus,
inferiour to none in that Church for learning, and for a Papiſt
a man of ſingular ingenuity bee iudge betwixt vs. If from his
words, as much as I haue ſaid, doe not moſt directly follow: let
let mee die the death for this ſuppoſed ſlander. Againſt the abſolute
infallibility of Councels, or Synods, maintained by him in
his fifth booke: our Writers, as hee frames their argument, thus
obiects. The Prieſts and Phariſes called Councels, whoſe ſolemne ſentences
were impious, becauſe they condemned the ſonne of God for ſuch:
in like ſort may the Romiſh Prelacie giue ſentence contrary vnto Chriſt.
Vnto this obiection, ſaith
                  Ad id quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      quod dem
                        •
                     eps ſequitur, non eſt difficile reſpondere. Nam ſacerdotum veterum acta quidem Chriſto aduerſa fueruent al ſententu. hominum ali
                        •
                     qui poſſimorum non ſolum veriſſinia, ſed reipub. etiam vtiliſſima ſuit. Quin diuinum o
                        •
                     aculum fuiſſe Ioan. Euangel. teſtatur. Cum enim poſt longam variam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , concilij deliberationem Caipha
                           •
                        , qui vt ſumm
                        ••
                      Pontifex Concino praeſidebat▪ ſententiam illam, cui omnes ferè conſenſerunt, dixiſſet: Expedit nobis, vt vnus m
                        •
                     riatur homo pro populo, & non tota gens pereat: mox Euangeliſta ſubiecit. Hoc autem à ſemetipſo non dixit ſed cum eſſet Pontifex animi illius prophetauit. Qua ex re ſit, vt ex noſtrorum Pontifi
                        •
                     um vita quidem & opera contraria fortè ſiat Domino Ieſu, ſed eorum iudicia, quae videlu et à ſummo Pontifice comprobata ſ
                        •
                     nt, & vera erant & Chriſtiani vtilia, quae ad populi ſalutem ſuit diuinitus inſtituta. Imo adeo à Spiritu ſancto erunt ob eam 
                        〈◊〉
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                      am eb Euangeliſta 
                        •
                     id cimus, quia ſcilicet Eccleſiae Chri
                        ••
                     i Pontifices ſunt. At de ſecundo argumento ſatis. Canus, lib. 5. cap. poſtremo.
                   Canus, the anſwere is eaſie; Let vs heare
it. The practiſes of the Prieſts were indeed againſt our Sauiour: but
the ſentence of men otherwiſe moſt wicked, was not onely moſt true,
but withall most profitable to the common-weale. Yea, Saint Iohn the
Euangeliſt tels vs, it was a diuine Oracle: for after a long and various
deliberation vſed by the Councell, Caiaphas now ſate as chiefe, being
the High-Prieſt, pronounced that ſentence whereunto almoſt all (at
the leaſt the maior part) agreed; [It is expedient, that one die for the

people, and that the whole nation periſh not], vpon which ſpeech the
Euangeliſt forthwith a
                     •
                  s; This hee ſpake not of himſelfe, but beeing
High-Prieſt for that yeere, hee propheſied, Whence it followes, ſayeth
Canus, that our Prelates liues and actions may perhaps be contrary to
our Lord Ieſus: but their iudiciall decrees or ſentences, ſuch as are cō
                  firmed
by the Pope (who muſt bee preſident in their Councels, as
Caiaphas was) ſhall proue true and profitable vnto Chriſtians, as inſtituted
by God for the peoples good, yea 
                     •
                  hey ſhall proceed from the holy
Ghost, for the reaſon which wee haue learned of the Euangeliſt, to wit,
becauſe ſuch as giue them, are Prelates of Chriſts Church. And this is
all I haue to ſay vnto the ſecond argument.
               12 It is eaſie indeed for them thus to anſwere: to whom it is
moſt eaſie and moſt vſuall to blaſpheme, That the Popes, aſwell
as Caiaphas prophecies, may in the euent proue true and profitable
to Chriſts Church, wee doe not doubt: becauſe vnto ſuch
as loue God, or are beloued of him, all things, euen Sathans
malice that had ſuborned Caiaphas and his brethren againſt Chriſt
and his members, turne to the beſt. But hee that had taken this
High-Prieſt, whileſt hee vttered this ſentence, for an infallible
Prophet of the Lord, had been bound in conſcience to haue done
ſo to our Sauiour at his, as the people did to Baals Prieſts, at Elias
inſtigation. If our aduerſaries will permit vs to interprete the
Trent Councels decrees, as the faithfull of thoſe times did Caiaphas
prophecie: wee will ſubſcribe vnto them without delay. It
is expedient, wee grant, and profitable withall vnto the Church,
that there ſhould bee ſuch decrees, whereby the faith of others
might bee tried. But as it was not lawfull for the people, to imbrue
their hands in Chriſts bloud, though the greateſt benefite
that euer befell the world, was by his death: ſo neither is it ſafe
to admit the Trent Canons, though a wonderfull bleſſing of God
they ſhould be ſet forth, becauſe they ſo clearely teſtifie the truth
of his word concerning Antichriſt. Canus ſaid more in this then
was needfull, according to his ſuppoſed principles in his anſwere
to the next argument. But God who ruled the mouth of Caiaphas,
and made him ſpeake the trueth, when hee intended nothing
leſſe, did alſo direct Canus penne to vent, what vpon
better conſideration hee would haue concealed. Yet herein hee
wrote, but out of the abundance of his owne, and moſt of his fellowes

hearts, who hold that the Prieſts and Phariſes did erre onely
in a matter of fact, not in any point of faith, when they condemned
Chriſt. Of which in the next Chapter. For concluſion of
this, conſider with me, Chriſtian Reader, how great cauſe we haue
to thanke our gracious God, that the ſect of Ieſuites, or rabble
of Predicants, were not founded in our Sauiours dayes; for
then doubtleſſe the Diuell had picked a traitor out of that crue,
whoſe impudent, ſophiſticall Apologies for open blaſphemie, and
vnrelenting perſeuerance in traiterous plots, might haue outfaced
the world, that the deliuering of Chriſt into his enemies hands
had beene no ſuch ſinne, as Iudas teſtified it was, both by his penitent
ſpeech, and deſperate end.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               What it would diſaduantage the Romiſh Church to deny the infallibility
of the Synagogue.
               1. THat any viſible company of men before our
Sauiour Chriſts time,Such infallible authority as the Ieſuites plead for more neceſſary in the time of the Law, then of the Goſpell. did challenge ſuch abſolute
authority ouer mens faith, as the Pope
doth, would bee very hard for them to proue; &
no queſtion but the High-Prieſt and Rulers amongſt
the Iewes, did oftentimes challenge
more then they had. If the Romaniſt ſhould ſay, that they had no
ſuch infallible authority in deciding all controuerſies, as their
Church now challengeth: the aſſertion would be as improbable
in it ſelfe, as incongruous to their poſitio
                     •
                  s. For vnto any indifferent
man ſuch infallibility in the Watch-Tower of Sion, muſt
needes ſeem more requiſite during the time of the law, then ſince
the promulgation of the Goſpell. Bee it granted, the points to be
expreſly beleeued of the ancient people, were but few: yet euen
ſuch of them as were moſt neceſſary to ſaluation, were more enigmatically
and myſtically ſet downe, then any in the new Teſtament
are; and the meaſure of Gods ſpirit vpon euery ſort of
men, (the vulgar eſpecially) in thoſe times, much leſſe. For this
cauſe God raiſed vp Prophets to inſtruct them, whoſe authority

though it was not ſuch, as the Romane Church now challengeth
(but giuen to ſupply the ignorance and negligence of the church
repreſentatiue in thoſe dayes:) yet much greater then is ordinarily
required in the light of the Goſpell, by which as the doctrine
of ſaluation is become moſt conſpicuous in it ſelfe, ſo is the illumination
of Gods ſpirit more plentifull then before it had beene.
And ſince the Prophets haue beene ſo clearely expounded by the
Apoſtles, and the harmony of the two Teſtaments ſo diſtinctly
heard, the ordinaryReuel. 19 10. 
                  teſtimony of Ieſus is become equiualent to
the ſpirit of Propheſie. Allowing then theſe infinite ods on our
parts, that enioy the labours of formers ages, with the ordinary
preaching of the Goſpell, an infallible oecumenicall authority
is much leſſe needfull now, then it was in the law.
               2 Or if our aduerſaries will bee ſo wayward,Vnleſſe the Iewiſh Church were infalliable our aduerſaries principall arguments, to proue the Romiſh churches infallibility are apparantly falſe. as to deny the
like infallibility to haue beene requiſite in the ancient Iewiſh
Church: they ſhall hereby thwart euidently themſelues, diſanull
their chiefe title, and vtterly diſclaime the maine plea hitherto vſed
for their owne infallibility. For moſt of them doe vrge Gods
promiſes made vnto that Church, to proue a neceſſity of admitting
a like authority in theirs. And if theſe promiſes made to the
Iewes, admit any diſtinction, condition, or limitation, whereby
this moſt abſolute infallibility (as they ſuppoſe it) may bee empaired:
then may all the promiſes made or ſuppoſed to bee made
vnto their Church; admit the ſame, or like. But beſides the weakning
of their title, by debarring themſelues of this plea (drawne
from the example of the ancient Iewiſh Church) no man that
reades their writings can bee ignorant, that all their chiefe and
principall arguments (wherewith they carry away moſt ſimple
ſoules, and importune ſuch, as almoſt neither feare God nor man,
to giue ſentence for them and their Church againſt vs) are drawn
from theſe, or the like tropicks [vnleſſe God had ordained one ſupreme
Iudge, or infallible authority, that might decide all controuerſies
in matters of faith viua voce, he had not ſufficienly proued
for his Church, yea, which were moſt abſurd, hee had left it
in worſe eſtate, then ciuill Eſtates are for ordinary matters; for
they, beſides their written lawes, haue Iudges to determine all
caſes or controuerſies ariſing. And ſeeing that Monarchicall gouernment
is of all others the beſt; and in any wiſe mans iudgement

moſt auaileable for auoiding all diſſention, and keeping the
vnity of faith; there ſhould bee no queſtion, but God hath ordained
ſuch an authenticall manner of deciding all controuerſies.
If hee haue not, it muſt needes bee, either becauſe hee could not
eſtabliſh ſuch an infallible authority, and vncontroleable power;
or elſe, becauſe he would not. To ſay he could not, were to deny
his omnipotency, open blaſphemie: to ſay he would not, were
little better; for this were to deny his goodneſſe and loue to his
Church, both which the Scriptures teſtifie to bee great, nay infinite.
               3 But how great ſoeuer his loue to his Church, and choſen be
(as we acknowledge it to bee infinite and euerlaſting) if theſe or
the like arguments make any things for the infallibility of the preſent
Romiſh; they proue as much, and as directly, for the ancient
Iewiſh Church. For that was a viſible company of men, not of
oxen and Aſſes, and of them God had a care alſo. Nay they were
his owne peculiar people, and (without al controuerſie)Yet I know not what Bellarmine ſhould meane, when he makes it a particular Church, his folly confutes it ſelfe, and it ſhall be ſufficient to propoſe it Bellar. de Ecc. milit. l. 3. c. 16. Ad tertium, de tempore Eliae, negat? conſequentia & antecedens huius argumenti. Conſequentia quidem, quia non eſt eadem ratio populi Iudaeorum, & populi Chriſtianorum: nam populus Iudaeorum non erat Eccleſia vniuerſalis vt eſt 
                           •
                        opulus Chriſtianorum, ſed particularis, & propterea etiam extra illum populum inueniebant fideles & iuſti, vt Melchiſedech, Iob, & postea Counclius Centurio, & Ennuchus Candacis Regine, & alij nonnull. Ita
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         etiam ſi 
                           •
                        niuerſa Synogoga Iudae
                           •
                        rum defeciſſet, non continuò omnis Eccleſia Dei in terris defec. 
                           〈◊〉
                         Sed antecedens etiam negat? Non enim eſtendi poteſt, vnquam Synagog
                           •
                        m Iudaeorum defeceſſe omnino vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad Chriſti aduentum, quo tempore eti
                           •
                        m non tam defecit, quam mutata 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      His compariſon holds right thus. None were ſaued then but Iſraelites, none now but Chriſtian in heart▪ diuers were ſaued then, though not Iſraelites by outward profeſsion, or ſolemne aſſociation to the people of God: ſo are m
                        ••
                     y now, that are not profeſſed members of the true viſible Church, whether that be theirs or ours. They drinke many amongſt vs ignorant of theirs, and wee in charity hope many amongſt them ignorant of our Churches tenents, yet ready to imbrace them when it ſhall pleaſe God to reueale them: are elected to ſaluation. But it was a prettie Sophiſme in ſo great a Clerke to compare not Iſraelites in heart, or in the ſight of God, but the viſible Church of Iſrael with Chriſtians in heart, not with any viſible Chriſtian Church. the onely
viſible Church, which hee had on earth. Wherefore all the
former arguments, if they conclude any infallible authority in
the preſent Romiſh Church; they conclude much more for the
like infallibility of the Iewiſh. And by neceſſary conſequence, if I
proue that the Church had no ſuch authority, my aſſertion ſtands
ſure; That this infallible authority which the factors of the Romiſh
Church doe challenge, is greater then any viſible Company
of men had before our Sauiour time. And by the ſame proofe,
ſhall the Romiſh Church bee debarred for euer, of both the two
former pleas; either drawne from the authority of the Prieſts, or
from the beſt forme of gouernment.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               That iuſtly it may be preſumed the Iewiſh Church, neuer had any abſolute
infallibility in propoſing or determining Articles of faith, becauſe
in our Sauiours time it did ſo grieuouſly erre in the fundamentall
point of ſaluation.
               1 FOr proofe of the Concluſion propoſed [that Ieruſalem
had no ſuch abſolute infallibility, as Rome
pleades for,] I tooke it for a long time as granted
by all, that if any ſuch authority had beene
eſtabliſhed in the law, it ſhould not haue varied
vntill the alteration of the prieſthood. For Gods couenant with
Leui was in this ſence euerlaſting, that it was to endure without
interruption, vntill his ſacrifice was accompliſhed, that was a
Prieſt after a more excellent order. His oblation of himſelfe, was
the common bond to the law and Goſpell: the end of the one,
and the beginning of the other. Nor did the legall rites or ceremonies
themſelues (though theſe moſt obnoxious to corruption)
vaniſh by little and little, as this ſacrifice did approch neerer
and neerer, as darkeneſſe doth before the riſing of the ſunne: rather
that conſummation wrought vpon the Croſſe, did ſwallow
them vp at once, as virility doth youth, youth childhood, childhood
infancy. Seeing then our aduerſaries ſuppoſe this infallibility
was annexed as a prerogatiue royall vnto the Prieſthood:
they cannot imagine any tollerable reaſon, why the one ſhould
expire before the other was quite aboliſhed. Hence it is that moſt
of them hold the Scribes and Phariſes in our Sauiours time, were
abſolutely infallible in their Cathedrall conſultations. And I had
iuſt reaſons to preſume Bellarmine had been of the ſame mind. For
beſides his vrging that place (without all ſenſe or reaſon, vnleſſe
grounded on this opinion,) They ſit in Moſes chaire; All therfore
whatſoeuer they bid you, that obſerue and do,] theſe other words of
his, ſeemed to imply thus much, [Non oſtend
                        •
                      poteſt, nunquam Synagogam Iudaeorum def
                        •
                     ciſſe omnino vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad Chriſti aduē
                     tum, quo tempore etiam non tam defecit, quàm mutata eſt in meluis, Bellar. de Eccleſia militante Lib. 3. cap. 16. 
                  It cannot be ſhewed that the Sinagogue
of the Iewes did faile [in ſaith] vntill Chriſts comming, at what
time it did not faile, but rather become better by change] By his ſpeeches
elſewhere I perceiued, by the Synagogue thus changed, hee

meant the Church planted by Chriſt: not the Conſiſtory of the
High-Prieſts and Elders, not the Catholike repreſentatiue Iewiſh
Church.Sunt qui dicunt, Concilium illud (in quo Chriſtus condematus eſt) erraſſe, q: non proceſſit ſ
                        •
                     cundu morem legitimi iudicis, ſed tumultuaria conspiratione, ſubornatis falſis teſtibus, Chriſtum darmauit id quod adeò notū erat omnibus, vt etiam Pilatus ſ
                        •
                     iret per inuidiam eum fuiſſe traditum ſibi à Pontificibus, vt habemus Math. 27 at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      haec quidem reſponſio probabilis eſt. Quia tamen non eſt inferiorum iudicare, an ſuperiores legitime procedant ne
                        •
                     ne, niſi manifeſtiſſimè conſtet intollerabilem errorem committi, & redibile eſt Deum non permiſſurum, & Concilia quibus ſummus Pontifex praeſidet. n. legitimè procedant. Ideo reſpondemus, Pontifices & Concilia Iudaeorum non potuiſſe errare antequem Chriſtus veniret, ſed eo praeſente potuiſſè, imo ſuiſſe praedictum erraturos Iudaeos & Chriſtum negaturos. Iſaiae 6. Danielis 9. & alibi. Sunt enim, non eſt neceſſarium, vt V
                        •
                     carius Papae non poſſit errare, cum ipſe Papa regat Eccleſiam, & ab errore defendat. Sic etiam non ſuit neciſſarium, vt Pontifices Iudaeorum non poſſent errare, quando Chriſtus, ſummus totius Eccleſiae Pontifex praeſens aderat, & Eccleſiam per ſe adm
                        •
                     niſtrabat. Bellarm. lib. 2. de. Conciliorum. auct. cap. 8. 
                  For, ſayeth he, as it is not neceſſary the Popes Vicar ſhould
bee inerrable, when the Pope himſelfe doth guid the Church, and defend
it from error: ſo neither was it neceſsary, that the Iewiſh high Prieſt
ſhould not erre, when Chriſt the High-Prieſt of the whole Church was
preſent, and did gouerne his Church in perſon.
               
               2 This example, were it true, might illuſtrate (though ill-fauoredly)
his aſſertion once ſuppoſed, as poſſible; but no way argues
it to be probable. Herein his ſimilitude failes, that the High
Prieſts in our Sauiours time, were Aarons lawfull ſucceſſors, their
Prieſthood as entire then as euer it was; and they Deputies to
none in this ranke or order. That their Predeceſſors had ſuch infallibility,
hee faine would proue. Can he or any for him, ſhew
vs when, or by what meanes it ſhould determine, whiles the
Prieſthood laſted? To take away the Popes infallibility, euen in
this laſt age of the world, were, in thier conſtruction to deny
Chriſts promiſe made vnto Saint Peters chaire. And was not the
former like prerogatiue as inſeparably annexed to Moſes ſeat? did
our Sauiour before his Paſſeouer, either by doctrine or practiſe,
derogate ought from any lawfull authority eſtabliſhed on earth;
much leſſe from that, which God had expreſly inſtituted? The
greateſt prerogatiue, the Scribes and Phariſes, Prieſts or Rulers
euer had, was, that they were Aarons ſucceſſors, and poſſeſſed
Moſes place: and this authority was neuer diſanulled, but rather
ratified by our Sauiour, after hee had vndertaken his miniſteriall
function; They ſit in Moſes ſeat, all therefore whatſoeuer they bid you,
that obſerue and doe. And elſewhere, Goe, and ſhew thy ſelfe vnto
the Prieſt, &c.
               
               3* Yet this Sophiſter would perſwade vs, that Iſaiah and Daniel
had foretold the expiration of this prerogatiue in latter times.
They both indeed foretell this peoples extraordinary generall

blindneſſe; about the time of our Sauiours conuerſation on earth,
But this directly proues, what wee obiect; not what Bellarmine
ſhould haue anſwered, at leaſt to vs, who contend the Prieſts and
Rulers of this people, were not infallible in our Sauiours time;
nor doth Iſaiah, or Daniel, or any Prophet of God ſay, they were
at any time ſuch. Let any Ieſuite proue (what eaſily hee may)
out of
                     Bellarmines reaſon to proue the Iewiſh Church 
                        〈◊〉
                      in faith in our Sauiours time prous it to haue beene erroneous in the time of Iſaiah.
                   
                  Iſaiahs words, cited by Bellarmine, that the Iewiſh church
repreſentatiue was not infallible in our Sauiours time; and from
the ſame wee ſhall as clearely euince it, palpably erroneous in
Iſaiahs owne dayes, or immediately after. For the ſelfe ſame words
which the Euangeliſt ſaith, were fulfilled in the vnbeleeuing Iewes
that heard our Sauiours doctrine, were literally and exactly veri
                  
                     •
                  ied
of their forefathers before the captiuity of Babylon, as the
Cardinall himſelfe (would hee take the paines to reade the whole
Chapter, and reuiue the place cited by him,) I know would not
deny: His wordes are theſe;For Dan
                           ••
                        l hath nothing which can bee wreſted to this purpoſe, for which reaſon this Impoſter cites onely his 9. Chapter at large. 
                  And hee ſaid, go, and ſay vnto this
people:
                  Iſai. 6. v. 9. 10. 11. 12. 
                  Yee ſhall heare indeed, but yee ſhall not vnderſtand, yee ſhall
plainely ſee and not perceiue. Make the heart of this people ſat, make
their eares heauy, and ſhut their eyes, leſt they ſee with their eyes, and
heare with their eares, and vnderstand with their hearts, and conuert &
he heale them. Then ſaid I Lord, how long? And he anſwered, vntill the
Cities be waſted without inhabitant, and the houſes without man, and the
land be vtterly deſolate, and the Lord haue remoued men far away, and
there be a great deſolation in the midſt of land. The truth of our
aſſertion is ſo pregnant, thatDicitur autem prophetia, quantum equidem obſeruare potui, quatuor modis impleri. Primum quum id ipſum ſit, de quo propriè & literate vt dicitur, ſenſu intelligebatur, ſicut cap. 1. viceſſimo ſecundo. Matthaeus dixit impletam in Maria Iſaiae prophetiam fuiſſe. Ecce virgo concipiet, & pariet filium. Secundo, cum ſit non id de quo propriè intell
                        •
                     gebatur prophetia, ſed id quod p
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     ll
                        •
                     d ſignificabatur, vt 2. Regum 7. 14. Ego ero illi in pat
                           •
                        em, & ille erit nihi in ſilium, qu
                        •
                     d proprie de Sal
                        •
                     mone dictum eſſe perſpecuum eſt. Diuus tamen Paulus de Chriſto cuius Salomon ſigura 
                        •
                     rat 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Heb. 1. 6. quaſi in eo impletum eſſet, & quod Exod. 12 46. dictum eſt, Os non comminuetis ex eo, certum eſt intelligi de agno, tamen Ioan. cap. 19. 36. in Chriſto, qui per agnum ſignificabatur, impletum dicit. Tertio, cum nec id ſit de quo propriè intelligitur prophetia, nec id quod per illud ſignificatur, ſed quod illi ſimile erat, & om
                        •
                     no ciuſmodi, vt prophetia non minus aptè de eo, quam de quo dicta eſt, dici patuiſſe videatur. Nam populus hic labijs me honorat▪
                      de Iudaeis qui tempore Iſai erant, Deus dixerat Iſai. 29. 13. Chriſtus autem in ijs, qui ſuo erant tempore, impletum ſignificat, Matth. 15. 7. 8. Simile eſt exemplum Matthae 13. 14. & Act. 28. 26. Quarto, cum id ipſum, quod per Prophetiam, aut Scripturam dictum erat, quamuis iam factum ſuerit. tamenmagis, ac magis fit. Tunc enim Scriptura impleri dicitur, id eſt, quod per eam dictum erat, cumulatiſſimè fieri. Maldonat. Comment. in Math. v. c. 2. The place cited Matth. 13. and 14. Act. 28. & 26. is that very place out of the 6. of Eſai, which Bellarmine vrgeth to proue the Iewes Church ſhould faile in our Sauiours time.
                   
                  Maldonat the moſt iudicious expoſitor
amongſt the Ieſuites, takes it as granted, the words late cited

were literally meant onely of that generation, with whome the
Prophet liued, and brings this very Text, as one of the apteſt inſtances
to illuſtrate the third kind, as he makes it of fulfilling propheſies,
to wit, when that which is truely and literally meant of
one, is fitly applyed vnto another matter or ſort of people, for
the ſimilitude of their nature or diſpoſition. Although (to ſpeake
the truth) hee might haue referred it more iuſtly, at leaſt, more
artificially, to the fourth kind there mentioned by him. For, as
ſhall appeare hereafter, this propheſie was alike literally, properly,
and directly meant of both, but verified of the former times
more immediatly, as firſt in order, becauſe that part of it obiect
had precedency in actuall exiſtence; of the latter more completly
as principally intended by the holy Ghoſt.
               4 The blindeneſſe there ſpoken of, was euen then begunne,
but did encreaſe from that age vntill the captiuity, and continued
vntill Chriſts comming, in whoſe dayes it was augmented, and
the propheſie fully accompliſhed as the deſolation which followed
their blindneſſe in putting him to death, was greater then that
which Nebuchadnezer brought vpon the City and land for the
prouocations wherwith Manaſſ
                        •
                     th, Iehoiachim, and other wicked
Rulers, as well Prieſts, as Laicks, had prouoked: he Lord by cruell
perſecution of his meſſengers ſent vnto them. This was a diſeaſe
in their Prelates and Elders, lineally deſcending to the Scribes &
Phariſes, who tooke
                     Math. 23. 52. Yee 
                        •
                     i
                        ••
                     enceked and vncircumciſed harts and eares, yee haue alwaies reſiſted the holy Ghoſt, as your fathers did, ſo do you, which of the Prophe
                        •
                     s haue not your fathers perſecuted? and they, haue ſlam thē, which ſhewed before of the comming of that Iuſt, of whom yee are now the betraiers and murtherers. Act. 7 51. 52. themſelues for infallible teachers, and free
from oppugning ſuch doctrine, as their forefathers had perſecuted
vnto the death. The ſinne of theſe later in crucifying Chriſt,
was in degree more grieuous, becauſe his perſonall worth was
much greater then the Prophets; but the ignorance was of the
ſame kind in both; for, as our Sauiour ſaith, the latter did but
See Chap. 9. Parag. 4. 
                  fulfill the meaſure of their fathers iniquity, in murthering Gods
meſſengers. And, as afterwardes ſhall bee declared, ſuch as the
Romaniſts account the Church repreſentatiue moſt infallible,
did continually cauſe, or countenance theſe perſecutions. The
originall likewiſe of this cruelty, continued from former to later
generations, was the very ſame in both: the one diſtaſted Gods
word, whileſt the Prophet ſpake them; the other vnderſtood them,
not, whilſt they were read euery ſabboth day vnto thē, bothAct. 13. v. 27. fulfilled
them in condēning Gods meſſengers, & ſhedding innocent
blood, vpon ſuch groſſe & palpable blindnes, as Iſaiah deſcribes.
               
                  
5 It will recreate the attentiue Reader to obſerue,Reſpo ideo, quidam aiunt, quaeſtionem fuiſſe de facto, non de iure, quam Concilium illud iudicauit, videlicet num Ieſus necandus eſſet, in e
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     modi autem iudicijs Concilia errare poſſe, non dubium eſt. At quaeſtio illa etiā
                     ſi de facto eſſet, tamen inuoluebat quaeſtionem de fide grauiſſimam, nimirum an Ieſus eſſet verus Meſſias, & Dei ſilius, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      adeò Deus verus. Quocirca errauit in fide perniciociſſimè Caiphas cum vniuerſo Concilio, cum iudicauit Ieſum bl
                        •
                     ſphem
                        •
                     ſſe, qui ſe Dei filium appellauerat. Alij dicunt, Pontificem & Concilium erraſſe, quantum ad errorem propriae mentis, non tamen erraſſe in ſententia, quam protulit. Verè enim I
                        •
                     ſ
                        •
                     s erat reus mortis. q. pecca
                        •
                     a noſtra in ſe
                        •
                     pſo purganda ſuſceperat, & verè expediebat, eum mori pro populo. Quare Iohan. cap. 11. dicit Caipham prophetaſſe. At licet verba Caiphae bonum ſenſum recipiant, non tamen omnia, cum enim ait de Chriſto, Blaſphemauit, quid adhuc egemus teſtibus? Certè tunc non prophetauit, ſed blaſphemauit. Bellar. de Conciliorum auct. cap 8. lib. 2. how the
Lord hath confounded the languague of theſe cunning builders
whiles they ſeeke to raiſe vp new Babylon from the foundation of
the old Synagogue. Bellarmine would ſeeme to make a conſcience
of blaſpheming, and therefore hath rather aduentured to be
reputed ridiculous, in auouching (as you heard before) without
all ground or ſhew of reaſon, that the infallible authority, formerly
eſtabliſhed in the Synagogue did expire vpon our Sauiours
entrance into his Miniſteriall function. Many of his fellowes
knowing how neceſſary it is for them to defend the publike ſpirit
of the Synagogues, and conſcious withall how friuolous it would
be, to ſay it ſhould vaniſh by our Sauiours preſence, who came
rather by doctrine and practiſe to eſtabliſh, then ouerthrow any
ordinance of the law, reſolue (though by open blaſphemy) to
maintaine the Scribes and Phariſes infallibility, vntill the aboliſhing
of Aarons Prieſthood. That they condemned our Sauiour,
was (in theſe mens iudgements) an error onely in matter of fact,
not of faith, or doctrine: and in ſuch caſe the Pope himſelfe may
erre, whiles he ſpeakes ex Cathedra. That the High Prieſt did not
erre in faith, they take it as proued becauſe theIohn. 11. ver. 50. 
                  Euangeliſt ſayth,
he propheſied, It were good one ſhould die for the people.
               
               6 Such infallibility as this, I neuer ſhall enuy the Pope: and I
deſire no more, then that hee would confirme this laſt cited doctrine
ex Cathedra.
                  That the Pope did erre in matters of ſaith,, not onely of fact when they condemned our Sauiour. For no queſtion but all ſuch throughout the
Chriſtian world, as beare any loue to Chriſt at all (any beſides
the Ieſuites, who make no conſcience of vilifying their Redeemer
for aduancing the Popes dignity, by defending his infallibility)
would renounce his decrees, and take him for Antichriſt euer
after. For this was no error de facto, vpon falſe information,
or priuy ſuggeſtion. Euen the High-Prieſts themſelues, for
the inueterate hate which they had borne vnto our Sauiours perſon
and doctrine (ſuch as the Romiſh Church did vnto Hus, and
Ierome of Prage,) hold a Councell, how they might put him to
death; and ſo farre were they from being miſled with falſe information,

that they ſuborne falſe witneſſes againſt him, and failing
in this, ſeeke to inſnare him in his owne confeſſion; & finally condemne
him with ioint conſent, for auouching one of the maine
points of Chriſtian beliefe, the article of his comming to iudgement.
I thinke might Sathan himſelfe ſpeake his mind in this caſe,
hee would condemne Gretzer and his fellowes, if not for their villany,
yet for their intollerable folly, in queſtioning, whether it
were an error in faith, or no, to pronounce the ſentence of death
with ſuch ſolemnity againſt the Iudge of quicke and dead▪ for profeſſing
and teaching the maine points and grounds of ſaith. This
villanie is too open and euident to maintaine the pollicie of the
Prince of darkeneſſe. And if neither feare of God, nor ſhame of
the world, could bridle the Ieſui
                     •
                  es mouthes, or ſtoppe the pens
from venting ſuch doctrine: yet certainely this Prince of darkeneſſe
(their Lord and Maſter) for feare of ſome greater reuolt,
will lay his command vpon them, and make them in this diſcourſing
age ſpeake more warily, though they meane ſtill no leſſe wickedly.
               7 Becauſe this is a point worth the preſſing let vs ouerthrow,That the High prieſt with his aſſociates did erre ex Cathedra in the main Article of faith.
not only their anſweres already giuen, or arguments hence drawn
for their Churches authority: but in briefe preuent all poſſible
euaſions. If any Papiſt ſhall here reply, that theſe High Prieſts,
and their aſſiſtants did not ſpeake ex Cathedra, when they ſo farre
miſſed the cuſhion: this anſwere as it might perhaps drop from
ſome ignorant Ieſuites mouth or pen, who is bound by oath to ſay
ſomething (and therfore muſt oftentimes ſay he knows not what)
ſot the defence of the Church: ſo wee may well aſſure our ſelues,
that the Pope himſelfe dare not for his triple Crowne deliuer it
ex Cathedra; nor will the learned Papiſts hold this point, if it bee
well vrged. For, as theſe High-Prieſts error was moſt groſſe and
grieuous: ſo was it receiued vpon long and mature deliberation,
their manner of proceeding was publike and ſolemne. They tooke
Ieſus, ſaieth theMath. 26. 
                  Euangeliſt, and led him to Caiaphas the High prieſt,
where the Scribes and Elders were gathered together. And leſt a Ieſuite ſhould haue picked a quarrell at the time of their aſſembly,
as if they had met at ſome vnlawfull howre, SaintLuk. 22. 66 
                  Luke ſaith, as
ſoon
                        ••
                      as it was day, the Elders of the people, and the High-Priests, and
the Scribes came together, and led him into their Councell, and examined

him vpon the very fundamentall point of ſaith; Saying, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
thou the Chriſt, tell vs? For affirming this, which is open infidelity
to deny the High Prieſt himſelfe, not miſled by any witneſſes,
but fromMath. 26. 65. Chriſts owne wordes which hee himſelfe had heard,
pronounceth ſentence againſt him. And if this were not enough,
he propoſed the matter to the reſt of his aſſociates;Ver. 66. 
                  What thinke
yee? and they anſwered and ſaid, Hee is worthy to die? After all this,
they vrged the people to approue of this their ſentence, perſwading
them to aske Barrabas, and to deſtroy Ieſus. And ſo ſtrongly
had they coniured the multitude by their pretended authority,
that they apprehend this their choice as a point of faith, or good
ſeruice to God and his Church. For when Pilate laieth his blood
vnto their charge: All the people (Math. 27. 25. as the Text ſayeth) (all ſuch as
relyed vpon the Scribes and Phariſes, or their high Prieſts) anſwered
and ſaid, His bloud be vpon vs and our children. One of your ſay
Papiſts could not haue been more throughly perſwaded of your
Churches authority, nor more violently bent againſt Iohn Hus,
or any other of Chriſts Martyrs, for the like reaſons, then this
whole multitude was againſt Chriſt, being condemned by the
High-prieſt▪ ſpeaking ex Cathedra. Here were 
                     〈…〉
                   &
more ſolemnities obſerued in this proceeding 
                     〈…〉
                  
require in the Pope ſpeaking ex Cathedra. Theirs 
                     〈◊〉
                   publike
aſſembly, and ſentence was giuen by ioint conſent in 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ſtory, and in the morning: you hold it ſufficient for the Pope to
giue his definitiue ſentence alone, without euidence of the fact
it ſelfe, whereunto hee ties mens faith, as ſhall appeare by your
owne confeſſions. Nor do you limit him any time, as well in the
afternoone, as in the forenoone; as well (for ought wee can gather)
when drinke is in, and his wits out of his head, as when he
is ſober. For you hold it not neceſſary for him to vſe any long
deliberation. But, if it be his will to bind all Chriſtians to belieue
him, the whole Church muſt belieue that he was herein directed
chiefe by the holy Ghoſt: for the Church is bound to heare their
Paſtor: And, if hee binde all men to belieue him, then muſt all
of neceſſity belieue, that hee was infallibly aſſiſted by the holy
Ghoſt, in ſhewing that which hee binds them to belieue: for otherwiſe
the whole Church might erre, nay were bound to erre,
becauſe it is bound to belieue the Pope. Theſe conſequents are

your own, not mine, as may in part appeare from what hath been
already, more fully from what ſhall bee ſaid hereafter. Beſides, the
whole multitude of the Iewiſh people heard the Prieſtes and Elders
vtter their opinions concerning Chriſt and his doctrine viua
voce: wee haue the Popes decrees but by heare ſay. Either
was this ſentence pronounced ex Cathedra, or elſe it will bee hard
for you to proue, that any ſentence in your Church hath beene ſo
pronounced, or can bee, although the Pope himſelfe bee preſent
in the Councell, and bee an eye witneſſe of all proceedings.
               8 Yet if any of you ſhould here ſhufle (as yee vſually doe at the
laſt pinch) and ſay [Howſoeuer Valentia, or ſome others of our
learned, but priuate ſpirites, may define, what it is to ſpeake ex
Cathedra; yet wee know not, whether our Church hath ſo defined
it, or no: and therefore although theſe High-prieſts and Elders
did obſerue all the circumſtances, which theſe doctors require in
a ſentence giuen ex Cathedra; yet, for ought we know, they might,
nay ſure they did faile in ſome circumſtance which we know not,
and did not indeed ſpeak ex Cathedra, albeit they ſeemed ſo to do:
wherefore this doth not conclude againſt the Popes infallible authority,
when he ſpeakes ex Cathedra:] if any of you ſhall take this
laſt hold (as I cannot imagine any other left you) we ſhall quickly
beate you out of it.Though it were ſufficiently proued that the Pope could not teach falſe doctrine, ex Cathedra, yet were it not ſafe to rely vpō his authority, Vide lib. 2. Sect. 4. cap. 6. Parag. 3. &c.
                   For let it be granted for diſputations ſake,
that the Pope hath (as yee ſuppoſe theſe Iewes had) an infallible
authority, when he ſpeakes ex Cathedra: yet ſeeing it is a matter
ſo hard to bee knowne, euen by theſe that heare him, whether hee
obſerue all circumſtances required to the exerciſe and true vſe of
ſuch infallible authority, and whether her hee ſpeake ex Cathedra or
no, when he may ſeeme to ſundry ſo to ſpeake; it would be the
onely ſafe courſe for all Chriſtian Churches vtterly to renounce
all obedience to him, but vpon examination of his doctrine, to
ſtand continually vpon their guard, leſt vnder pretence of this his
infallible authority, when he ſpeakes ex Cathedra, hee may worke
ſome ſuch ineſtimable miſchiefe vnto the Scriptures, or Chriſtes
choſen here on earth, as theſe High Prieſts did vnto Chriſt himſelfe,
by his ſeeming to ſpeake ex Cathedra, when hee doth not. If,
by abuſing this his infallible authority, he ſhould either make away
theſe Scriptures, or animate the people to imbrue their hands
in the bloud of Chriſts deereſt Saints: it is not his ſpeaking ex

Cathedra, that can redeem their ſoules from hell, nor reſtore Gods
word againe; for theſe are matters of an higher price, then that
they ſhould bee purchaſed with two or three words of his Holineſſe
vnhallowed mouth.
               9 To conclude, if this authority of your Church be but ſuch,
as the ancient Church of the Iewes had; you cannot expect any
faithfull people ſhould otherwiſe eſteeme of your decrees, then
the faithfull in our Sauiours time were bound to eſteeme of the
Iewiſh High-Prieſts and Elders, whom ſurely they did not take
for Chriſts onely, nor beſt friends. If the Popes infallibility bee
but ſuch, as theſe high Prieſts had: you may bee as guilty of the
bloud of Chriſts Saints, as they were. If you will challenge (as
indeed you doe) greater authority then they had: yee muſt of neceſſity
renounce your principall arguments brought to proue
it.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               That Moſes had no ſuch abſolute authority as is now aſcribed vnto
the Pope: That the manner of his attaining to ſuch as hee had, excludes
all beſides our Sauiour from iuſt challenge of the like.
               1 WHether Moſes were a Magiſtrate (as the Papiſts
thinke) ſpirituall, or (as others) meerely ciuill,
or (whereunto vpon grounds in due places to
be diſcuſſed, I moſt incline) actually neither, and
virtually both, it will ſuffice, for proofe of our
concluſion, that the Pope is no ſeruant of God, but an aduerſary, in
that hee exalts him ſelfe aboue Moſes, whom none, beſides the
High Prieſt, and ſole Mediator of the new couenant, was to equaliſe
in ſoueraignety ouer Gods people. Nor doth the exceſſe of
glory aſcribed vnto the new Teſtament, in reſpect of the old, argue
greater authority in Chriſtian, then was in ordinary legall gouernours,
whether temporall or ſpirituall, much leſſe doth it
inferre greater authority in any (Chriſt onely excepted) then
Moſes had.
               2 If we take Chriſts Church, as conſiſting both of Prieſts and

people: it is a congregation farre more royall and glorious, then
the Synagogue ſo taken was. If we compare our High-Prieſt (or
mediator of the new Couenant) with theirs, the Apoſtles compariſon
is fitteſt:
                     Heb. 3. 12. 3. 5. 6. That the exceſsiue glory of the new Teſtamēt argues no greater ſoueraignety in ſpirituall gouernors ſince Chriſts time then the prieſt
                        •
                      had in the Law. 
                  Conſider the Apoſtle and High Priest of our profeſsion,
Chriſt Ieſus: who was faithfull to him that hath appointed him,
euen as Moſes was in all his houſe. For this man is counted worthie of
more glory then Moſes, in as much as hee which hath builded the
houſe, hath more honour then the houſe. Now Moſes verily was faithfull
in all his houſe, as a ſeruant, for a witneſſe of the things which ſhould
be ſpoken after: but Chriſt is as the ſonn
                        •
                      ouer his owne houſe, whoſe
houſe wee are. If ſeuerally wee ſort our people, or Miniſters with
theirs, as the Apoſtles ſucceſſors with Aarons, the preheminence
both wayes is ours. Notwithſtanding, this exceſſe of our Miniſters
glory, whether ordinary or extraordinary, compared with
the like of theirs, is not ſo great as the preeminences of Chriſts
flocke aboue the people of the Synagogue. Yet muſt all exceſſe
of in ſpirituall graces, which the ordinary hearers of the Goſpell
haue the ordinary hearers of the law, be ſubducted from that prerogatiue
which wee that are Chriſts meſſengers, haue in reſpect
of Aarons ſucceſſors, ere we can take a right account of our own
authority ouer our flock committed to vs, in compariſon of theirs
ouer the ancient people. Computatis computandis, our ſoueraignety
will proue leſſe, not greater, as our aduerſaries confuſedly reckon
without their hoſt. Their pretended gloſſes, that all ſuch
places of Scripture as make for the authority of Moſes chaire, conclude
á fortiori for Saint Peters, becauſe the New Teſtament is
more glorious then the old, are, as if a man ſhould argue thus:
The ancient Roman and moderne German, are States far
                     •
                  e more
noble then the Turkiſh or Moſcouitiſh: therefore the Romane
Conſuls had more abſolute authority ouer the people, or the preſent
Emperour, ouer the Princes and States of Germany, then
the Turke hath ouer his Baſhawes, or the Moſcouit ouer his
Vaſſals.
               3 The glory of a common weale, or praiſe of gouernement,
conſiſts in the ingenuitie or ciuill libertie, not in the ſlauery, or
ſeruile condition of the gouerned: or in their voluntary obſequiouſneſſe
to wholeſome lawes, proportioned to common good;
not in their abſolute ſubiection to the omnipotent will of an vnruly

Tyrant, ſubiect to no law, but the law of ſinne. Our Sauiours
authority ouer his Diſciples was more ſoueraigne, then is
befitting any to vſurpe or challenge ouer his fellow ſeruants; his
kingdome more glorious after his reſurrection then before: yet a
little before his ſuffering, hee ſaith to his Diſciples:Ioh. 15. 14. 15. 
                  Yee are my
friends, if ye doe whatſoeuer I command you. Henceforth call I you not
ſeruants, for the ſeruant knoweth not what his Maſter doth, but I haue
called you friends, for all things that I haue heard of my Father, haue I
made knowne to you. It is the very conceit of the baſe degenerate,
diſſolute, ſottiſh later heathen Romane, more delighted in ſuch
gaudy ſhewes as his luxurious Emperours made happily, once
or twice in their whole raigne, then in the valour and vertue of
his victorious, free-born Anceſtors, that to this day ſwims in the
Ieſuites braine, and makes him dreame the royalty of Chriſtian
Prieſt-hood, or glory of the Goſpell, ſhould conſiſt wholly, or
chiefly in the magnificent pompe of one viſible high Prieſt, or
Oecumenicall Biſhoppe; for garniſhing of whoſe Court, the
whole Body of Chriſt beſides, muſt bee content to ſpend their
liues, goods, or ſubſtances, and as his occaſion ſhall require, to
pawne their very ſoules, as younglings, will bee at any coſt or
paines they can deuiſe, to decke vp a Lord of the Pariſh, a victor
in a Grammer ſchoole; or as merry fellowes wil be ready to ſpend
more then their incomes will defray, to haue a gallant Lord of
miſrule of their owne making.
               4 But they demand, Wherein doth the Pope aſpire aboue the
pitch of Moſes throne?Wherein the Popes Soueraignety is made greater-then Moſes had any. He deſires but to he reputed an infallible
teacher, and was not Moſes ſuch? yet not ſuch after the ſame maner.
He approued himſelfe perpetually infallible, becauſe alwaies
found moſt faithfull in all affaires belonging to God: but had it
beene poſſible for him to haue worſhipped the golden Calfe, to
                  Pſal. 106. 28. 
                  haue
eaten the offerings of the dead, or to haue ioyned himſelfe to Baal-Peor:
The Leuites and ſuch as claue vnto the Lord in theſe Apoſtaſies
would haue ſought Gods will at more ſanctified lips, then his, at
leaſt for that time, were If then wee conſider him not as he might
haue been, but as indeed hee proued; the peoples obedience vnto
him, was de facto perpetuall and compleat: yet but conditionally
perpetuall, but conditionally compleat, or perpetually compleat
vpon their ſight and vndoubted experience of his extraordinary

familiarity with God, of his intire fidelity in all his ſeruice.
The Pope would bee proclaimed ſo abſolutely infallible by irreuocable
pattent or inheritance, as no breach of Gods commandements,
no touch of diſloyalty to Chriſt in actions, might breede
a forfeyture of his eſtate, or eſtrange Chriſtian conſciences from
yeelding obedience to him, euery way as compleat and abſolute,
as that which the people of God performed vnto Moſes, or
Chriſtians doe yet vnto their Sauiour. Whence though we admit
Moſes infallibility, and his to be the ſame; yet the difference betweene
the abſoluteneſſe of their authority, or the tenour, or
holds of this ſame infallibility, would be ſuch, as is betweene a
Tenant at will, or one that enioyes a faire eſtate, perhaps, all his
life time, yet onely by continuance of his Lords good liking of
his faithfull ſeruice, & a Freeholder that cannot by any act of fellony,
murther, treaſon, or the like, forfeit his intereſt in as large
poſſeſſions.
               5 Againe, albeit the authority gotten, or manner of holding
it, were the ſame; yet the manner of getting it in Moſes and the
Pope is not alike. The one profers no miracle for the purchaſe, no
ſigne from heauen, no admirable skill in expounding Gods word;
his calling hee profeſſeth to bee but ordinary, and in this reſpect
(ſay his followers) hee was to ſucceed Saint Peter: Moſes not ſuch,
nor ſo affected: his miracles were many and great; the ſignes &
tokens of his eſpeciall fauour with God, almoſt infinite: his calling
extraordinarily extraordinary: otherwiſe that obedience the
people performed to him, had beene no leſſe then deſperate Idolatry;
as the challenge of the like without like proofe & euidence
of ſuch fauour with God, is no better then blaſphemie or Apoſtaſie.
Hence ſaithCum igitur oporteret Dei legē in edictis Angelorum 
                        ••
                     erribiliter dari, non vni homini pa
                        ••
                     ciſue ſapientibus, ſed vniuerſae genti & 
                        〈…〉
                      coram eodem populo magna 
                        ••
                     ctaſant in monte, vbi 
                        〈◊〉
                      per 
                        〈◊〉
                      dabatur? conſp
                        •
                     ciente multitudine metuenda ac tremenda, quae ſiebant. Non enim populus Iſrael, ſic Moyſi credidit, quemadmodum ſuo Lycurgo Lacedaemony, quòd a Ioue ſeu Apol
                     
                        ••
                     ue leges quas condidit accepiſſet. Cū enim lex dabatur populo, 
                        〈…〉
                      vnus iubehatur
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      conſpectu ipsias populi, ſufficere di
                        ••
                     a prouidentia iudicabat, mirabilibus 
                        〈…〉
                      ſignis ac motibus 
                        〈…〉
                      ad eandem leg 
                        〈…〉
                      creatori ſeruire creaturam. Aug. de Ciuit. Den. lib 10. cap. 13. S. Austen, the people of Iſrael did belieue Moſes
lawes were from God, after another maner, then the Lacedemonians did
Lycurgus lawes were from Apollo. For when the Law which enioines
the worſhippe of one God, was giuen vnto the people, it did appeare (as
farre forth as the diuine prouidence did iudge ſuff
                        •
                     cient) by ſtrange
ſignes and motions, whereof the people themſelues were ſpectators, that
the creature did performe ſeruice to the Creator for the giuing of that
Law. But wee muſt belieue as firmely as this people did Moſes,
                  
that all the Popes iniunctions are giuen by God himſelfe, without
any other ſigne or teſtimonie, then the Lacedemonians had,
that Lycurgus lawes were from Apollo. Yet is it here further to be
conſidered, that the Iſraelites might with farre leſſe danger haue
admitted Moſes lawes then wee may the Popes, without any examination,
for diuine, ſeeing there was no written law of God
extant before his time, whereby his writings were to bee tryed.
No ſuch charge had been giuen this people, as he giues moſt expreſly, to this purpoſeDeut. 4. 1. 2 
                  Now therefore hearken, O Iſrael, vnto the
ordinances, and to the Lawes which I teach you to doe, that yee may liue
and goe in, and poſſeſſe the land which the Lord God of your fathers
giueth you. Yee ſhall put nothing vnto the word which I command you
neither ſhall yee take ought there from, that yee may keepe the commandements
of the Lord your God which I command you. But was the motiue
or argument by which hee ſought to eſtabliſh their beliefe, or
aſſent vnto theſe commandements) his owne infallible authoritie?
no but their owne experience of their truth, as it followeth,
Ver. 3. 
                  Your eyes haue ſeene what the Lord did becauſe of Baal-Peor. For all
the men that followed Baal Peor the Lord thy God hath deſtroyed euerie
one from among you:
                  The motiue, vſed by Moſes, for eſtabliſhing the Iſraelites faith. 
                  but yee that did cleaue vnto the Lord your God,
are aliue, euery one of you this day; ſo gracious and mercifull is our
God vnto mankind, and ſo farre from exacting this blind obedience
which the Pope doth chalenge, that hee would haue his
written word eſtabliſhed in the freſh memory of his mighty wonders
wrought vpon Pharaoh and all his hoſt. The experiment of
their deliuerance by Moſes had beene a ſtrong motiue to haue
perſwaded them to admit of his doctrine for infallible, or, at the
leaſt, to haue beleeued him in his particular promiſes. When the
ſnares of death had compaſſed them about on euery ſide, & they
ſee no way but one, or rather two ineuitable wayes to preſent
death and deſtruction, the red ſea before them, and a mighty hoſt
of bloud behind them, the one ſeruing as a glaſſe to repreſent the
cruelty of the other: they (as who in their caſe would not?)Exod. 14. 10. 
                  cry
out for feare. He that could haue foretold their ſtrange deliuerance
from this eminent danger, might haue gotten the opinion
of a God amongſt the Heathen: yet Moſes confidently promiſeth
them, euen in the middeſt of this perplexity, the vtter deſtruction
of the deſtroyer, whom they feared.Ex. 14. 13. 14 
                  Feare yee not, ſtand ſtill, and

behold the ſaluation of the Lord, which he will ſhew to you this day: for
the Egyptians whom you haue ſeene this day,
                  Vide Pſal. 106. ver. 10. &c. 
                  you ſhall neuer ſee againe.
The Lord ſhall fight for you: therefore hold you your peace. Notwithſtanding
all this, Moſes neuer enacts this abſolute obedience, to
be belieued in all that euer he ſhall ſay, or ſpeake vnto them, without
farther examination, or euident experiment of his doctrine.
For God requires not this of any man, no not of thoſe to whome
hee ſpake face to face; alwayes ready to feed ſuch as call vpon him,
with infallible ſignes and pledges of the truth of his promiſes. For
this reaſon, the waters ofExod. 15. 23. 
                  Marah are ſweetned at Moſes prayer.
And God vpon this new experiment of his power and goodnes,
takes occaſion to reeſtabliſh his former couenant, vſing this ſemblable euent, as a further earneſt of his ſweet promiſes to them.
[Ver. 26. 
                  If thou wilt diligently hearken O Iſrael vnto the voice of the Lord thy
God,
                  Faith muſt bee confirmed by continuall experiments anſwerable to Gods word. 
                  and wilt doe that which is right in his ſight, and wilt giue eare vnto
his commandements, and keepe all his ordinances: then will I put none
of theſe diſeaſes vpon thee, which I brought vpon the Egyptians: for I
am the Lord that healeth thee.] As if hee had ſaid; This healing of
the bitter waters ſhall bee a token to thee of my power in healing
thee. Yet for all this they diſtruſt Gods promiſes for their foode,
as it followeth, cap 16. Nor doth Moſes ſeeke to force their aſſent
by fearefull anathemaes, or ſudden deſtruction, but of ſome principall
offenders herein. For God will not haue true faith thunderblaſted
in the tender blade: but rather nouriſhed by continuance
of ſuch ſweet experiments: for this reaſon he ſhewers down
Manna from heauenExod. 16. 4 12. 
                  I haue heard the murmuring of the children of
Iſrael, tell them therefore, and ſay, At euening ye ſhall eat fleſh, and in
the morning you ſhall be filled with bread, and yee ſhall know that I am
the Lord your God. For beſides the miraculous manner of prouiding
both Quailes and Manna for them, the manner of nouriſhment
by Manna did witneſſe the truth of Gods word vnto them.
They had been vſed to groſſe and ſolid meates, ſuch as did fil their
ſtomackes, and diſtend their bellies▪ whereas Manna was in ſubſtance
ſlender, but gaue ſtrength and vigour to their bodies; and
ſerued as an embleme of their ſpirituall food, which being inuiſible,
yet gaue life more excellently then theſe groſſe and ſolid
matters did So ſaithDeut. 18. v. 3. 
                  Moſes: Therefore hee humbled thee, and
made thee hungry, and fed thee with Manna which thou kneweſt not,

neither did thy Fathers know it, that he might teach thee, that man liueth
not by bread onely, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the
mouth of the Lord.
               
               6 Yet in their diſtreſſe (ſo fraile is our faith, vntill it be ſtrengthned
by continuall experiments) they doubt, and tempt the Lord,
ſaying.Exod. 17. 7. 
                  Is the Lord amongſt vs or no? Nor doth Moſes interpoſe
his infallible authority, or charge them to belieue him, againſt
their experience of their preſent thirſt, vnder pain of eternall damnation,
or ſufferance of greater thirſt in hell: ſuch threates without
better inſtruction in Gods word, and the comfort of his ſpirit,
may bring diſtruſts or doubts to vtter deſpaire, and cauſe faith
to wither where it was wel nigh ripe, they neuer ripen & ſtrengthē
any true and liuely faith. Moſes himſelfe is faine to crie vnto the
Lord, ſaying, What ſhall I doe vnto this people? for thy be almoſt readie
to ſtone me. As the Papiſts would doe to the Pope, were hee to
conduct them through the wilderneſſe in ſuch extremity of thirſt,
able to giue them no better aſſurance of his fauor with God, then
his Anathemaes, or feed them onely with his Court-holy-water,
or bleſſings of mind▪ But euen here againe God feedes Iſraels faith
with waters iſſuing out of the rocke, making themſelues eye-witneſſes
of all his wonders, that ſo they might belieue his wordes
and promiſes, nay himſelfe, from their owne ſenſe and feeling of
his goodneſſe, and truth of his word.
               7 Though no Law-giuer or Gouernour, whether temporal or
ſpirituall, eſpecially, whoſe calling was but ordinary, could poſſibly
before or ſince ſo well deſerue of the people committed to
his guidance, as this great General already had done of al the hoſt
of Iſrael; were they vpon this conſideration, forthwith to belieue
whatſoeuer hee ſhould auouch without further examination,
ſigne, or token of his fauour with God; without aſſured experience,
or at the leaſt more then probable preſumptions of his
continuall faithfulneſſe in that ſeruice, whereunto they knew him
appointed? Albeit, after all the mighty workes before-mentioned,
wrought in their preſence, they had beene bound thereunto:
the meaneſt
                     The Hebrews haue a common ſaying, Ancilla plus vidit ad mare rubrum, & montē Sinai quam viderent omnes Prophetae 
                        •
                     ag. in 5 De
                        •
                     t. 
                  handmaid in that multitude had infallible pledges
plenty of his extraordinary calling, lockt vp in her own vnerring
ſenſes. But from the ſtrange, yet frequent manifeſtation of Moſes
power and fauour with God, ſo great as none beſides the great

Prophet whom hee prefigured, might challenge the like, the Lord
in his all 
                     •
                  acing wiſdome, tooke fi
                     •
                  te occaſion to allure his people
unto ſtrict obſeruance of what he
                     Deu. 13. 1. &c. God in the eſtabliſhing of Moſes authority, giue a caueat to future generations for auoiding blind obedience. afterwards ſolemnly enacted,
as alſo in the
                     •
                  
                  ▪ to forwarne all future generations without expreſſe
warrant of his word, not abſolutely to belieue any gouernour
whomſoeuer in all, though of 
                     •
                  ried skill and fidelity in many
principal points of his ſeruice. That paſſage of Scripture wherin
the manner of this peoples ſtipulation is regiſtred, well deſerues
an exact 
                     〈◊〉
                   of all, eſpecially of theſe circumſtances,
[How the Lord by rehearſall of his mighty workes forepaſſed, extorts
their promiſe to doe whatſoeuer ſhould by Moſes be commanded them, &
yet will not accept it offered, vntill hee haue made them eare-witneſſes
of his familiarity and communication with him.] Firſt, out of the
Mount he called Moſes vnto him to deliuer this ſolemn meſſage
vnto the houſe of Iacob;
                  Exod. 19 4. 5. & 6. 
                  Yee haue ſeene what I did to the Egyptians,
and how I carried you vpon Eagles wings, and haue brought you vnto
mee. Now therefore, if you will heare my voice indeed, and keepe my couenant,
then yee ſhall bee my chiefe 
                        •
                     eaſure aboue all people, though all
the earth be mine. After Moſes had reported vnto God this anſwere,
freely vttered with ioint conſent of all the people, ſolemnly
Ver. 8. aſſembled before their Elders [Ver. 7. 
                  All that the Lord commanded,
we will doe,] was the whole buſineſſe betwixt God and them, fully
tranſacted by this Agent in their abſence? No, hee is ſent backe
to ſanctifie the people, that they might expect Gods glorious appearance
in Mount Sinai, to ratifie what he had ſaid vpon the returne
of their anſwere;Ver. 9. 
                  Lo
                        •
                      I come vnto thee in a thicke cloud, that
the people may heare, whilſt I talke with thee, and that they may alſo belieue
thee for euer. They did not belieue that God had reuealed
his word to Moſes for the wonders hee had wrought; but rather
that his wonders were from God, becauſe they heard God ſpeake
to him, yea, to themſelues. For their principall and fundamentall
lawes were vttered by God himſelfe in their hearing, as Moſes expreſſeth,
Deut. 5. 22. Vide. Inn
                        •
                     t. a
                        •
                      § ex 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  Theſe words, (to wit) the Decalogue) the Lord ſpake vnto
all your multitude, in the mount, out of the midſt of the fire, the cloud,
and the darkeneſſe, with a great voice, and added no more. And leſt
the words which they had heard might ſoone bee ſmoothered in
fleſhly hearts, or quickly ſlide out of their brittle memories▪ the
Lord wrote them in two Tables of ſtone, and at their 
                     •
                  ranſcription

not Moſes onely, but Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, with the ſeuenty
Elders of Iſrael, are made ſpectators of the diuine glory, rauiſhed
with the ſweetneſſe of his preſence.Exod. 24. v. 1. 9. 10. 11. 
                  They ſaw ſaieth the
Text, the God of Iſrael, and vnder his feet, as it were, a worke of a Saphire
ſtone, and as the very heauen when it is cleare. And vpon the
Nobles of the children of Iſrael he laid not his hand, alſo they ſaw God,
and did eate and drinke. After theſe Tables through Moſes anger
at the peoples folly and impiety, were broken, God writes the
Exod. 34. v. 1. ſame words againe, and renewes his Couenant
                  Ver. 10. 11. before all the
people, promiſing vndoubted experience of his diuine aſſiſtance.
               8 Doth Moſes after all this call fire from heauen vpon all ſuch
as diſtruſt his words? Aaron and Miriam openly derogate from
his authority, which the Lord confirmes againe viua voce, deſcending
in theNumb. 12. 5. 6. 8. 9. 
                  pillar of the cloud, conuenting theſe detractors in the dore
of the Tabernacle; Wherefore were you not afraid to ſpeake againſt my
ſeruant, euen againſt Moſes? Thus the Lord was very angry and departed,
leauing his marke vpon Miriam, cured of her leproſie by
Moſes inſtant prayers. No maruell if Korah, Dathan. and Abirams
iudgements were ſo grieuous: when their ſinne againſt Moſes,
after ſo many documents of his high calling, could not but bee
wilfull, as their perſeuerance in it, after ſo many admonitions to
deſiſt, moſt malitious and obſtinate. Yet was Moſes further countenanced
by the appearance of Gods gloryMumb. 16. 19. 
                  vnto all the congregation,
and his authority further ratified by theVer. 33. ſtrange and fearefull
end of theſe chief malefactors, (Ver. 27. 28. foretold by him,) and by fire, iſſuing
from the Lord to conſume their confederates, in offering incenſe
vngratefull to their God, Tantae molis erat Iudaeam condere
gentem! So long and great a worke it was to edifie Iſrael in true
faith, but without any like miracle or prediction, ſuch as neuer
ſaw him, neuer heard good of him, muſt belieue the Pope as well
as Iſrael did their Law-giuer, that could make the ſea to grant him
paſſage, the cloudes ſend bread, the windes bring fleſh, and the
hard rocke yeeld drink ſufficient for him and all his mighty hoaſt,
that could thus call the heauens as witneſſes to condemne & appoint
the earth as executioner of his iudgements vpon the obſtinate
and rebellious, yet after all this hee inflicts no ſuch puniſhments
vpon the doubtfull in faith, as the Romiſh Church doth,

but rather (as is euident out of the placesDeut. 4. ver. 2. before alleadged) confirmes
them by commemoration of theſe late cited, and like experiments,
makingDeut. 7. ver. 17 18. 19. If thou ſay in thine heart, Theſe nations are more then I, how can I caſt them out? Thou ſhalt not feare them, but remember what thy Lord thy God did vnto Pharaoh, and vnto all Egypt. The great tentation which thine eyes ſaw, and the ſignes and wonders, and the mighty hand, and outſtretched out arme, whereby the Lord thy God brought thee out: ſo ſhall the Lord thy God doe vnto all the people, whoſe face thou feareſt. Gods fauours paſt the ſureſt pledges of his aſſiſtance
in greateſt difficulties that could beſet them. To conclude
this people belieued Moſes for Gods teſtimony of him, wee may
not belieue Gods word without the Popes teſtimony of it. Hee
muſt bee to God as Aaron was to Moſes, his mouth, whereby hee
onely ſpeakes diſtinctly or intelligibly to his people.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               That the Churches authority was no part of the rule of faith vnto the
people after Moſes death, That by experiments anſwerable to his
precepts and predictions, the faithfull without relying vpon the
Prieſts infallible propoſals, were as certaine, both of the diuine truth,
and true meaning of the law, as their forefathers had beene that liued
with Moſes, and ſaw his miracles.
               1 TO proceed vnto the ages following Moſes; How
did they know Moſes law, either indeed to bee
Gods word, or the true ſence and meaning of it,
being indefinitely knowne for ſuch?How farre the traditions, exhortations, or inſtructions of parents did ſteed their children for eſtabliſhing of faith. By tradition?
Yes, By tradition onely? No, But how at
all by tradition? As by a ioint part of that rule, on which they
were finally to relie? Rather it was a meane to bring them vnto
the due conſideration, or right application of the written rule,
which Moſes had left them. So hard were their hearts with whom
this great Law-giuer had firſt to deale, that faith could not take
roote in them, vnleſſe firſt wrought and ſubacted by extraordinary
ſignes and wonders: but once thus created in them, the incorruptible
ſeed therof might by meanes ordinary, eaſily be propagated
vnto poſterity, with whom it was to grow vp and ripen,
not by bare credence to their anceſtors traditions, nor by ſuch

miraculous ſights as they had ſeene; but by aſſiduous and ſerious
obſeruation of Gods prouidence in their owne times. For all his
wayes, to ſuch as marke them, are euer paralell to ſome one or
other rule contained in this booke of life. The Iſraelites in euery
age might haue diſcerned the truth of his threates or promiſes,
alwayes fulfilled according to the diuerſity of their wayes,
though thus much the beſt amongſt them would ſeldome haue
obſerued, perhaps not ſo much as once haue compared their
courſe of life, with either part of Gods couenant of life and death,
vnleſſe thus forwarned by their Anceſtors. The tradition then
of former, was of like vſe, for begetting true beliefe in latter generations,
as the exhortations of tutors, who haue already taſted the
ſweet of helicon, are vnto their pupils for attaining true knowledge
in good arts, of whoſe pleaſantneſſe they neuer conceiue aright,
vntill they taſte it themſelues, though taſte it but vpon the
others commendation, they would not, without their direction,
(ordinarily) they could not.
               2 This Methode Moſes himſelfe preſcribes;
                  Deut. 11. v. 2 Conſider this day,
for I ſpeake not vnto your children, which neither haue known nor ſeen
the chastiſement of the Lord your God, his greatneſſe, his mighty hand
and his ſtretched-out arme, and his ſignes, and his acts which he did in the
midſt of Egypt, vnto Pharaoh the King of Egypt, and all his land. For
your eyes haue ſeene all the great acts of the Lord which he did. Therefore
ſhall yee keepe all the commandements which I command you this
day, that yee may be ſtrong, and goe in and poſſeſſe the land wither ye go
to poſſeſſe it. Gods wonders paſt, they were to conſider to what
end? That they might lay vp their Law-giuers words
                  Ver. 18. in their
hearts, and in their ſoules, bind them as remembrances vpon their
hands, that they might bee as frontlets betweene their eyes, or ſights
whereby to leuell their ſteps, leſt they trode awry. Gods word ſo
rooted in the fathers, as thus to fructifie in their carriage, geſture,
ſpeech, and action, the ſeed of it was to bee ſowne in the tender &
ſupple hearts of children, as Moſes in the next words ads;
                  Ver. 19. And yee
ſhall teach them your children, ſpeaking of them when thou ſitteſt in
thine houſe, and when thou walkeſt by the way, and when thou lyeſt down,
and when thou riſeſt vp. And thou ſhalt write them vpon the poſts of
thine houſe, and vpon thy gates. Thus was Gods couenant with his
people, firſt, briefly drawne in ſignes and wonders, and vttered by

a mighty voyce in mount Horeb, as it had beene a demiſe Paroll;
afterwards, conceiued in more ample ſort, and written in more
ſpeciall tearmes by Moſes, but was to bee ſealed to euery generation,
by their ſure experience of Gods mercy and iuſtice; the one,
infallibly accompliſhing their proſperity for obeying; the other,
their calamities for tranſgreſſing it, as in the ſame place followeth,
                  Ver. 22. For, if ye keepe diligently all theſe commandements which I command
you toe, doe that is, to loue the Lord your God, to walke in all his wayes,
and to cleane vnto him; then will the Lord caſt out all theſe nations before
you, and yee ſhall poſſeſſe great nations mightier then you. All the
places whereon the ſoles of your feet ſhall tread, ſhall be yours; your coaſt
ſhall be from the wilderneſſe, and from Lebanon, and from the riuer, euen
the riuer Perah, vnto the vttermost Sea. No man ſhall ſtand againſt you, for the Lord your God ſhall caſt the feare of you vpon all the land,
that yee ſhall tread vpon, as hee hath ſaid vnto you.
               3 Euery light or formall obſeruation of this couenant ſuffiſed
not to auert Gods threates, or make them capable of thoſe
bounteous promiſes, which hee neuer failed to fulfill, as long
as in heart and deed they vſed Moſes writings for their rule, nor
weighing the fooliſh traditions of the Elders;Pſal. 78. 
                  When he ſlew them
(ſayth the Pſalmiſt) they ſought him,
                  Ver. 33. 34. 
                  and they returned, and ſought
God earely. And they remembred that God was their ſtrength, and the
moſt high God their redeemer. Proportially to their repentance (but
far aboue, or rather without all proportion of deſerts) did the
Lord deale with them. For, as their hearts (though in ſome ſort
turned vnto him) were not vpright with him, neither were they
faithfull in his couenant: ſo hee being mercifull, thus farre forgaue
their iniquite, that hee deſtroyed them not, but oftimes called backe
his anger, and ſuffered not his whole diſpleaſure to ariſe.
               
               4 The whole hiſtoricall part of the old Teſtament, vntill Dauids
time (epitomized by this Pſalmiſt) witneſſeth, what way ſoeuer
this people went, either the bleſſing or the curſe which Moſes
there ſets ſets before them, did alwayes ſurely meet them
                  Deut. 11. 26. Behold
I ſet before you this day a bleſsing,Ver. 26. and a curſe, the bleſsing, if yee obey
the commandements of the Lord your God, which I command you this
day, and the curſe, if yee will not obey the commandements of the Lord
your God, but turne out of the way which I command you this day, to goe
after other Gods yee haue not knowne. In theſe terms of bleſſings

and curſings, hee enſtiles the former diſ
                        •
                     unctiue couenant; If yee
ſhal hearken therfore to my commandements which I ſhall command you
this day,Deut. 11, v. 13. 14. 15. 17. that you loue the Lord your God, and ſerue him with all your
heart, and with all your ſoule: I alſo will giue raine vnto your land in due
time, the first raine and the latter, that thou mayeſt gather in thy
wheate, and thy wine, and thine oyle. Alſo I will ſend graſſe in thy
fields for thy cattell, that thou mayeſt eate, and haue enough. But beware
leſt your heart deceiue you, and leſt yee turne aſide and ſerue other Gods,
and worſhip them, and ſo the anger of the Lord be kindled againſt you,
and hee ſhut vp the heauen, that there be no raine, and that your land
yeeld not her fruit, and yee periſh quickly from the good land which the
Lord giueth you. To ſtirre them vp to more ſtrict obſeruance of the
former couenant, the bleſſinges and curſings here mentioned,
were to be pronounced with great ſolemnity at their firſt entrāce
into the land of Cannan,Deut. 11. v. 29. When the Lord thy God therfore hath brought
thee into the land whither thou goeſt to poſſeſſe it, then ſhalt thou put
the bleſsing vpon Mount Gerizim, and the 
                     〈◊〉
                   Mount Eball.
And elſewhere Moſes chargeth the people ſaying,
                  Deut. 27. v. 11. 12. 13. 14. Theſe (all
ſonnes of the free-woman) ſhall stand vpon Mount Gerizim to bleſſe
the people when yee paſſe ouer Iordan, Simeon and Leui, and Iudah, &
Iſſachar, and Ioſeph and Beniamin, and theſe (ſonnes of the bond-woman)
ſhall ſtand vpon Mount Ebal to curſe, Ruben, Gad, and Aſher,
and Zebulon, Dan, and Nephtali, and the Leuits ſhall anſwere
and ſay vnto all the men of Iſrael, with a lowde voyce. Nor was this
rehearſall more ſtrictly enioined by Moſes, then faithfully performed
by Ioſhuah;Ioſuah. 8. v. 33. 34. 35. And all Iſrael and their Elders and Officers, and
their Iudges ſtood on this ſide of the Arke, and on that ſide, before the
Prieſts of the Leuits, which beare the Arke of the Couenant of the Lord,
as well the ſtranger, as hee that is borne in the Country halfe of them
were ouer against Mount Gerizim, and halfe of them ouer againſt
Mount Eball, as Moſes the ſeruant of the Lord had commanded before,
that they ſhould bleſſe the children of Iſrael. Then afterward he read
all the words of the Law, the bleſsings and curſings, according to all that
is written in the book of the Law. There was not a word of all that Moſes
had commanded, that Ioſuah read not before all the Congregation
of Iſrael, aſwell before the women and children, as the ſtranger that was
conuerſant among them. The like ſolemnity was to be continued euery
ſeuenth yeare, as Moſes commanded them, ſaying, euery

ſeuenth yeere,Deut. 31. v. 10. 11. 12, 13. when the yeere of freedome ſhall bee in the feaſt of tabernacles,
when all Iſrael ſhall come to appeare before the Lord thy God
in the place which he ſhall chuſe, thou ſhalt read this law before all Iſrael,
that they may heare it. Gather the people together, men and women
and children, and thy ſtranger that is within thy gates, that they may
heare, and that they may learne, and feare the Lord your God, and keepe
and obſerue all the words of this law, and that their children which haue
not known it may heare it, and learne to feare the Lord your God, as long
as yee liue in the land, whether yee goe ouer Iorden to poſſeſſe it.
               5The Iſraelites care to inſtruct their children in the precepts of the Law, neceſſary vnto Chriſtians, ſeeing faith ſeldome grows without miracles, vnleſſe planted in tender yeeres. Children were to bee inſtructed firſt, priuately, then publikely;
that the ſolemnity of the ſpectacle might worke in them a
modeſt feare and reuerence, without whoſe precedent impreſſion
true faith hardly findes entrance into the heart of man. And
without miracles it ſeldome takes, but where the ſeedes of it haue
been ſowen in tender yeares; nor doth it vſually ſinke in yonger
breaſtes, vnleſſe ſucked in with admiration. All that Moſes, all
that Ioſuah, all that Prieſts and Leuites, all that Parents or other
Inſtructers, priuate or publike, could doe to ſuch, all they aimed
at, was to propoſe the infallible word in ſuch ſort, as might ſtir vp
their hearts to receiue it with attention and admiration; afterwards
to make ſure triall of it (alwayes ſufficient to proue it ſelfe)
by their practiſe. No inſtructer in that people, euer taught his
hearers, either finally or iointly, to relie vpon the infallibility of
his propoſals.
               6 But the Ieſuites heart, though his mouth will not vtter it,
thus indites; Did all this ſtirre theſe Scripturians would ſeeme to
make, or tatling parents daily inuitation of their children to ſtrict
obſeruance of this rule, take ſuch effect as Moſes dreamed of in poſterity?
No▪ But the reaſon why it did not, was becauſe they
ſought not in time to ſupply the defect or rarity of miracles in
latter, with more frequent and ſolemne memoriall of ſuch as had
happened in former ages; or with more abundant meditation vpon
their written law, and diligent obſeruation of their ordinary
ſucceſſe, alwayes correſpondent thereunto. Take heed to thy ſelfe
ſayeth Moſes, and keepe thy ſoule diligently, that thou forget not the
things thine eyes haue ſeen,
                  Deut. 4. 9. &c. 
                  and that they depart not out of thine heart
all the dayes of thy life, but reach them thy ſonnes, and thy ſonnes ſons;
forget not the day that thou ſtoodeſt before the Lord thy God in Horeb,

when the Lord ſaid vnto me, Gather me the people together, and I will
cauſe them to heare my words, that they may learne to feare me all the
daies that they ſhall liue vpon the earth, and that they may teach their
children.
                  Iudg. 2. v. 7. 8. The neceſſity of this, and like premonitions, was too
well manifeſted by the euent. The people (ſaith another Penman
of the ſacred Canon) ha
                        •
                      ſerued the Lord all the dayes of Ioſuah, and
all the dayes of the Elders that outliued Ioſuah, which had ſeene all the
great works of the Lord that he did for Iſrael. Not the auouchment
or preſence of infallible teachers, but their ſure experience of
Gods power and mercy, did more ſurely faſten this peoples aſſent
vnto the truth of that which Moſes had left written, then Moſes
liue perſonall propoſall could doe their Fathers, to his words vttered
in their audience.Ver. 10. 11. 
                  But after that generation (with whom Ioſuah
had conuerſed) was gathered vnto their fathers, and another generation
aroſe after them, which neither knew the Lord, nor yet the
works hee had done for Iſrael, then the children of Iſrael did wickedly
in the ſight of the Lord, and ſerued Baal. Whence it came to
paſſe, that whither ſoeuer they went out, the hand of the Lord was ſore
againſt them,
                  Ver. 15. 16. 
                  as the Lord had ſaid, and as the Lord had ſworne vnto
them, ſo he puniſhed them ſore. Notwithſtanding, the Lord raiſed
vp Iudges which deliuered them out of the hands of their oppreſſors:
yet when the Iudge was dead, they returned, and did worſe then their
fathers,
                  Ver. 19. 
                  in following other gods, to ſerue them, and worſhip them, they
ceaſed not from their owne inuentions, nor from their rebellious way.
What rule then was left to reclaime them? the infallible propoſals
of their Prieſts? Though theſe or an Angell from heauen
ſhould haue propoſed any other doctrine, then what was conſonant
to their written law (whoſe true meaning in this reſpect, euery
one of them ſhould haue knowne) Moſes curſe before mentioned,
had ouertaken them following it. So much were they
addicted vnto Baals Prieſts propoſals,Of Gedeons diſtruſt, and the meanes how his faith was eſtabliſhed. that Angels could ſcarſly be
heard, though ſuggeſting nothing but what their Lawgiuer had
taught, though aſſuring them by their preſence of ſuch aſſiſtance
from their mighty God as he had promiſed. Thus when the generall
of theſe heauenly ſouldiers, ſought to encourage Gedeon,
The Lord is with thee thou valiant man;
                  Iudg. 6. v. 13. Hee replies, Ah, my Lord,
if the Lord be with vs, why then is all this come vpon vs, and where be
all his miracles which our fathers told vs of, and ſaid, Did not the Lord

bring vs out of Egypt? but now the Lord hath forſaken vs, and deliuered
vs into the hand of Midianites. As if hee had ſaid, I will not
deny but the Lord hath done of old, as our fathers haue declared
vnto vs; Moſes ſtory I diſtruſt not, but am ſure he hath dealt farre
otherwiſe with vs.
               7 But doth this defect of faith in him, conuince the law of imperfectiō?
rather the obiect of his diſtruſt, might haue taught him
to haue belieued the perfection of Moſes law, which had ſo often
forewarned them of ſuch oppreſſion by their enemies, when they
forſooke the God of their fathers. Theſe forwarnings had Gideon
belieued aright; hee had not diſtruſted the Angels exhortation.
What was the reaſon then of his miſbelieuing, or rather ouerſeeing
that part of the law? Not ignorance of Gods word in
generall; for the miracles related by Moſes he had in perfect memory.
What then? want of ſufficient authority to propoſe vnto
him theſe particular reuelations, or their true meaning? This is all
the Romaniſt can pretend. Yet what greater authority could he require,
then that Angell had, which ſpake vnto Gideon? Our Apoſtle
ſuppoſeth any Angels propoſall of diuine doctrines, to be at the
leaſt equiualent to Apoſtolicall, Though wee ſayeth he (whether
Paul or Cephas) or (which he ſuppoſeth to be more) an Angell
from heauen preach vnto you otherwiſe,
                  Gal. 1. 8. 
                  then wee haue preached vnto
you, let him be accurſed. Or, if wee reſpect not onely the perſonal
authority of the propoſer, but with it the manner of propoſing
Gods word: What propoſall can wee imagine more effectuall
then this great Angel of the couenants reply vnto Gideons diſtruſtfull
anſwere; [and the Lord looked vpon him, and ſaid Goe in this thy
might,
                  Iudg. 6 14. 
                  and thou ſhalt ſaue Iſrael out of the hands of the Midianites,
haue I not ſent thee?]
               
               8 Whether Gideons diffidence after all this, were a ſinne, I leaue
it to bee diſputed by the Ieſuites. A defect or dulneſſe, no doubt
it was, and onely in reſpect of the like in vs, they hold a neceſſity
of the viſible Churches infallibility: vnto whoſe ſentence
whoſoeuer fully accords not, is by their poſitions, vncapable
of all other infallible means of diuine faith. To pretend doubt
or diſtruſt of Gods word once propoſed by it, yea, to ſeeke further
ſatisfaction or reſolution of doubts then it ſhall vouchſafe to
giue, is more then a ſinne, extreame impiety. Yet had this great

Angell ſtood vpon his authority in ſuch peremptory tearms, Gideon
had died in his diſtruſt. For after a ſecond reply made by Gideon,
                  Ibid. v, 15.
                  [Ah my Lord, whereby ſhall I ſaue Iſrael? behold my familie
is poore in Manaſſeh, and I am the leaſt in my fathers houſe] and a
further promiſe of the Angels aſſiſtance not like the former, [haue
I not ſent thee] but [I will therefore be with thee, and thou ſhalt ſmite
the Madianites as one man;] hee yet prefers this petition; I pray
thee, if I haue found fauour in thy ſight, then ſhew mee a ſigne that thou
talkeſt with me: Depart not hence I pray thee, vntill I come vnto thee,
and bring mine offering, and lay it before thee. After he had by more
euident documents fully perceiued it was an Angell of the Lord
that had parlied with him all this time, erecting his deiected heart
with theſe comfortable words, Peace bee with thee, feare not, thou
ſhalt not die; He yet demands two other ſignes before hee aduentures
vpon the Angels word. But after it is once confirmed vnto
him by experience of his power, in keeping his fleece drie in the
middle of moiſture; and moiſtning it where was nothing but drineſſe
about it; hee is more confident vpon a Souldiers dreame,
then a Ieſuite in like caſe would bee vpon the Popes ſentence or
bleſſing giuen ex Cathedra,
                  Iudg. 7. 15. 
                  When Gadeon heard the dreame told, &
the interpretation of the ſame, he worſhipped and returned to the hoaſt
of Iſrael, and ſaid; Vp, for the Lord hath deliuered into your hand, the
hoaſt of Midian.
               9 Nor hee, nor his people could at any time haue wanted like
aſſurance of Gods might and deliuerances, had they according to
the rule which Moſes ſet them, turned vnto him with all their
heart, and with all their ſoule; but as far were they, as the Papiſts
from admitting his words for their rule of faith. The vnwritten
traditions of Baal, were (at the leaſt) of equall, or ioint
authority with his writings, and in deed, and action, though not
in word and profeſſion, preferred before them. Longer then their
aſſent was, by ſuch miraculous victories as Gideon had now gotted
ouer the Midianites, and as it were tied and faſtned to the
bleſſings and curſings of Moſes law, this ſtiffe-necked generation
did neither cleaue to it, nor to their God;Iudg. 8. 33. 
                  But when Gideon was
dead, they turned away and went a whoring after Baalim, and made
Baal-Berith their God, and remembred not the Lord their God, which
had deliuered them out of the hands of all their enemies on euery ſide.
                  
Miracles after the Law-giuen, were vſually either tokens of precedent
vnbeliefe, or for ſignes to vnbelieuers, ſeruing eſpecially to
put them in mind of what Moſes had foretold: the attentiue conſideration
of whoſe predictions, wrought greater faith and confidency
in ſuch as without miracles laid this law in their harts, then
this people conceiued vpon the freſh memory of Gideons extraordinary
ſignes and glorious victory.
               10The peoples experience of ſuch calamities as Moſes thretned, was their ſureſt ground of ſuch ioyfull hopes as hee had promiſed. The like occaſions of ſuch diſtruſt as were obſerued in Gideon,
were frequent in thoſe times, wherein the foure and fortieth
Pſalme was written, yet the author of it, is not ſo daunted with
the oppreſsion of his people, as Gideon was. The manifeſtation
of ſuch reproach, contempt, and ſcorne, as Moſes ſaid ſhould befall
them, did alwayes animate ſuch as indeed had vſed the Law
as a perpetuall rule to notifie the diuerſity of all ſucceſſe, good or
bad, by the degrees of their declining from it, or approach vnto
it. The greater calamities they ſuffered, the more vndoubted
experience they had of diuine truth contained in Moſaicalthreats:
the more vndoubted their experience of their truth, vpon conſciouſneſſe
of their owne tranſgreſſions, the greater motiues they
had vpon ſincere and hearty repentance, to apprehend the ſtability
of his ſweeteſt promiſes for their good. No depreſſion of this
people, but ſerued as a conterſway to accelerate, intend, or enlarge
the meaſure of their wonted exaltation, ſo long as they
rightly weighed all their actions and proceedings in Moſes ballances,
equalizing their permanent ſorrow for ſins paſt, vnto their
wonted delight in tranſient pleaſures.
               11 Thus when Ieremie more admired then diſtruſted Gods mercies,
in rendering the purchaſe of his kinſmans field to him, cloſe
priſoner, for denouncing the whole deſolation of his country,
when the Kings and Princes of Iudah had no aſſurance of ſo much
poſſeſſion in the promiſed land, as to inherite the ſepulchres of
their fathers: the Lord expels not his ſuſpenſiue rather then diſſident
admiration, with ſignes and wonders, as he had done Gideons
doubt, or his ſtiffe-necked forefathers diſtruſt. By what meanes
then? by the preſent calamities which had ſeized vppon the
Cities of Iudah, and that very place wherein his late purchaſed inheritance
lay, when hee caſt theſe, and the like doubts in his mind;
                  Ier 32. 24. 25. &c. Behold the Mounts they are come into the City to take it, and the Citie

is giuen into the hand of the Caldeans that fight againſt it, by meanes
of the ſword, and of the famine, and of the peſtilence, and what thou haſt
ſpoken is come to paſſe, and behold thou ſeeſt it: And thou haſt ſaid vnto
me, O Lord God, Buy vnto thee the field for ſiluer, and take witneſſes:
for the City ſhall be giuen in to the hand of the Caldeans. Then came the
word of the Lord vnto Ieremiah ſaying, Behold, I am the Lord God of
all fleſh, is there any thing too hard for me? The Lord had
                  Ier. 30. 13. 14. 
                  ſtricken
Iacob with the wound of an enemy, and with a ſharpe chaſtice mē
                     
                        •
                     ,
for the multitude of his iniquities, wherefore hee cryed for his affliction,
and ſaid, My ſorrow is incurable, not conſidering who it
was had done all this vnto him: for, becauſe the Lord had killed,
they muſt belieue hee would make aliue againe. Their preſent
wounds inflicted contrary to the rules of politique defence, where
the beſt pledges of their future health, beyond all hope of State-Surgeons.
And this is the very S
                        •
                     ale of Ieremiahs aſſurance, from
the Lords own mouth:
                  Ier. 22. 42. 43. &c. Thus ſayeth the Lord, like as I haue brought
all this great plague vpon this people; ſo will I bring vpon them all the
good I haue promiſed them. And the fields ſhall be poſſeſſed in this land,
whereof ye ſay, It is deſolate, without man or beaſt, and ſhall be giuen into
the hand of the Caldeans. Men ſhall buy fields for ſiluer, and make writings,
and ſeale them, and take witneſſes in the land of Beniamin, and
round about Ieruſalem. So abſolute and all-ſufficient was Moſes
law in particular actions, much more in generall or doctrinall reſolution, that God himſelfe, for confirmation of his Prophets, &
this diſtruſtfull peoples faith, in a point by humane eſtimate moſt
incredible, thought it ſufficient to be a remembrance to the Lawgiuer.
For the Lord here ſaith to Ieremiah, concerning this particular;
Moſes many generations before, had vniuerſally foretold;
                  Deut. 30. 1. Now when all theſe things ſhall come vpon thee, either the bleſsing or
the curſe which I haue ſet before thee, and thou ſhalt turne into thine
hart among all the nations, whither the Lord thy God hath driuen thee:
then the Lord thy God will cauſe thy Captiues to returne, and haue compaſsion
vpon thee, and will returne to gather thee out of all the people,
where the Lord thy God had ſcattered thee. Though thou w
                     •
                  rſt caſt vnto
the vttermoſt part of heauen; from thence will the Lord thy God gather
thee, and from thence will he take thee. And the Lord thy God
will bring thee into the land which thy fathers poſſeſſed, and thou ſhalt
poſſeſſe it, and he will ſhew thee fauour, and will multiply thee aboue thy

fathers. By this rule of Moſes, according to the prediction of
Ieremiah; doth Nehemiah afterwards frame his prayers to God, &
direct his enterpriſe for reſtauration of Ieruſalem: Wee haue grieuouſly
ſinned againſt thee,Nehemiah. 1. 7. and haue not kept the commandements nor
the ſtatutes, nor the iudgements which thou commandeſt thy ſeruant
Moſes, I beſeech thee remember the word that thou commandeſt thy
ſeruant Moſes, ſaying, Ye will tranſgreſſe and I will ſcatter you abroad
among the people. But if yee turne vnto me, and keepe my commandements,
and doe them, though your ſcattering were to the vttermoſt part
of the heauen, yet will I gather you from thence, and will bring you vnto
the place that I haue choſen, to place my Name there. Now theſe are
thy ſeruants, and thy people, &c. O Lord I beſeech thee, let thine eare
now hearken to the praier of thy ſeruants, who deſire to feare thy name,
and I pray thee, cauſe thy ſeruant to proſper this day, and giue him fauour
in the preſence of this man. He ſaw the truth of Moſes diuine
predictiō confirmed by the Kings preſent grant of his petition, &
ſpeedy reſtauration of Ieruſalem,Nehe. 6. 10. 11. 
                  albeit a Prophet by profeſſion,
had diſſwaded the enterpriſe, as likely to proue dangerous
to his perſon.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               That the ſocietie or viſible Company of Prophets had no ſuch abſolute
authority as the Romiſh Church vſurpes.
               1 DId the Records of antiquity, afford vs any the
leaſt preſumption to thinke, that abſolute beliefe
or obedience might ſafely be tendered by
inferiors, as due to any viſible Company of
men, without examination of their propoſals
by Moſes writings, ſince they were extant: the ſociety of Prophets
in all reſpects the Romaniſts can pretend, had the moſt probable
title to this prerogatiue.That the company of Prophets had as great priuiledges as any 
                        〈◊〉
                      can chalenge. Their profeſſiō or calling was publike
and lawfull; their diſtinction from all others, eminent; their
perſons and places of reſidence, viſible and knowne; their promiſes
for enioying the extraordinary preſence or illuminations
of Gods ſpirit, peculiar: many of them, venerable for their integrity

in ciuill dealings, and ſanctity of priuate life; ſome of
them endued with the gift of miracles: In all theſe, and many
like conſiderations, that fraternity or collegiate ſociety, might
iuſtly haue pleaded all the priuiledges a publike ſpirit can grant to
one ſort of men before others. For, if the more or leſſe expreſſe
teſtimony of Gods word for extraordinary aſſiſtance of his ſpirit,
or the different meaſure of his illumination, or manner of immediate
teaching be that which makes ſom mens ſpirit more publike
then their brethrens: this difference was greater betweene
the Prieſts or Prophets, and people of old, then ſince God ſpake
vnto the world by his ſonne; yet what Prophet did once intimate
the neceſſity of his propoſall,That the people were not bound to belieue what a maior part of Prophets determined without examination. for notifying the truth of
Scriptures? What one did euer bewray the leaſt deſire to haue
his interpretations of them, vniuerſally held authentique? or
his particular predictions, abſolutely aſſented vnto, without further
triall then his bare aſſertion, without examination of them
by Moſes doctrine already eſtabliſ
                     •
                  ed?
               2 Had they beene the infallible Church repreſentatiue, had
their aſſertions, though giuen by ioinct conſent ex Cathedra, or
in the moſt ſolemne manner vſed in thoſe times beene of ſuch authority
as the Romaniſt would perſwade vs a Councell of their
Prelates lawfully aſſembled is, Gods people had ſtood bound to
embrace whatſoeuer a maior part of that profeſſion had reſolued
vpon: but this inference, though neceſſarily following the ſuppoſed
premiſes, the Ieſuit I know, dare not affirme, leſt Ahabs
bloud, vntimely ſhed by confidence in their infallibility, cry out againſt
him. Yet
                     De Eccleſ. milit. l. 3. c. 17. Ad primum 
                        〈◊〉
                      illos 400. prophetas manifeſte fuiſſe pſeudo Prophetas, ne
                        •••
                      ignoraſſe v
                        •
                     l ipſum Achab, qui cos conſulebat. N
                        •
                     m ibid 
                        〈…〉
                      rex I 
                        〈…〉
                      aliquis Propheta Domini per quem 
                        〈…〉
                      Dominum? Reſpondet Achab, Romanſit vnus, ſed ego 
                        〈◊〉
                     , qu a ne
                        •
                      prophetat 
                        〈…〉
                      malum 
                        〈◊〉
                      quis nunc in media Sa
                        •
                     on
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      400. Miniſtro, 
                        •
                     uth
                        •
                     ranos de fide 
                        •
                     ſtificante, poſtea 
                        〈…〉
                      non eſſet mirum, ſi maior 
                        〈◊〉
                      erraret: & ſicut nun
                        ••
                      non ſequitur, totam eccleſiam errare, e
                        •
                     am ſi 
                        〈◊〉
                      400. Miniſtri Lutheram, 
                        〈◊〉
                      preter Saxoniam & 
                        〈…〉
                      alia mulla, 
                        〈…〉
                     , ita non ſequitur, omnes Doctores Iudaeorum tempore 
                        〈…〉
                      etiamſi 
                        〈…〉
                      Samaria erant. Nam praeter eos Prophetas erat 
                        〈…〉
                      Sacerdotes in Ieruſalem, quibus ex officio 
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                  Bellarmine too well knowing the liquoriſh temper
of this preſent age, (for the moſt part acquainted with none
but table-talke Diuinity) to bee ſuch as will ſwallow down any
doctrine, bee it neuer ſo idle, prophane, or poiſonous, ſo it bee
ſauced with pleaſant conceit and merriment, would put vs of
with this ieſt; That as in Saxonie, one Catholiques verdict were to

be taken b
                        •
                     fore ſowre hundred Lutherans: ſo ſhould one of the Lords
Prophets haue beene followed in thoſe times, before fiue hundred of
Baals. AndThat Ahabs falſe Prophets were not profeſſed enemies of Baal.
                   
                  Ahab no doubt had ſo done, had not the Diuell
taught his Diuines then as hee hath done Bellarmine and his fellowes
ſince, to take vniuerſality, as a ſure note of the Church;
traditions, and cuſtomes of the Elders, for the rule of faith, and
(which is the vndoubted Concluſion of ſuch premiſſes) to
follow a multitude to any miſchiefe. So mightily did the opinion
of a maior part, being all men of the ſame profeſſion, ſway with
the ſuperſtitious people of thoſe times that1. King. 22. 13. 
                  Ahabs Purſeuant
conceiued hope of ſeducing Micaiah whilſt they were on the way
together, by intimating ſuch cenſures of ſchiſme, of hereſie, of
peeuiſhneſſe, or priuacy of ſpirit, as the falſe Catholike beſtowes
on vs, likely to befall him, if he ſhould vary from the reſt. The beſt
anſwere (I thinke) a Romane Catechiſme could afford, would
be to repeat the concluſion which Bellarmine would haue maintained,
[All the reſt beſides were Baals Prophets.] They were indeede
in ſuch a ſence as Ieſuites and all ſeducers are: but not by publike
profeſſion or ſolemne ſubſcription to his rites, as may partly
appeare by Iehoſaphats, continuing his reſolution to goe vp to
battell againſt Micaiahs counſell, which queſtionleſſe, hee would
rather haue died at home, then done, had hee knowne Michaiah
onely to haue belonged vnto the Lord, and all his aduerſaries vnto
Baal; partly, by that reuerent conceit which euen the chiefe of
theſe ſeducers entertained at that time of Elias, whoſe vtter diſgrace
Baals ſeruants would by all meanes haue ſought, for his
late deſignes acted vpon their fellowes: Yet as
                     Antiq. l. 8. c. 10. Interea Sedecias quidam vnus 
                        〈◊〉
                      Pſeudo-Prophetis in medium progreditur, negans curandum quid Michaeas garriet, nihil en
                        •
                     m veri cum predicere, argumento eſſe praedictionem Eliae, qui ſine dubio melius quiā iſte futura cerneret Illum enim praedixiſſe apud Iezraelem in Nabuthi ſuburbano lambendom à ca
                        ••
                      bus regis ſanguinem, quemadmodum, 
                        •
                     ambuiſſent cruorem Nabut
                        •
                     i opera ipſi
                        •••
                      lapidati à populo. Perſpicuum igitur eſſe eum mentiri, qui longè preſtantiori Prophetae no
                        •
                      vereatur contrarium dicere, quòd: eriturus ſit rex ab hinc die 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſed mox ſore euidentius etiam quàm verax ſit aut a
                        •
                     ſtatus diuino ſpiritu. 
                  Ioſephus records,
the chiefe argument vſed by Zidkiah to diminiſh Micaiahs credite
with both Kings, was an appearance of contradiction betwixt
his and Eliahs prediction of Ahabs death, the accompliſhment
of both being apprehended as impoſſible, leſſe credit (as he vrged)
was to be giuen to Mica
                        •
                     ah, becauſe ſo impudent as openly to contradict
ſo great a Prophet of the Lord as Elias, at whoſe threatnings
Ahab King of Iſrael trembled, humbling himſelfe with

faſting, cloathed in ſackcloth. And it is likely hee would ſo ſhortly
after entertaine the profeſſed ſeruants of Baal for his Councellors?
yet, ſeeing the euent hath openly condemned them for
ſeducers, and none are left to plead their cauſe: it is an eaſie matter
for the Ieſuite or others to ſay, they were Baals Prophets by
profeſſion. But were not moſt Prieſts and Prophets in Iudah &
Beniamin vſually ſuch? yes, and (as afterward ſhall appeare) did
band as ſtrongly with as ioint conſent, againſt Ieremy, and Ezechiel,
as theſe did againſt Michaiah. The point wherein wee deſire
reſolution, is, by what rule of Romiſh Catholique Diuinity, truth
in thoſe times might haue beene diſcerned from falſhood before
Gods iudgements did light vpon the City and Temple. Hee is
more blind then the blindeſt Iew that euer breathed, who cannot
ſee how ſuch as profeſſed themſelues Prieſts and Prophets of the
Lord, aſwell in Iudah as in Iſrael, did bewitch the people with
the ſelfe ſame ſpels the Papiſts boaſts of to this day, as the beſt
prop of his Catholike faith. Yet ſuch is the hypocriſie of theſe
proud Phariſes, that they can ſay in their hearts; Oh had wee liued
in the dayes of Iezabel, we would not haue beene her inquiſitors againſt
ſuch Prophets as Elias and Micaiah were: When as in truth Iezabels
impietie towards them, was clemency in reſpect of Romiſh
cruelty againſt Gods Saints, her witchcrafts but as veniall ſins,
if wee compare them with Ieſuiticall ſorceries. But of this error
more directly in the Chapter following; of their ſorceries and impieties
hereafter.
               3 Vnto our former demand, [whether the ſociety of Prophets
were the Church repreſentatiue, whether the people were bound
without examination to belieue whatſoeuer was by a maior part,
or ſuch of that profeſſion as were in higheſt or moſt publike place
determined.] What anſwere a learned Papiſt would giue I cannot
tell. Then this following, better cannot be imagined on their
behalfe, [That this ſupreme authority which they contend for,
was in the true Prophets onely; that they, albeit inſpired with
diuine illuminations, and endued with ſuch authority as the Ieſuite
makes the Popes humana diuinitas inſpirala, did notwithſtanding
permit their declarations, for the hardneſſe of this peoples
heart to be tried by the euent, or examined by the law, not
that they wanted lawfull power (would they haue ſtood vpon

their authority) to exact beliefe without delay; ſeeing readineſſe
to belieue the truth propoſed, is alwayes commended in the ſacred
Story. And no doubt, but the people did well in admitting
the true Prophets doctrine, before the falſe, at the firſt propoſal;
the ſooner, the better. But were they therefore to belieue the true
Prophets abſolutely without examination? Why ſhould they
then belieue one of that profeſſion, before another; ſeeing ſeducers
could propoſe their conceits with as great ſpeed and peremptorineſſe
as the beſt? Nor did reaſon onely diſſwade, but theIud. 13. 1,. law
of God alſo expreſly, forbid that people, alwayes, and in all cauſes
to truſt ſuch, as vpon triall had beene found to diuine aright
of ſtrange euents. Yet grant wee muſt, that hardneſſe of heart
made this people more backeward, then otherwiſe they would
haue beene to belieue truthes propoſed; that oftimes they required
ſignes from their Prophet, when obedience was inſtantly due
from them to him; that oftimes they ſinned in not aſſenting immediately,
without interpoſition of time for triall, or reſpite to
reſolue vpon what termes beliefe might be tendered. Thus much
wee may grant with this limitation; [if we conſider them abſolutely,
or ſo well diſpoſed as they ſhould,In what caſes and perſons pronenſſe to belieue particular truthes is commendable, in what or in whom ſuſpitious. and might haue beene,
not as the Prophets found them.] For in men inwardly ill affected
or vnqualified, for true faith, credulity comes neere the nature
of vice then vertue, a diſpoſition of diſloyalty, a degree of hereſie
or infidelity, rather then a preparation to ſincere obedience, or
any ſure foundation of true and liuely faith. Aſſent perchance
men ſo affected, may more readily then others would vnto ſundry
diuine truthes: yet not truely not as they are diuine and
conſonant to the rule of goodneſſe, but by accident, in as much
as they in part conſort with ſome one or other of their affections.
And the more forward men are vpon ſuch grounds, to belieue
ſome generalities of Chriſtian dueties; the more prone they
proue, when opportunity tempts them, to oppugne others more
principall, and more ſpecially concerning their ſaluation. For credulity,
if it ſpring not out of an honeſt diſpoſition vniformally inning
vnto goodneſſe, as ſuch; but from ſome vnbrideled humor,
or predominant naturall affection: will alwayes ſway more vnto
ſome miſchiefe, then vnto any thing that is good.Iohn. 2. 23. 
                  Many belieued
in Ieſus (ſaith Saint Iohn) when they ſaw his miracles. It pleaſed

them well hee had turned water into wine, that hee had giuen other
proofes of his power, in driuing buyers and ſellers out of the
Temple, did miniſter hope vnto proud hearts, hee might proue
ſuch a Meſſias as they expected, as elſewhere vpon the like occaſion
they ſaid,Iohn 6. v. 14. 
                  This is of a truth the Prophet that ſhould come into the
world. The ground of this their aptneſſe to belieue thus much,
(as is intimated in the words following) was their inordinate deſire
of hauing an earthly King, that might rule the nation with an
yron rod.Iohn 6. v. 15. 
                  When Ieſus therefore perceiued by their forwardneſſe to
profeſſe the former truth, that they would come and take him to make
him a King, he departed againe into a mountaine himſelfe alone; for
the ſame cauſe no doubt, which the Euangeliſt ſpecifies in the
former place,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . 2. 24. 25. 
                  But Ieſus did not commit himſelf vnto them, becauſe he
knew them all, and had no need that any ſhould teſtifie of man. He knew
ſuch as vpon theſe glimpſes of his glory were preſently ſo ſtifly
ſet to belieue in him, vpon hopes of being fed with dainties, or
mighty protection againſt the Heathen; would bee as violently
bent againſt him, euen to crucifie him for a ſeducer, after they
had diſcouered his conſtant endeuours to bring them both by life
and doctrine vnto conformity with his croſſe, mortification humility,
contempt of the world, patience in affliction, with other
like qualities deſpiſeable in the worlds eyes; yet maine principles
in his ſchoole, and elementary grounds of ſaluation; ſo his countrimen
of Nazareth ſodainly admiring the gratious words which
proceeded out of his mouth,Luke 4. v. 22. 28. 29. after hee begunne to vpbraid them
with vnthankefulnes, as ſpeedily attempt to throw him headlong
from the toppe of the hill, wherein their City was built. By this
it may appeare, that of the Iewiſh people in ancient times, ſome
did ſinne in beeing backeward: others, in an immature forwardneſſe
to belieue propheticall doctrines. But the fountaines or firſt
heads whence theſe ſwift motions of life were depraued in the
one, was inordinate affection, or intrinſique habitual corruption;
the roote whence ſuch deadneſſe was deriued into the actions of
the other, was hardnes of heart, precedent neglect of Gods word,
and ignorance of his wayes thence enſuing. Which preſuppoſed,
the parties ſo affected, did not
                     Bellarmine grants that he which doubts of the Popes abſolute authority doth not amiſſe to examine it, albeit he ſin in doubting of it. Vide Annot. cap. 14
                           •
                         §. 7. Sect. 1. §. 10. amiſſe, in not beleeuing the
true Prophets without examination; but in not abandoning ſuch
diſpoſitions, as diſenabled them for belieuing all parts of truth

propoſed with conſtancy, and vniformity, making them fitte inſtruments
to be wrought vpon by ſeducers. Hence ſaith our Sauiour,
Iob. 5. 43. 44. 
                  I come in my fathers name, and ye receiue me not: if another
ſhall come in his owne name, him will yee receiue. How can yee belieue
which receiue honour one of another, and ſeeke not the honour that
commeth of God alone: Nor Propheticall, nor Apoſtolicall, nor
Meſſiacall much leſſe could Papall authority make them belieue
the doctrine of life, intirely and ſincerely, whileſt their hearts were
heardned; whoſe hardnes though, might eaſily haue been mollified,
by laying Moſes law vnto them, while they were young and
tender.
               4 It is a rule as profitable for our owne information in many
points,A rule for the right ſetling of our perſuaſions in diuine matters, or ripening of true faith. as for refutation of the aduerſarie, that the commendation
of neceſſary meanes, is alwaies included in the commendation
of the end; which how good or excellent ſoeuer it bee, our
deſires of it are prepoſterous, all earneſt endeauours to attaine it,
turbulent; vnleſſe firſt addreſſed with proportionable alacrity to
follow the meanes that muſt produce it: ſober ſpirites alwayes
bound their hopes of accompliſhing the one by perfect ſuruey of
their intereſt in the other; as minds truly liberall, determine future
expences, by exact calculation of their preſent reuenewes.
Euen in buſineſſes of greateſt importance, though requiring ſpeedieſt
expedition, a wiſe man will moderate his pace according to
the quality of the ground whereon hee goes, otherwiſe the more
haſte may cauſe worſe ſpeed. The Iewes were, as wee are, bound
to belieue truthes propoſed without delay: but both for this reaſon
moſt ſtrictly bound to a continuall vniformity of practiſing
diuine precepts already knowne, without diſpenſing with this or
that particular, though offenſiue to our preſent diſpoſition without
indulgence to this or that ſpecial time, without all priuiledge
ſought from the pleaſure or diſpleaſure of men, both bound, ſo to
frame our liues and conuerſations, as to bee inſtantly able to diſcerne
the truth propoſed, not by relying vpon their authority
that propoſe it, but for it ſelfe, or from a full and liuely, though
a quicke and ſpeedy apprehenſion of immediate homogeneall
conſonancie betweene the externall and the internall word. For
if any part of Gods word truly dwell in vs, though ſecret it may

bee and ſilent of it ſelfe, yet will it Eccho in our hearts, whileſt
the like reuerberates in our eares from the liue voice of the Miniſtery.
Thus had the Iewes hearts beene truely ſet to Moſes law,
had their ſoules delighted in the practiſe of it as in their food, they
had reſounded to the Prophets call, as a ſtring though vntouched,
and vnable to beginne motion of it ſelfe, will yet raiſe it ſelfe
to an vniſon voice, or as the ſoules of heauen anſwere with like
language to others of their owne kind, that haue better occaſion
to beginne the cry. In this ſenſe are Chriſts ſheepe ſaid to heare
his voice, and follow him; not euery one that can counterfeit his
or his Prophets call,
               5 The iſſue of all that hath beene ſaid is, that none within the
precincts of theſe times, whereof wee now treat, from the Law,
giuen, vnto the Goſpell, were bound to belieue Gods meſſengers,
without examination of their doctrine by the precedent
written word. Onely this difference there was; ſuch as had rightly
framed their hearts to it, did make this triall of Prophetical doctrines,
as it were by a preſent taſte, which others could not without
interpoſition of time, to worke an alteration in their diſtempered
affections. For this reaſon do the Prophets alwayes annex
Moſaicall precepts of repentance,Why the Prophets inioyne repentance whileſt the
                        •
                      fortell euents to come. to their predictions of future
euents, as knowing that if their hearts to whom they ſpake, were
turned to God, their ſight ſhould forthwith bee reſtored clearely
to diſcerne the truth. For further manifeſtation of the ſame concluſion,
it appeares ſufficiently from ſundry diſcourſes in the
former booke, that Iſraels incredulity vnto their Prophets, was
finally to bee reſolued into their neglect, their imperfect, or partiall
obſeruance of Moſes precepts. Wherefore not the liue voice
of them, whoſe words in themſelues were moſt infallible, and are
by the approbation of time, with other conſpicuous documents
of Gods peculiar prouidence, preſeruing them in diuine eſtimation
ſo long, become an vndoubted rule of life vnto vs: but the
written word before, confirmed by ſignes and wonders, ſealed
by the euents of times preſent and precedent, was the infallible
rule, whereby the propheticall admonitions of euery age, were
to bee tried and examined.
               6 The words of the beſt, while they ſpake them, were not of

like authority, as now written they are vnto vs, nor were they admitted
into the Canon, but vpon iuſt proofe of their diuine authority.
That one ſpeech which Eſay vttered, was an axiome ſo
well knowne, as might bring all the reſt to bee examined, before
admiſſion;Iſaiah 8. v. 20. 
                  To the Law and to the Teſtimony if they ſpeake not according
to this word, it is becauſe there is no light in them. For Gods
will already knowne and manifeſted to the proples conſciences,
was to ouerſway the contrary propoſals of knowne Prophets,
though neuer ſo peremptory. Nor was it impoſſible for Prophets
to auouch their owne conceites vnder the name of diuine Reuelations,
more immediatly ſent from God, then the Pope pretends:
witneſſe the1 King. 13. v. 18. man of God, that went from Iudah to Bethel,
ſeduced by his fellow Prophets, fained reuelation from an
Angell, counſelling him to diuert into his houſe, contrary to the
Lords commandement giuen before. The ones dealing was, I
confeſſe moſt vnuſual; ſo was the others death, yet a liuely document
to cauſe all, that ſhould heare of it vntill the worlds end, take
heede of diſpenſing with the word of the Lord once made known
vnto themſelues, vpon beliefe of more manifeſt reuelations or
inſtructions, by what meanes ſoeuer giuen to others, either for
recalling or reſtraining it. Hence may the Reader diſcry, aſwell
the height of our aduerſaries folly, as the depth of their impietie,
making their Churches authority, which by their own acknowledgement
cannot adde moe bookes to the number of the Canon
already finiſhed, but onely iudge which are Canonicall,
which not, farre greater then theirs was, that did preach and write
theſe very bookes, which both wee and they acknowledge for
Canonicall. For the Prophets words were no rule of faith,
vntill examined and tried by the written word precedent,
or approued by the euent; the Popes muſt
be, without triall, examination, or further
approbation then his owne bare
aſſertion.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX.
               That the Church repreſentatiue amongſt the Iewes was for the moſt
part, the moſt corrupt Iudge of matters belonging to God: and the
reaſons why it was ſo.
               1 BVt was the neglect of Moſes law, or this peoples
inward corruption, abounding for want
of reſtraint by it, the ſole cauſe of their dulneſſe
in perceiuing, or of their error in peruerting
the things of Gods ſpirite: This ouerflow of
wickedneſſe ſerued as a tide to carry them: but
the continuall blaſts of ſuch vaine doctrine, Templum Domini,
Templum Domini, the Church, the Church, was like a boiſterous
wind to driue them headlong into thoſe ſands, wherein they alwayes
made ſhipwracke of faith and conſcience. The true Prophets
neuer had greater oppoſites then the Prieſts, and ſuch as the
Papiſts would haue to be the onely pillars, yea the onely materiall
parts of the Church repreſentatiue. Notwithſtanding, whom
the Fathers had traduced for impoſtors or Sectaries, and oftimes
murdered as blaſphemers of the Deity, or turbulent members of
the ſtate;Poſterities good affection to the Prophets their fathers had killed, oftimes an argument 
                        •
                     ather of hypocriſie then ſinceritie. the Children reuerenced as men of God, and meſſengers
of peace vnto the Church and common weale. What was
the reaſon of this diuerſity in their iudgement? or doth it argue
more ſtedfaſt beliefe in poſterity? No, but more experience of
the euents, foretolde oftimes, not fulfilled vntill the Prieſts, and
other oppoſites, either coaeuals or ancients to the Prophets, were
couered with confuſion. The childrens motiues, to belieue particulars
oppugned by their parents, were greater; and the impediments
to withdraw their aſſent from them, leſſe: That the
children ſhould thus brooke what their fathers moſt diſliked in
the Prophets, is no more then wee may obſerue, in other Writers.
Few much reuerenecd in any faculty by poſterity, but had
eager detractors in their flouriſhing dayes, vicinity alwayes breeding
enuy. And euen of ſuch, as did not aemulate them for their
skill, nor would haue beene moued with enuy at their fame or
glory, they were not eſteemed as they deſerued, being defrauded

of due praiſe by ſuch of the ſame profeſſion, as better pleaſed
the predominant humor; alwayes next in election to the lauiſh
Magnificates of preſent times; but vſually reiected by poſterity,
when that particular humour, (euermore ſhorter liuth than the
humorous) beganne to change. Thus in euery faculty, haue
thoſe authors which moſt applied themſelues to ſolidity of truth,
neglecting new-fangle trickes or flaſhes of extemporary wit, endured
in greateſt requeſt, and beſt credit throughout all ages: as
meates ſtrongeſt and moſt nouriſhing, not moſt delicate, are fitteſt
for continuall diet.Statius in ſine 12. Thebaid. What the Latine Poet ſaid of his Poems,
euery Prophet might haue more truely applyed vnto his writinges.
               
                  Mox, tibi ſi quis adhuc pretendat nubila, liuor
                  Occidet, & meriti poſt me referentur honores.
               
               
                  Though cloudes of enuy now may ſeeme,
                  thy ſplendent rayes to choake;
                  Theſe with my aſhes ſhall diſſolue,
                  and vaniſh as their ſmoake.
                  VVhat whileſt I breath ſharpe cenſures blaſt,
                  when my leafe fals, ſhall ſpring,
                  Thy fame muſt flouriſh, as I fade;
                  graue honour forth ſhall bring.
               
               It was a Methode moſt compendious, for attaining ſuch eternity
of fame, as the continuall ſucceſſion of mortality can affoorde
vs, which is giuen byPetrarch. another Poet, but in proſe; Dum viuas
virtutem colas, inuenias famam in Sepulchro; Hee that hunts after
vertue in his whole courſe of life, ſhall bee ſure to meete with
fame after death; but hardly ſooner, leaſt of all could theſe Prophets
bee much honoured in their owne Country, whileſt men
of their owne profeſſion,Why the prieſts or ſpirituall rulers hated the liuing Prophets whileſt they loued the memory of the deceaſed. carnally minded, poſſeſſed the chiefe
ſeates of dignity, ſometimes the beſt ſtay and pillars of faith in
Gods Church, moſt capable of that infallibility, which their
proud ſucceſſors did more boaſt of. Yet were, euen theſe ſeducers
alwayes willing to celebrate the memory of ancient prophets,
becauſe the authority giuen to their ſayings, or reuerence
ſhewed vnto their memory by the preſent people, ouer whome

they ruled, did no way preiudice their owne dignity or eſtimation
which rather increaſed by thus conſorting with the multitude
in their laudatoes of holy men deceaſed. Thus from one and the
ſame inordinate deſire of honour and praiſe from men, did contrary
effects vſually ſpring in theſe maſters of Iſrael. The dead they
reuerenced, becauſe they ſaw that acceptable vnto moſt, & likely
to make way for their owne prayſe amongſt the people: but feare
leſt the liuing Prophets ſhould bee their coriuals in ſuites of glory,
whereunto their ſoules were wholly eſpouſed, did ſtill exaſperate
and wher the malice of impatient mindes, conſcious of their own
infirmities, againſt their doctrine, which could not be embraced,
but their eſtimation muſt be impaired, their affections croſſed, &
their politique proiects daſhed. The higher in dignity the Prieſts
and Rulers were, the more it vexed them, ſuch poore men, as the
true Prophets, for the moſt part, were, ſhould take vpon them to
direct the people. Their obiections againſt thoſe men of God,
their ſcurrilous taunts, and bitter ſcoffes, their odious 
                     〈◊〉
                  
forged, to make way for bloudy perſecutions, are moſt liuely
repreſented by the like practizes of the Romiſh Clergy; continued
almoſt as many yeares againſt the Albigeans, Hu
                     •
                  ſites, and generally
againſt al whom they ſuſpect to haue any familiarity with
the ſpirit, whoſe teſtimony againſt them, is as authentique as euident;
onely ouerborne through Gods permiſſion in the worlds
ſight, by preiudice of priuateneſſe. Thus, when poore Michatah
would not ſay, as the King would haue him, the politique State-Prophet
Zidkiah; ſonne of Chenaanah, gaue him a blow on the
cheeke, to beate an anſwere out to this demand; When went the
Spirit of the Lord from mee to thee? As many proud Prelates would
in like caſe, reply vpon his poore brother, that ſhould croſſe his
opinion, ſpecially in a matter belonging, though but a farre off,
vnto the State; Sirrha, I am your better, know your place, before
whom, and in what matter you ſpeake. Nor did Zidkiah onely,
but 400. more (no otherwiſe diſcernable for falſe Prophets then
by ſuch triall as wee contend for) as if they would haue bound the
Almighty to haue followed moſt voices in beſtowing victory,
perſwade the King to goe vp againſt Ramath Gilead. But my former
aſſertion is fully ratified by Michaiahs reply to the others demand;
When went the &c. Thou ſhalt ſee (ſaith hee) in that day,

when thou ſhalt goe from chamber to chamber to hide thee. No queſtion,
but ſuch as were neuters before, after they ſee his propheſie
fulfilled in Ahabs ouerthrow, did take Michaiah for a Prophet, as
true as Zedkiah was falſe.
               3 In like manner when Ieremy a poore Prophet and Prieſt of
Anathoth had come vnto Ieruſalem among the Prelates, and propheſied
the truth, but truth offenſiue to the State,Ier. 29. v. 15. 
                  That all the
euils which God had pronounced, ſhould be brought vpon that City, and
her townes: Paſhu
                        •
                     
                   the ſonne of Immer the Prieſt, which was appointed
gouernour in the houſe of the Lord, intreats him worſe
then Zidkiah had done Michaiah. Hee could haue flouted him
with as good applauſe of his complices, as the Inquiſitors can a
Proteſtant now: You that can read State fortunes a farre off, can
you tell where you ſhall lodge your ſelfe this next night? if you
cannot take him for a better Prophet that can. And by Paſhurs
Propheſie, hee was to take vp his lodging in his way home in the
Stockes that were in the high gate of Ben
                        •
                     amin, neare vnto the houſe of
the Lord. whoſe deſolation hee had threatned. The like entertainement
hee found againe at the whole multitudes hands, but
by the Prieſts and Prophets inſtigation;Ier. 26. v. 8. 9 
                  Now when Ieremiah had
made an end of ſpeaking all that the Lord had commanded him to ſpeake
vnto all the people, then the Prieſts and the Prophets, and all the people
tooke him and ſaid, Thou ſhalt die the death. Why haſt thou propheſied
in the name of the Lord, ſaying, This houſe ſhall bee like Shiloh, and
this City ſhall bee deſolate without an inhabitant? As if the Church of
God could poſſibly erre, or the gates of hell preuaile againſt the
ſplendor of it, would the Romiſh Clergie adde, ſhould the Lord
ſend a Prophet with ſuch tidings vnto Rome. And did they not
learne this interpretation of Chriſts promiſe vnto his Church,
from the hypocriticall Iewes their predeceſſors, which made the
like comment in Ieremiahs time, vpon Gods wordes as pregnant
for the high-Prieſts ſucceſſion as Saint Peters;
                  Ier. 18. v. 18. 
                  Come aud let vs
imagine ſome deuiſe againſt Ieremiah, for the Law ſhall not periſh
from the Prieſt, nor counſell from the wiſe, nor the word from the Prophet,
come, and let vs ſmite him with the tongue, and let vs not giue
heed to any of his words. Away with the heretique. The manifeſtation
of like affection in the Prelates towards Gods Prophets,
did embolden Shemaiah the Nehelemite, to write from Babylon vnto

                  Zephaniah the high Prieſt and his aſſociates to this effect.Ier. 29. v. 26. 
                  The
Lord hath mad thee Prieſt, for Iehoiada the Prieſt, that yee ſhould bee
officers in the houſe of the Lord, for euery man that raueth and maketh
himſelf a Prophet, to put him in priſon, and in the ſtocks. Now therfore,
why haſt not thou reproued Ieremiah of Anathoth which propheſied
vnto you. This captiuity is long: built houſes to dwell in, and plant
gardens, and eate the fruites of them.
               
               4 But when Paſhur found the Omen of thatIer. 20. v. 3. 4 name which Ieremiah
gaue him, when hee and his mates proued indeed Magors
Miſſabibs, a terror to themſelues, and all about them, when they
ſaw with their eyes all the miſeries there expreſſed, then was Ieremiah
held for a true Prophet, eſpecially by ſuch as outliued the
captiuity, to ſee the truth of his propheſie for thier good as exactly
fulfilled, as this had heen for their harme, whileſt according
to hisIer. 29. v. 31. 32. prediction, Shemaiah and his ſeed were rooted out from
amongſt Gods people happily replanted in their natiue ſoile. For
from the reaſons ſet downe before, poſterity did alwayes better
iudge of propheſies then the age wherein their Authors liued,
at the leaſt, the younger and meaner ſort of that age which
out-liued the euent, vſually better digeſted their doctrine, then
the ancient or men of dignity that enuied them credite amongſt
the people, yet were not ſuch as leſſe maligned them, greater
belieuers vniuerſally, as was ſaid before, but onely of ſome few
particulars. For, if a new Prophet ſhould haue riſen amongſt thē
hee was almoſt as euill entreated by the preſent Clergy, or others,
whoſe humors he contradicted. This is euident by the
Scribes and Phariſes, and the chiefe Rulers of the Iewiſh Church
in our Sauiours time;Math. 23. v. 29. 30 
                  They builded the tombs of the Prophets, &
garniſhed the ſepulchres of the righteous, and ſaid (as they verily
thought) If wee had been in the dayes of our fathers, we would not haue
beene partakers with them in the bloud of the Prophets: yet made they
the people of their owne time ſo mad, as to be partakers with thē
in the bloud of that great Prophet, their long deſired Meſsiah, the
onely Sauiour of the world. Throughout the whole Story almoſt
of the old Teſtament, the truth propoſed may appeare, that the
viſible Church (if it be taken in ſuch a ſence as the Romaniſts take
it) was the moſt corrupt Iudge either of the truth, or true meaning
of Gods word; that the people ſeduced by their goodly

ſhewes and glorious titles of Moſes ſucceſſors, were ſtill brought
into the combination of bloud, vntill they brought vpon themſelues,
their poſterity, and the holy City,Math. 23. v. 35 
                  All the righteous bloud
that was ſhed vpon the earth, from the bloud of Abel the righteous, vntil
the bloud of their Meſſiah.
               
               5 But though their cruelty and hypocriſie be ſo notoriouſly
knowne,What meanes the people had to diſcerne true Prophets from falſe. as it euen ſeemes to point out the like in the moderne
Romaniſt: yet ſome honeſtly minded will perhaps demand, how
the people of thoſe ages wherein the Prophets liued, could poſſibly
know the truth of their Propheſies, ſeeing for the moſt part
they ſaw a maior part of men in Eccleſiaſtique authority, bent againſt
them. This happily may tempt vnſētled minds to thinke
the Lord had determined his Prophets ſhould haue Caſſandraes
fates, neuer to bee belieued till remedy were paſt. The peoples
miſt
                     •
                  king of their predictions, was in a ſort fatall, yet not neceſſary,
but vpon ſuppoſition of former neglect God ſent them Prophets
for their good, but their wickedneſſe turned his bleſſings into
curſings, their hypocriſie and folly made them ſo blind, that
they could not diſcerne the ſignes of the times, vntill wofull experience,
the fooles onely Schoolemaſter, began to teach it them,
when their time for lore was ended.Prou. 22. v. 3. 
                  A prudent man (ſaith the
wiſe-man,) ſeeth the plague, and hideth himſelfe: but the fooliſh go
on ſtill, and are puniſhed. But wherein doth that prudence conſiſt,
which might haue preuented this plague? ſurely in reading Gods
law and continuall meditation thereon; for this giues wiſdom to
the ſimple. Men in this caſe ſhould haue askedEccleſ. 37. ver. 13. 14. 15. 
                  counſell of their own
heart▪ for there is no man more faithfull vnto thee then it, for a mans
mind is ſometimes more accustomed to ſhew more then ſeauen Watchmen
that ſit aboue in an high Tower. And aboue all this, pray to the
moſt High, that he will direct thy way in truth. Had they thus done
without partiality to their corrupt affections, or without all reſpect
of perſons (in which Chriſtian faith cannot bee had:) Moſes
law had beene a lanterne vnto their feet, for the diſcerning of
true Prophets, and thoſe diſcerned, had beene a light vnto latter ages,
for diſcerning the true Meſſias.
               6 The euidence of this truth,Of later Prophets ſubordinate vnto Moſes.
                   not without cauſe ſo often inculcated,
will better appeare, if wee conſider 
                     •
                  ow moſt propheticall
predictions of particular alterations, were but determinations

of Moſaicall generalities, out of which they grow as branches out
of the ſtocke. As for example, The Lord told Moſes before his
death, and he gaue it to Iſrael for a ſong to be copied out by all,
Deut. 31. v. 16 
                  That when they went a whoring after the Gods of a ſtrange land, forſaking
him he would forſake them, and hide his face from them. After
Ie
                        •
                     oiadahs death, Zechariah his ſonne ſeeing the Princes of Iudah
leauing the houſe of the Lord to ſerue Groues and Idols, albeit
hee were moued as the Text ſaith, by the ſpirit of God, yet onely
applies Moſes generall prediction to the preſent times,2. Chr. 24. v. 20 
                  Thus
ſaith God, Why tranſgreſſe yee the commandement of the Lord? Surely
yee ſhall not proſper, becauſe yee haue forſakeu the Lord, he alſo will forſake
you. Saint Paul himſelfe vſeth his own aduiſe, not the Lords
authority in ſuch points, as were not euidently contained in Moſes
law;1. Cor. 7. v. 10 
                  Vnto the married command not I, but the Lord, Let not the
wife depart from her husband, for ſo Moſes had expreſly commanded.
But to the Remnant, I ſpeake, not the Lord, If any brother haue
a wife that belieueth not, if ſhee be content to dwell with him, let him
not forſake her. And againe, concerning Virgins, I haue no commandement
of the Lord, but I giue mine aduiſe as one that hath obtained
mercy of the Lord to be faithfull; This was his iudgement, and as
he thought warranted by the ſpirit of God; yet hee preſcribes it not
as a generall rule of faith to all, but rather leaues euery man to
bee ruled by his conſcience, and the analogie of Moſes law. So
likewiſe, though God vſe an extraordinary reuelation to inſtruct
Saint Peter in the free vſe of meates forbidden by Moſes; yet hee
perſwades him it by manifeſting the true meaning of another
clauſe of the ſame law; for what hee vttered vpon thisVide lib. 1. Part. 2. Sec. 4. cap. 1. para 1. & lib. 2. Sec. 1. cap. 7. Para. 9. inſtruction
and the experiment anſwerable thereto, was but a further
ſpecification of what Moſes had ſaid,Act. 10. v. 34. 
                  I perceiue of a truth (ſaith
S. Peter) that God is no accepter of perſons, Moſes had ſaid,Deut. 10. v. 17▪ 18. 
                  The
Lord your God is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, mighty
and terrible, which accepteth no perſons, nor taketh reward, who doth
right vnto the fatherleſſe and widdow, and loueth the
                  It was a peculiar operation of Gods ſpirit (the principall end of this Reuelation) to inſtruct Saint Peter that Gods graces were to bee communicated henceforth to the Gentiles. And this was but a branch of that Precept of louing ſtrangers, ſo often ingeminated by their Law-giuer. Had the Iewes ſincerely practiſed this duty towards Aliens, the communication of Gods graces vnto the Gentiles could not haue ſeemed ſo ſtrange vnto them. 
                  ſtranger, giuing
him ſood and rayment.
               
               
                  
7 Theſe paſſages ſufficiently enforme vs, that the extraordinary
ſpirit wherewith the Apoſtles themſelues were aboue the meaſure
of Gods former meſſengers inſpired oftimes, onely made the
ſtems, whether of the tree of life, or of knowledge planted by
Moſes to blow and flouriſh in them by little and little after the
manner of naturall growth, it did not alwayes bring forth new
ones in an inſtant, as the earth did at the firſt creation. Much
more vſually did propheſies during the ſtanding of the firſt temple,
ſpring out of Moſaicall predictions. If wee compare his
writings with latter propheſies, not long before the Babyloniſh
captiuity, though hee had departed this life before their fathers
entred into the land of promiſe, yet hee ſpeakes vnto this laſt
generation as an intelligencer from a farre Country, that great
preparation was made againſt them, but who ſhould bee the executioners
or managers of miſchiefe intended; hee leaues that to
ſuch Prophets as the Lord ſhould raiſe them vp for the preſent.
Ieremy and Ezechiel vpon his admonition, following his direction,
are ſent by God, as it were, to ſcowre the coaſt, to diſcrie when the
Nauy comes, for what Coaſt it is bound, and how neare at hand.
Here had the people faithfully examined their hearts by Moſes
law, whether not guilty of ſuch ſinnes as deſerued the plagues
threatned by him, they had quickly aſſented vnto Moſes writings,
and the Prophets words. For as conſciouſneſſe of their
ſinnes in generall, might cauſe them feare ſome plague or other,
indefinitely threatned by their Lawgiuer, whoſe writings
they beſt belieued: ſo might the diligent obſeruation of their
particular tranſgreſſions, and their progreſſe in them, haue
taught them to preſage the determinate manner of their plagues
and puniſhments foretold by the preſent Prophet. For God in
his vſuall courſe of iuſtice, ſo ſuites his puniſhments to the moſt
accuſtomary habits or predominant ſinnes, as vnto men religiouſly
obſeruant of times and ſeaſons, the growth and proceſſe of
the one will giue a certaine criſis of the other. Beſides euery age
hath peculiar ſignes ſubordinate to the generall predictions of
good or euill foretold by Gods meſſengers, whereby the faithfull
learne to know the day of their viſitation, and as Salomon ſaith,
to hide themſelues (in latibulo altiſsimi) from the plague;) if not by
their hearty repentance, godly prayers, and religious endeauors

to preuent it. And becauſe wee in this age, are not ſo well acquainted
with the particular ſignes of former times, wherein true
Prophets liued, it is hard for any liuing now, though eaſie to all
the faithfull then, to giue any certaine or particular rule how the
truth of their propheſies might haue beene, at leaſt probably
knowne, before the euent did finally and abſolutely approue
them. Would to God wee could diſcerne the ſignes of times
preſent; and the Lord of his infinit mercy giue vs grace to know
the day of our viſitation. But of this argument elſewhere by Gods
aſſiſtance. It ſhall ſuffice in the next place to ſhew that our Sauiours
doctrine was by the ſame meanes to be diſcerued.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               That the Soueraignety giuen by Ieſuites to the Pope is greater then our
Sauiours was.
               1 IT is a Rule in Diuinity [whatſoeuer can rightly
be conceiued as an abſolute perfection, hath reall exiſtence
in the Almighty.] From this notion of
the Deity, ſwimming in the braines of ſuch as in
heart & deed make the Pope their Lord & God,
doe the parties thus affected, vſually take whatſoeuer
power might poſſibly be deligated by God to any, as actually
granted vnto his holineſſe. And thus I imagine ſome Ieſuite
or other, when hee ſhall bethinke himſelfe will except againſt
our diſputes in this preſent cauſe, [Deny you cannot that God
can, and what if hee ſhould expreſly grant ſuch authority as the
Pope now challengeth, would your arguments conclude him
to bee Antichriſt, or the doctrine we teach to be blaſphemous.]
On the contrary, ſeeing our Sauiour Chriſt did neuer either practiſe
or challenge, ſeeing neither Moſes nor the Prophets did euer
ſo much as once intimate ſuch abſolute power ſhould be acknowledged
in that great Prophet, of whome they wrote, wee
ſuppoſe the imagination of the like, in whomſoeuer, cannot bee
without reall blaſphemie. Yet ſuppoſe Chriſts infallibility, and

the Popes,Though the Popes infallibility be made by Ieſuits but equall to Chriſts, yet is his ſoueraigntie much greater in reſpect of Chriſtian people. were; in reſpect of the Church Militant, the ſame: the
Popes authoritie would be greater: or were their authoritie but
equall, his priuiledges with God would bee much more magnificent
then Chriſts. That which moſt condemned the Iewes of
infidelity, in not acknowledging Chriſt as ſent with power full &
abſolute from God his father, were his mightie ſignes and wond
                     •
                  rs,
his admirable skill in Gods word alreadie eſtabliſhed; but
chiefly his ſacred life and conuerſation as it were exhibiting vnto
the world a viſible patterne or cōſpicuous modell of that incomprehenſible
goodneſſe which is infallible. Now, if we compare
his powerfulneſſe in words and workes, with the Popes imperfections
in both; or his diuine vertues with the others monſtrous
vices: to equalize their infallibilities, were to imagine God to bee
like man, and Chriſt (at the beſt) but as his faithfull ſeruant, the
Pope his Minion, his Darling, or ſome of his age. For ſuch is
our partialitie to our owne fleſh, that oftimes (though the Wiſe
man aduiſe to the contrarie) a lewde and naughtie ſonne (in that
hee is a ſonne) hath greater grace and priuiledges, then the moſt
faithfull ſeruant in the fathers houſe. So would the Ieſuites make
God dote vpon the Pope, whoſe authoritie, bee his life neuer ſo
vngracious, if they ſhould denie to bee leſſe then Chriſts in reſpect
of vs, their practiſes enioyned ex Cathedra would confute
them. For much ſooner ſhall any Chriſtian, though otherwiſe
of life vnſpotted, be cut off from the congregation of the faithfull,
for denying the Popes authoritie, or diſtruſting his decrees,
then the Iewes that ſaw Chriſts miracles, for contradicting him
in the dayes of his fleſh, or oppugning his Apoſtles after his glorification.
Nor bootes it ought to ſay, they make the Popes authoritie
leſſe then Chriſts, in reſpect they deriue it from his; rather,
becauſe they euidently make it greater then Chriſts was, it
cannot bee truly thence deriued: or if it could, this onely proues
it to bee leſſe then the other, whileſt onely compared with it, not
whileſt wee conſider both in reſpect of vs: for Chriſts authoritie
as the Sonne of Man, in reſpect of vs, is equall to his Fathers,
whence it is deriued,Iohn 5. v. 
                        •
                     
                   
                  For the Father iudgeth no man, but hath committed
all iudgement vnto the Sonne.
               
               2 But wherein doe they make the Popes authoritie greater

then Chriſts?That our Sauiors doctrine was to be tried by Moſes, and the Prophets writings: but the Popes (if we belieue the Ieſuites) neither by theſe, nor our Sauiours doctrine. Firſt, in not exempting it from triall by Chriſts and
his Apoſtles doctrine, neither of which were to be admitted without
all examination of their truth, for as you heard before Gods
word was firſt vttered in their audience, eſtabliſhed by euident
ſignes and wonders in their ſight, and preſence of whom beliefe
and obedience vnto particulars was exacted. And it is a rule moſt
euident and vnqueſtionable, that Gods word once confirmed and
ſealed by experience, was the only rule whereby all other ſpirits
and doctrines were to bee examined; that not Propheticall viſions
were to bee admitted into the Canon of Faith, but vpon
their apparent conſonancie with the word alreadie written. The
firſt Prophets were to be tried by Moſes, the latter by Moſes and
their Predeceſſors; Chriſts and his Apoſtles, by Moſes and all the
Prophets, for vnto him did all the
                  Act. 10. v. 43 Vide Act. 3. v. 18. 21. 24. 
                  Prophets giue teſtimonie. The manifeſt
experiments of his life and doctrine ſo fully conſonant to
their predictions, did much confirme euen his Diſciples beliefe
vnto the former Canon, of whoſe truth they neuer conceiued poſitue
doubt.
               3 Againe, there had beene no Prophet, no ſignes, no wonders,
for a long time in Iudah, before our Sauiours birth, yet hee neuer
made that vſe either of his miracles, or more then Propheticall
ſpirit, which the papiſts make of their imaginary publike ſpirit: he
neuer vſed this or like argument, to make the people relie vpon
him. How know yee the Scriptures are Gods word? How know
yee that God ſpake with Moſes in the Wilderneſſe, or with your
Fathers in Mount Sinai? Moſes, your Fathers, and the Prophets
are dead, and their writings cannot ſpeake. Your preſent Teachers
the Scribes and Phariſes doe no wonders. Muſt you not then
belieue him whome daily you may behold doing ſuch mightie
workes as Moſes ſaid to haue done; that Moſes, as your fathers
haue told you, was ſent from God; that Gods word is contayned
in his writings: otherwiſe you cannot infallibly beleeue that
there was ſuch a man indeed as you conceiue hee was, much leſſe
that he wrote you this Law, leaſt of all can you certainely know
the true meaning of what hee wrote. Hee that is the onely ſure
foundation of faith, knew that faith grounded vpon such doubts,
was but built vpon the ſand, vnable to abide the blaſts of ordinarie

temptations; that thus to erect their hopes was but to prepare
a riſe to a grieuous downefall, the ready way to atheiſme, preſumption,
or deſpaire. For this cauſe hee doth not ſo much as
once queſtion how they knew the Scriptures to be Gods word:
but ſuppoſing them knowne and fully acknowledged for ſuch, he
exhorts his hearers to ſearch them, ſeeking to prepare their hearts
by ſignes and wonders to embrace his admirable expoſitions of
them. And becauſe the corruption of particular morall doctrines
brought into the Church by humane tradition, would not ſuffer
the generality of Moſes, and the Prophets already belieued to
fructifie in his hearers hearts, and branch out vniformely into
liuely working faith: he laboured moſt to weede out Phariſaiſme
from among the heauenly ſeed, as euery one may ſee, that compares
his ſermon vpon the Mount, with the Phariſes gloſſes vpon
Moſes. If the particular, or principall parts of the law and Prophets,
had beene as purely taught, or as clearely diſcerned, as the
generall and common principles: His Doctrine, that came not
to deſtroy, but to fulfill the law in words and works, had ſhined
as brightly in his hearers hearts at the firſt propoſall, as the ſunne
did to their eyes at the firſt riſing. For all the morall duties required
by them, were but as diſperſed rayes or ſcattered beams
of that diuine light and glory; which was incorporate in him, as
ſplendor in the body of the ſunne. Nor was there any poſſibility
the Iewes beliefe in him ſhould proſper, vnleſſe it grew out of
their generall aſſent vnto Moſes doctrine, thus pruned and purged
at the very roote;Iohn 5. v. 46. 47. 
                  Had yee belieued Moſes (ſaith our Sauiour)
yee would haue belieued me, for he wrote of me, but if yee belieue not
his writings, how ſhall yee belieue my words? For which cauſe, they
were in conſcience bound to examine his doctrine by Moſes, and
the Prophets: otherwiſe they might haue belieued the ſauing
truth,To belieue Chriſt without examination of his doctrine by Moſes had beene neither to belieue Chriſt nor Moſes.
                   but falſly; and vpon decitfull grounds. The ſtronger or
more abſolute credence they had giuen vnto his words or workes
without ſuch examination, the more they had enſnared their
ſoules, and ſet their conſciences vpon the Racke, by admitting a
poſſibility of contradiction betwixt two doctrines both firmely
belieued, without any euidence of their conſonancie, or bothes
conſpiring to the ſame end. The ſpeedier and higher this edification
in Chriſt had beene, the ſooner it might haue ruinated that

foundation which God by Moſes and the Prophets had reared in
Iſrael, vnleſſe this new worke had been orderly ſquared, well proportioned,
cloſely layed, and ſtrongly caemented vnto the former.
In ſecular ſchooles hee is held an vnwiſe anſwerer, that will admit
Socraticall intertogations; for, albeit there appeare no difficultie
in any one propoſed apart, yet in the proceſſe, a reſpondent
may bee eaſily brought to grant concluſions, from which
he knowes not what conſequences may bee drawne, becauſe their
conſonancy with the probleme whoſe defence hee vndertakes, is
not ſo euident nor immediate, as vpon a ſodaine may bee fully
examined. And not examining the conſonancy of euery other
propoſition with the principles of that faculty, whereto the probleme
belongs, the beſt anſwerer liuing may bee made either
grant what hee ſhould not, or deny what ſhould bee granted.
Now Chriſts doctrine was to Moſaicall and Propheticall, as the
concluſion to the premiſſes, or as the corollarie of greateſt vſe
vnto the ſpeculatiue theoreme. Suppoſe then a Iew well skilled
in Moſes and the Prophets, ſhould inſtantly vpon the firſt hearing
of our Sauiours ſermons, or ſight of his miracles, haue admitted
him for ſuch an infallible teacher, vpon tearmes as abſolute
and irreuocable, as the Ieſuite would haue the Pope acknowledged
by all Chriſtians, a good diſputant might eaſily haue
ſtaggered him by theſe or like Socraticall demands; Doe you
ſtedfaſtly belieue Moſes writings for Gods word? God forbid I
ſhould doubt of this: Doe yee belieue this new doctrine confirmed
by miracles as firmely? What if I doe? Doe you know
as certainely, whether both agree aſ well as one part of Moſes writings
with another? What if I doe not? vntill you bee fully reſolued
in this, your beliefe in both cannot be ſound: for in caſe
they ſhould diſagree, the one muſt needes be falſe; and if choice
were giuen you, whether in ſooth would you diſclaime? Here a
wiſe man, that (as the wiſe King ſpeakes) had eyes in his head and
would not be led by a blind ſaith, would haue pauſed a while, and
thought with himſelfe, This is a point that ſhould bee looked to:
for if theſe new doctrines ſhould proue incompatible, as for any
iuſt examination hitherto made, they may, I cannot ſee whether
deſerues more credence; Whiles I conſider Moſes writings, &
call to mind thoſe mighty wonders our fathers told vs, with like

continuall experiments of their diuine truth; nothing can ſeeme
more certaine then they; againe, whiles I behold theſe new miracles,
me thinkes his authority that workes them, ſhould bee as
great as Moſes was; yet if they ſhould happen to diſagree, the one
muſt bee better belieued then the other, or elſe (for ought I ſee)
there can bee no certainety of either; for, if this mans poſſibly may
bee, why might not Moſes doctrine likewiſe be falſe? or if our fathers
were deceiued by his ſignes and wonders, why may not we
bee ſo ſerued by this mans miracles? But if vpon iuſt trial they ſhal
be found fully to agree in euery point (as I truſt they doe) then
doubtleſſe both are from God, and I ſhall ſtedfaſtly belieue this
new doctrine to be diuine, if ſuch as Moſes had foretold; & withal,
more euidently acknowledge, then before I could, that Moſes
ſpake by the ſpirit of the all ſeeing, euerliuing God, if this Ieſus of
Nazareth be in all points like to him, and ſo qualified as hee foretold
the great Prophet ſhould bee. But in the interim till the triall
bee made, it is beſt to lay ſure hold on Moſes and the Prophets.
For prior tempore potior iure: their writings doubtleſſe were from
God, becauſe hitherto they could not bee deſtroyed: time and
they ſhall trie whether Ieſus and his doctrine be ſo or no; whether
he be that great Prophet that ſhould come, or we are yet to looke
for ſome other.
               4 Thus when Iohn Baptiſt ſent his Diſciples to our Sauior with
this very queſtion,Propheticall teſtimonies did more ſufficiently witnes our Sauiour to be the promiſed Meſſias then any miracles. 
                  Art thou hee that ſhould come, or ſhall we looke
for another; The anſwere hee returned againe, (whether for confirmation
of Iohns owne faith, or as the moſt interpreters thinke
of his Diſciples,) was this and no more;Math. 11. ver. 3. &c. & Luk. 7. ver. 18. 19. 22. 
                  Goe and ſhew Iohn what
things yee haue ſeene and heard, that the blind ſee, the halt goe, the
leapers are clenſed, the deafe heare, the dead riſe againe, and the Goſpel
is preached to the poore, and bleſſed is hee that ſhall not be offended in
mee. Theſe or other of their fellow Diſciples had enformed their
Maſter Iohn before of Chriſts healing the Centurions ſeruant by
his word or command, though abſent; of his raiſing the widows
ſonne from death to life; of the rumors ſpread abroad of him
throughout all Iudea, and the regions round about: and vpon
this report, as Saint Luke tels vs, did Iohn make the former ſolemne
demand. But ſome will yet demand, how could he or his
Diſciples bee confirmed by the anſwere giuen them, wherein is

little more then formerly both had heard: for the raiſing vp of
the widdowes ſonne which eſpecially occaſioned their comming
was the greateſt of all in this Catalogue, and yet as great as this,
ſome of the ancient Prophets had done; how could it then proue
him to be the Meſſias? Had he told them as much in plain terms,
they might haue beleeued him, becauſe this great worke did witneſſe
him to be a Prophet, and therefore one that could not lie:
But by this anſwere, how could they gather more, then the people
vpon the aſtoniſhment of that accident, had ſaid? forLuk. 7. v. 16 
                  when the
dead man ſate vp and ſpake, feare, ſaith the Euangeliſt, came on them
all, and they glorified God ſaying, A great Prophet is raiſed vp among
vs, and God hath viſited his people.
               
               5 Yet this obiection, at leaſt the ſolution, confirms the truth
of my former aſſertion, that by his miracles alone conſidered, they
were not bound abſolutely to belieue hee was the Meſſias, but by
comparing them with other circumſtances, or preſuppoſed truths
eſpecially the Scriptures receiued and approued propheſies of the
Meſſias: though no one for the greatneſſe of power manifeſted
in it, could of it ſelfe, yet the frequency of them at that time, and
the condition of the parties on whom they were wrought, might
abſolutely confirme Iohn and his Diſciples; becauſe ſuch they
were in theſe and euery reſpect, as the Euangelicall Prophet had
foretold Meſſias ſhould worke: for this reaſon our Sauiour deliuers
his anſwere in the Prophets owne words, asThough in that 61 of Eſay no expreſſe mention bee made of reſtoring blind men to ſight, yet the Septuagints (as elſewhere) truly expreſſe the meaning of the Hebrew phraſe there vſed. For in the Hebrew Dialect as ſom iudicious Hebrecians obſerue, the deaf or bind are called vinſti, or ligati.
                   elſewhere he
himſelfe did read them, then beſt interpreted by the ſignes of the
time, that Iohn might ſee by the euent, he was in the man of whom
Iſaiah ſpeakesLuk. 4. v. 18. 19. At that time (when Iohns Diſciples came vuto him) he cured many of their ſickneſſes and plagues, & of euill ſpirits) and vnto many blind men he gaue ſight. And leſus anſwered and ſaid vnto them, Goe your wayes, and ſhew Iohn what things yee haue ſeen & heard, that the blind ſee, the halt goe, &c. Luk. 7. ver. 21. 22. 
                  He whom the Lord had annointed to preach the Goſpel
to the poore, whom he had ſent to heale the broken hearted, to preach
deliuerance to the Captiues, and recouering of ſight to the blind, to ſet at
liberty ſuch as were bruiſed, and that hee ſhould preach the acceptable
yeare of the Lord. The multitude of blind men reſtored to ſight in
their preſence was a good preparatiue to diſſolue that ſuffuſion
which had blinded their hearts; the releaſing of ſo many from the
poſſeſſion of vncleane ſpirits, was an ocular demonſtration hee
was the man appointed to preach deliuerance to the Captiues,

plagues & ſickneſſes then cured by him in great abundance, were
ſure pledges to the obſeruant, that hee was the great Phyſition of
body and ſoule ſo often ſpoken of by Iſaiah. Beſides, Iohns mouing
this doubt at that very inſtant, wherein ſuch varietie of miracles;
of all, or moſt of which, his Diſciples one or other, were
eye-witneſſes, did concurre all ſo well ſuited to the ſeuerallIſaiah. 6. v. 1. 2. 3. & caps 35. ver. 5. & cap. 53 ver. 4. predictions
of Iſaiah, and theſe asFor Iohn him ſelfe from the words immediately precedent had been taught by God himſelfe to diſcern Chriſt for the true Meſsias. Compare Iohn 5. v. 33. with Eſay 61. v. 1. & 42. v. 1. & 11. v. 2. 
                  Iohn could inſtruct them, all vnqueſtionably
meant of the Meſſias, was an infallible argument of
Gods vnſpeakable prouidence in thus diſpoſing times & ſeaſons
for their fuller reſolution. The like diſpoſition of the diuine prouidence,
might the ingratefull Nazarites haue obſerued. Firſt,
that when heLuke 4. v. 16 17. &c. ſtood vp to reade in the Synagogue, they ſhould
deliuer the booke of the Euangelicall Prophet before any other;
afterwards, that hee ſhould at the firſt opening light vpon that
very place wherein his late miracles, yet riſe in all mens mouthes,
(as appeareth by SaintMark. 6. v. 2. & Luke 4. 23. 
                  Marke) were foretold: eſpecially, if
they had diligently marked the meanneſſe of their own eſtate, the
manner of his comming thither, moued (as theLuke 4. v. 14. Euangeliſt ſaith)
by the ſpirit, which as theEſaiah 61. v. 1▪
                   Prophet had foretold, was to bee vpon
him, and did manifeſt it ſelfe at that time by his ſtrange eſcaping
his turbulent countrimens deſperate attempts againſt him.
This melodious harmony betwixt his works and Gods word already
eſtabliſhed,Luke. 4. v. 29. 30. and this ſweet diſpoſition of the diuine prouidence,
in cauſing the one ſound in mens eares, whileſt the other
were in their eyes, were in his heauenly wiſdome the beſt meanes
to eſtabliſh true and liuely faith: hee neuer exacted blind obedience,
which who ſo ſuffers to be impoſed vpon him by others, or
ſeekes to enforce vpon himſelfe, ſtriues to put out that light of
nature or inferiour grace, whereby he ſhould view and marke the
wayes of God, alwayes confirming his truth alreadie reuealed,
by experimentes and ſignes of the time proportioned to
them.
               6 From theſe inſtances,In what ſenſe Chriſts works are ſaid to beare witneſſe of him. to omit others, the Reader may reſolue
himſelfe, in what ſence Chriſts workes are ſaide to beare
witneſſe of his Diuinitie, or condemne the Iewes of infidelity.
Both which they manifeſtly did, yet not in themſelues, not as ſeuerally
conſidered or ſequeſtred from all ſignes of times and ſeaſons;
but as they inuolued ſuch concurrence of Gods prouidence

or preſuppoſed ſuch propheticall predictions, as haue beene intimated.
Euery miracle was apt of it ſelfe to breed admiration, &
beget ſome degree of faith, as more then probably arguing the
aſſiſtance of a power truely diuine. But, ſeeing Moſes had forwarned,
God would ſuffer ſeducers to worke wonders for the tryall
of his peoples faith: who beſides him that gaue them this libertie
could ſet them bounds, beyond which they ſhould not paſſe?
who could preciſely define the compaſſe of that Circle, within
which onely Sathan could exerciſe the power he had by that permiſſion?
Bee it granted (which is all, men otherwiſe minded concerning
this point, demaund) that Beelzebub himſelfe with the
helpe of all his ſubiects, can effect nothing exceeding the natural
paſſiue capacity of things created: hee muſt be as well ſeen in the
ſecrets of nature, as theſe ſubtle ſpirits are, that can preciſely define
in all particulars, what may bee done by force of nature, what
not. Hardly can wee (without ſome admonitions to obſerue
their carriage) diſcern the ſleight of ordinary Iuglers: much more
eaſily might the Prince of darkeneſſe, ſo blind our naturall vnderſtanding,
as to make vs belieue (were the light of Gods word taken
away) that were effected by his power, which had bin wroght
by the finger of God, that ſecret conueighance of materials elſe
where preexiſtent, into our preſence, were a new creation of
them.
               7 For mine owne part (vntill I bee by ſome others better inſtructed)
I reſt perſwaded our Sauiour taught the ſame doctrine I
now deliuer; thus much at leaſt, [Such ſignes and wonders might
be wrought by ſeducers, that ſuch as would gaze on them, and
truſt their owne ſkill in diſcerning their trickes, ſhould hardly eſcape
their ſnares]Mark. 13. v. 21. 22. 
                  If any man ſay to you, loe here is Chriſt, or loe
he is there, belieue it not. For falſe Chriſts ſhall ariſe, and falſe Prophets,
and ſhall ſhew ſignes and wonders to deceiue if it were poſsible, the
very elect. And poſſible it was to haue deceiued euen theſe: if it
had been poſſible for theſe not to haue tried their wonders by the
written word. Wherefore neceſſarie it was, that which immediately
followes, ſhould bee written for our inſtruction; But take
you heed (this he ſpake to his elect Apoſtles,) behold I haue tolde you
all things before. Much eaſier it was for ſuch ſeducers to counterfeit
his greateſt wonders with deceitfull ſleights, vndiſcouerable

for the preſent, then in theſe plaine diſtinct predictions of
matters ſo farre aboue the pitch of ordinarie obſeruation, ſo to imitate
him as time ſhould not detect their impoſtures, nor experience
conuince them of open folly, or their ſoothſaying of groſſeſt
falſhood. And conſequently, this very Oracle compared with
the euent, was of more force to eſtabliſh true faith, then any one
miracle hee euer wrought, conſidered alone. Yea this fooliſh expectation
the Iewes had, their Meſſias ſhould worke mighty, but
pompous and vaine-glorious wonders, did make them (not prefaſhioned
in mind to thoſe deſcriptions the Prophets had made of
his firſt comming in humility) vndervalew both his true miracles
and heauenly doctrine. Euen ſuch as are ſaid to haue belieued
in him for the works they had ſeene him doe, ſeemed doubtfull
whether to acknowledge him for ſome great Prophet, or for
their long looked for Meſſias.Iohn 7. v. 31. 
                  Many of the people, (ſaith S. Iohn)
belieued in him, and ſaid, When the Chriſt commeth, will he doe moe miracles
then this man hath done. And as the ſame Euangeliſt elſewhere
tels vs, ſuch as had taſted of his miraculous goodneſſe, and
in huge troupes followed him for their dayly food, that had no
where to lay his head by night,Iohn 6. v. 30. 
                  deſire a further ſigne that they
might ſee and belieue the father had ſent him. His late ſatiſfying fiue
thouſand hungry ſoules with fiue loues, they deemed much leſſe
then Moſes ſuſtaining ſixe hundred thouſand ſo long with Manna,
a meate immediately ſent from Heauen,Expectation of pompous and vaine-glorious miracles the originall of Iewiſh infidelity. not made by multiplication
of ſuch bread as they might haue bought of ordinary Bakers.
Nor doth our Sauiour ſeeke to winne them by outuying
Moſes in multitude or magnificence of his miracles: but by alluring
them to taſte and proue his heauenly doctrine For the experiments
that giue vs the ſeale and aſſurance of liuely faith, muſt of
neceſſity bee within vs, euen in our hearts, and in our ſoules; and
theſe are they. Had this people without miracles beene dicto
audiens, as they were enioyned by Moſes, in that they tooke him
for a Prophet, they might in ſhort time haue knowne what Peter
confeſſed,
                     Iohn 6. v. 68. No man is euer truly conuerted without an internall miracle, wrought in his owne ſoule, vnto this end onely outward miracles ſerue 
                  Verba vitae aeternae habes, Thou haſt the words of eternall
life, whoſe ſweetneſſe once inwardly taſted was much more
then all the miracles that could bee wrought without his hearers
or vpon them. But of ſuch workes theſe proud Iewes neuer dreamed,
as not knowing the Scriptures, nor the vertue of their Meſſias,

who as the Prophets had foretold, was to preach the Goſpell vnto
the poore, to comfort ſuch as mourned in Sion, to whom no miracles
could be more welcome, then ſuch as hee did, for what
could be more acceptable to the blind then reſtitution of ſight,
to the lame, then right vſe of his limmes? what more gratefull
meſſage could bee vttered to the deafe, then ephata, to haue his
eares opened? what to the dumbe, then vntying of the tongue?
what to the poſſeſſed, then to be freede from the tyranny of Sathan,
or his Miniſters? Finally, as theMark. 7. v. 37 Euangeliſt notes, hee did
all things well, and vnto the beſt contentment poſſible of euery afflicted
ſoule, farre aboue the exigence or ſignifications of their
peculiar neceſſities, but further beyond their expectation. In euery
worke he ſhewed his willingneſſe in all, his power to eaſe &
refreſh all that were wearie and heauy laden: but vnto ſuch as
thought themſelues ſo whole and ſound, as no way to neede his
Phyſicke, rather deſirous to feed their curious fancies with ſuperfluous
or vnneceſſary wonders, hee was not willing to giue ſatisfaction
by turning Gods graces into wantonneſſe, or vaine oſtentation
of his power or skill. Another eſpeciall occaſion of
this peoples ſtumbling at this ſtone elect and pretious, was their not
conſidering that many of Moſes greateſt wonders were types,
partly of thoſe glorious miracles which Meſſiah was to worke
ſecretly by his ſpirit, manifeſted onely to their hearts and conſciences,
in whom they were wrought; partly of that his glory
and power, which was outwardly reuealed to his Diſciples,
and might ſo haue beene to more, had they not ſtumbled (as the
Prouerbe is) in the very entrie, and ſo departed from him in
deſpaire, bred from a fooliſh preiudice, that no great
good could be expected from a Nazarite, of parentage,
birth, and education
ſo meane.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               Confirming the truth deliuered in the former Chapter from the very
law giuen by Moſes for diſcerning the great Prophet, further exemplifying
the vſe and 
                     •
                  orce of miracles for begetting faith: The
manner of trying propheſies: Of the ſimilitude betwixt Chriſt and
Moſes.
               1 ASwell for farther diſcouerie of Romiſh blaſphemie,
as ratification of our formar aſſertion:
let vs view with diligence that place of
Moſes, wherein ſuch ſtrict obedience and attention
to the Meſſias doctrine is enioyned,
as no where elſe, ſuch as no other may exact,
without incurring the curſe there threatned
to the diſobedient,Deut. 18. v. 15 16. 17. 18. 19. 
                  The Lord thy God will raiſe vp thee
a Prophet like vnto me from among you, euen of thy brethren. vnto
him yee ſhall hearken. According to all that thou deſiredſt the Lord
thy God in Horeb, in the day of the aſſembly, when thou ſaideſt. Let me
heare the voyce of my Lord God no more, nor ſee this great fire any more
that I die not. And the Lord ſaid vnto me, they haue well ſpoken. I wil
raiſe them vp a Prophet from among their Brethren like vnto thee, and
will put my words in his mouth, and hee ſhall ſpeake vnto them all that
I ſhall command him.
                  The law cited literally ment both of Chriſt and the Prophets. 
                  And whoſoeuer will not hearken vnto my words
which he ſhall ſpeake in my Name, I will require it of him. This propheſie
by ioint conſent of beſt interpreters, as well moderne, as
ancient Pontificians as Proteſtants, may bee truely and literally
applyed to other Prophets, whether of the old or new Teſtament,
according to that meaſure of the ſpirit they had from him,
of whoſe fulneſſe all, as well ſuch as in time went before him, as
thoſe that came after him, had receiued grace for grace. True it
is, if wee rightly value the ſtrict propriety of euery word or clauſe
in the whole context; what all hiſtoricall circumſtauces put together
import, or the full extent of S. Peters
                  Act. 3. v. 23. See Pag. 21. paraphraſe on the
laſt ſentence, it cannot bee exactly fitted vnto any but Chriſt, vnto
whom onely the whole diſcourſe is as fully commenſurable,
as a well made garment to the body that weares it: yet is this no

impediment why the ſame rule taken according to ſome literall
circumſtances, might not vſually ſerue for certaine diſcretion of
true Prophets from falſe, as wee vſe to notifie leſſer, but indefinite
quanties of things, by the known parts of ſome greater meaſure,
commenſurable, if wee take the whole, to ſubſtances of a
larger ſize.
               2 Euident it is out of the literall meaning of this law acknowledged
by all, that Iſrael was ſtrictly bound to hearken vnto ſuch
Prophets as God at any time ſhould raiſe them vp,How farre, & on what terms Iſrael was bound by the former law to heare Gods Prophets. though with
moſt attention and greateſt reuerence to heare the Prince of Prophets.
But the queſtion is, vpon what tearmes, or how farre they
were bound to heare all. Abſolutely, and at firſt propoſall of their
doctrines, without examination of them by the written law? So
might hee that could haue ſet the beſt legge foremoſt, and ſtept
vp ſooneſt into Moſes chaire, haue kept the reſt of his profeſſion
in awe, by thundering out Anathemaes thence, as the Pope doth
from Saint Peters, to all gaine-ſayers, prieſt or people. By what
rule then were true Prophets to be diſtinguiſhed from falſe? By
miracles? Theſe were meanes oftimes effectuall, but (as was intimated)
more vſuall for enforcing men to an acknowledgement of
the truth in generall, then for trying particular controuerſies by,
amongſt true profeſſors: in reſpect of whom they were ſubordinate
to that rule giuen by Moſes in the words immediately following:
Deut. 18. ver. 20. 21. 22. 
                  But the Prophet that ſhall preſume to ſpeake a word in my
Name, which I haue not commanded him to ſpeake, or that ſpeaketh in
the name of other Gods, euen the ſame Prophet ſhal die. And if thou think
in thine heart. How ſhall wee know the word which the Lord hath not
ſpoken? When a Prophet ſpeaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing
follow not, nor come to paſſe, that is the thing which the Lord hath not
ſpoken, but the Prophet hath ſpoken it preſumptuouſly: thou ſhalt not
therefore be afraid of him.
               
               3 Before this or any other part of the law was written, ſomewhat
in proportion anſwerable to it,Miracles in themſelues no ſure rule of trying Prophets before the Law was giuen. did alwayes neceſſſarily concurre
with miracles, for diſtinguiſhing true profeſſors from ſeducers.
When the controuerſie was betwixt Moſes and Pharaohs
Enchanters, the Lord confutes his aduerſaries by an ocular demonſtration
of his power, yet further ratified by their confeſſion
whoſe words were the beſt Oracles that people knew. Theſe faire

warnings concurring with the Egyptians conſciouſneſſe of their
vnmercileſſe practiſes againſt poore Iſrael, ſtill thriuing in deſpight
of policie, could not but witneſſe euen to the moſt vnnaturall
men amongſt them, that the God of Iacob and his ſeed, was
a father to the fatherleſſe, an help to the helpeleſſe, a God of mercy,
and a God of ſtrength, willing and able to right ſuch as ſuffered
wrong, to ſuccour all in diſtreſſe, that with faith and patience
commended their cauſe vnto his patronage. The moſt deuoutly
ſuperſtitious or idolatrous might (at the leaſt) more then probably
haue gathered, that the God of Moſes was greater then any, they
or their cunning Magitians worſhiped. But it is a curioſity incidēt
to ſuperſtitious hypocrites, at their firſt entrāce into Gods ſchole,
ſcrupulouſly to demand full ſatisfaction in all doubtes or difficulties
can be ſuggeſted, and (as if they ſought to obtaine mercy by
way of bargaine, not by faith or fauour) to haue their aſſurance
preciſely drawne, and fully ſealed, before they ſurrender vp the
leaſt part of their intereſt, in any pleaſure, commoditie, or cuſtome
long enioyed, though neuer ſo deſtitute of reaſon. As in
this caſe, imagine ſome Romiſh Schooleman or Ieſuite had been
in ſuch fauour in Pharaohs Court, as that crew is now in too many
Princes; what other collections could wee imagine he would
haue made, but theſe? [How doe theſe wonders proue the God
of Iſrael to be ſo great a God, as Moſes boaſts of? Hee hath more
skill wee ſee in theſe particulars, then the Gods adored by vs Egyptians:
therefore in all? or more, in theſe then the Gods of any
other nation? Theſe were ſtranger works indeed, then we expected
ſuch poore ſilly fellowes could haue wrought: but may
not others by the ſame reaſon work more ſtrange hereafter?] And
to ſpeake the truth, more, that victory Moſes had ouer the Egyptians,
could not proue vnto the naturall man (ſo long as he conſidered
the wonders onely in themſelues, without any concurrence
of other circumſtances or truth (preſuppoſed) then that
this God of Iſrael was greater then any other hee yet knew of,
not greater then any that might manifeſt himſelfe hereafter. Notwithſtanding,
theſe few documents or eſſaies of his power, compared
with the end and occaſions, for which they were exhibited,
were ſo fully conformable to thoſe naturall notions, euen the heathen
had of the Deity, that no man free from paſſion or preiudice

of their meane eſtate, for whoſe good the cunningeſt were
thus foiled at their owne weapon, and the mightieſt among the Egyptians
plagued, but might haue ſeene the finger of a good, a
iuſt, and mercifull God in all their troubles, had hee in ſobrietie
of ſpirit ſeriouſly conſulted his owne heart. And who ſo ſyncerely
had glorified his name, according to this meaſure of knowledge,
ot apprehenſion of his iuſtice to him, no doubt more had
beene giuen daily of this bread of life.
               4 The Iewes I am perſwaded could haue giuen as many inſtances
of Diuels caſt out by
                     Mat. 12. v. 24 The end and manner of our Saniours caſting out Diuels, did ſufficiently teſtifie his diuine power, albeit others had caſt out Diuels by the helpe of Beelzebub.
                   
                  Beelzebub the Prince of Diuels, as
might haue defeated any induction gathered from the manifold
practiſe of ſuch works (conſidered alone) to proue the diuine
powers aſſiſtance. Moſt apparently, moſt malitious, notwithſtanding
was their application of ſuch inſtances to our Sauiour,
whoſe vſuall manner of diſpoſſeſſing wicked ſpirits of thoſe manſions
wherein they had reuelled moſt, did abundanrly witneſſe
hee wrought by the finger of God, who onely was greater then
that ſtrong man whom hee vanquiſhed, bound and ſpoiled of his
goods, ſeruants and poſſeſſions. For though Diuels ſometimes
ſuffer themſelues to be commanded by men, neither of greateſt
wiſdome, beſt place, nor faſhion: yet this they doe (as any well
inſtructed in Gods law, or illuminated with the notions of good
and euill will eaſily diſcerne) alwayes with purpoſe to bring men
vnto a perpetual acknowledgement of ſom diuine power in them,
or to performance of ſome Magicall ſeruice vnto them; no otherwiſe
then cheating mates or cunning gameſters can be well
content to ſuffer bunglers beate them the firſt or ſecond ſet, in
hope to entiſe them holde play longer, or for greater wagers. On
the contrary, the onely fee our Sauiour demanded for all his admirable
cures in this kind, was, the parties ſhould giue ſuch glory
vnto God alone, as that infernal crew moſt deteſted, but which
the law of Moſes ſo highly eſteemed by his calumniators, did purpoſely
require in defiance of Beelzebub, and all the powers of darkneſſe.
The end of euery particular diſpoſſeſſion was ſuch, and the
multitude of legall confeſſions, ſincerely vttered by poore ſoules
ſet free, ſo many as his bittereſt aduerſaries owne conſciences,
could not but witneſſe againſt themſelues, that all the chiefe titles
of Satans wonted triumphes ouer Gods people, were vtterly

ouerthrowne, that hee could not vrge them eyther vnto ſuch
blaſphemies againſt God, or outrages againſt themſelues or their
neighbours, as hee moſt delighted in. Beſides, few or no inſtances
could (I thinke) bee brought of Diuels caſt out in any Magitians
name, in Chriſts they were, and (as it ſeemes) by ſuch as had better
acquaintance, or more alliance with his accuſers, then with
himſelfe. Thus much our Sauiour in my coniecture, intimates in
that ſpeechMath. 12. v. 27 
                  By whom then doe your children caſt them out? therefore
they ſhall be your iudges. Which words I neither would refer
to Chriſts Diſciples, as ſome good Interpreters doe, nor (as others)
vnto ſuch exorciſts as thoſe mentioned, Acts 19. verſe 15.
which attempting to throw out this ſtrong man, were ouerthrowne
in their owne play: but vnto ſuch as Iohn complained
of,Mark. 9. v. 38, 
                  Maſter, wee ſaw one caſting out Diuels in thy name, which followed
not vs, and wee forbad him. This man, though no Diſciple,
was neither ſo ill diſpoſed in himſelfe, nor ſo malitiouſly affected
to our Sauiour as theſe Iewes were, as appeares by our Sauiours
anſwere vnto Iohn;
                  Ver. 39. 
                  Forbid him not, for there is no man that can
doe a miracle in my Name, that can lightly ſpeake euill of me, for whoſoeuer
is not againſt vs, is on our part. In the ſame words hee concludes
his diſputation againſt the Iewes in theMath. 12. v. 30 forecited
place.
               5 Such as this man was, none of Chriſts followers, but rather
a friend (as ſeems) of his accuſers, yet vſing Chriſts not Beelzebubs
Name, to caſt out Diuels, were competent witneſſes of
his heauenly vertue, and his aduerſaries malitious partiality. Many
other circumſtances well knowne then; not now, eſpecially
the long want of miracles more then propheſies, before his comming
did manifeſt their malice to bee more impudent & ſhameleſſe,
then wee in ſuch diſtance of time can diſcerne. That finger
of God (from ſuch ſignes of the time as wee in generall may ſuppoſe)
farre more apparent in his victories ouer Sathan himſelfe,
then in Moſes ouer his Schollers the Enchanters, eſpecially whiles
compared with knowne Propheſies of the Meſsias, did point him
out to bee the womans ſeed, ordained of olde to bruiſe the Serpents
head; to bee the ſonne of man, appointed to erect the euerlaſting
kingdome, foretolde by Daniel, vnto whoſe and other propheſies
he referres his enemies in that ſpeech,Math. 12. v. 28 
                  But if I by the

ſpirit (or as SaintLuke. 11. v. 20▪
                   
                  Luke reades) by the ſinger of God caſt out Diuels,
then is the Kingdome of God come vnto you. Yet were not all his miracles
of this kind thus conſidered, ſo effectuall to confirme the
faithfull, or ſo pregnant to condemne all vnbelieuers, as the former
rule of Moſes. For this cauſe after the former diſpute
ended, he gaue his aduerſaries ſuch a ſigne, as if it did follow▪
would infallibly proue him to bee that great Prophet, Moſes
there ſpeakes of, and conſequently leaue them lyable to Gods
heauy iudgement without excuſe, for not hearkning vnto him. Of
which hereafter.
               6 Here I may once for all conclude, that the power of doing
miracles was as effectuall to aſſure ſuch as did them of ſaluation,
as ſight of them done, was to eſtabliſh ſpectators in ſauing faith.
But the power of caſting Diuels out, or doing greateſt miracles,
was no infallible pledge of ſaluation to ſuch as did them: much
leſſe could the acknowledgement of this diuine power in them,
breede full aſſurance of true faith in others, but onely ſerue as a
meanes to cauſe them relie vpon the Law and Prophets as their
onely rule, and to taſte and proue the bread of life proffered
to them by our Sauiour, which alone could aſcertaine them by
their names were written in the booke of life. But to proceede by
the former rule.
               7 If others by experiments anſwerable to it,Chriſt was to bee acknowledged for the great Prophet by his ſupereminency in thoſe gifts of the ſpirit, whereby former Prophets had beene approued. were knowne to
bee true Prophets: Chriſt likewiſe by his knowne ſupereminency
in that which approued them, was to be acknowledged for the
Prince of Prophets. Now, if wee reuiſe the hiſtorie of the olde
Teſtament, how few Prophets ſhall wee finde endowed with the
gift of miracles; ſuch as were, did exerciſe their power rather among
Idolaters, then true profeſſors. So, when Gods meſſengers
were brought to as open competition with Baals Prieſts, in
the King of Iſraels; as Moſes had beene with the Enchanters, in
Pharaohs Court:1. King. 18. 
                  Elias makes his calling as cleare as the light,
by calling downe fire from heauen, which Baals Prieſts attempting
in moſt furious manner could not effect: but Elias profeſſed
thus much before, as Baals Prieſts, no queſtion had done:
ſo as the euent, anſwering to his prediction, not to the others,
did, by Moſes rule, demonſtrate him to be, them not to be, Prophets
of the liuing God. But when the like controuerſie was to

be tried betweene Zidkiah and his foure hundred complices, on
the one part, and1 King. 22. 
                  Michaiah, on the other before king Ahab,
in whom Elias late miracles, and later threates, had wrought ſuch
a diſtaſt of Baal, and ſuch a liking of the truth in generall, as hee
would not conſult either any profeſſed ſeruant of the one, or open
oppugner of the other; for his future ſucceſſe: Michaiah (as
was obſerued before) appeales to this law of Moſes as moſt
competent Iudge betweene ſuch as iointly did embrace it;Ver. 28. 
                  If
thou returne in peace, the Lord hath not ſpoken by me, as if he had ſaid
(what Moſes there doth) hee hath not put his word in my mouth. And
hauing brought his controuerſie to this triall, he deſires the people
to conteſtate the iſſue thus ioyned [and hee ſaid hearken all yee
people] From this and many like caſes, ruled by the former expreſſe
and pregnant law of Moſes, Ieremy pleades his warrant, being born
downe by the contradictions of Hananiah a profeſſed Prophet of
the Lord, as hee was, but of greater fauour in the Court, becauſe
hee propheſied peace vnto the preſent ſtate, and good ſucceſſe to
the Proiects then on foot;Ier. 28. v. 6. 7. 8. 9. 
                  Euen the Propeth Ieremiah ſaid, So be
it: the Lord ſo doe, the Lord confirme thy words which thou haſt propheſied,
to reſtore the veſſels of the Lords houſe, and all that is carried
Captiue from Babel into this place. But heare thou now this word that
I will ſpeake in thine eares, and in the eares of all the people. The Prophets
that haue beene before mee, and before thee, in times past propheſied
againſt many Countries, and against great kingdomes, of warre,
and of plagues and of peſtilence. And the Prophet which propheſieth of
peace, when the word of the Prophet ſhall come to paſſe, then ſhall the
Prophet bee knowne that the Lord hath truly ſent him. Ezechiel likewiſe
referres himſelfe to the ſame triall amongſt ſuch as were profeſſed
hearers of the word in generall, which they would not
obey in particularEzec. 33. v. 32▪ 33. 
                  And loe thou art vnto them, as a ieſting ſong
of one that hath a pleaſant voice, and can ſing well: for they heare thy
words, and doe them not. And when this commeth to paſſe (for loe
it will come) then ſhall they know that a Prophet hath beene among
them.
               
               8 From theſe debatements,In what caſe Moſes rule for diſcerning true Prophets did hold infallibly true. we may gather in what caſes the
former rule held for certaine. Firſt, negatiuely, it was vniuerſally
true; for hee that propheſied any thing which came not to
paſſe, did ſufficiently proue himſelfe to bee no true Prophet, but

a counterfeit. So did not euery prediction of what afterwardes
came to paſſe, neceſſarily argue it to haue beene from God. Yet
as the force and vertue of many things, not ſuch of themſelues, became
euident from vicinity, or irriation of their contraries: ſo
though God permitted ſome to foretell ſtrange euents for triall
of his peoples faith; yet this power hee reſtrained when the
controuerſie came to a former triall; then hee cauſed the true
Prophets words to ſtand, whiles the predictions of the falſe, and
the Princes bloud which relied vpon them, fell to the ground, like
Dagon before the Arke. So as the fulfilling of what the one, and
fruſtrating of what the other had ſaid, did ſufficiently manifeſt
the one had ſpoken of himſelfe preſumptuouſly; the other, what
the Lord had put into his mouth. Hence is the determination
eaſie, what meanes this people had to diſcern, amongſt true Prophets
which was that Great one, in all things like to Moſes. Firſt
if euents foretold did ſufficiently teſtifie of his diuine ſpirit: his
owne witneſſe of himſelfe would bee authentike, becauſe a true
Prophet could hardly lie, or make himſelfe greater then he was.
This is an argument, which directly confutes ſuch, as acknowledge
Chriſt to haue been a Prophet, ſincere in doctrine; & mighty
in deedes: and yet denie him to be the Prince of that profeſſion,
the great mediator of the new Couenant, both which hee
often auouched. Beſides the quantity of that ſpirit, whoſe ſincere
quality manifeſted him to bee a Prophet, would notifie his
exceſſiue Greatneſſe in that ranke and order, or more directly to
the queſtion.
               9 The great Prophet there ſpoken of was to be knowne by
his ſimilitude with Moſes,
                  
                     Moſes deſcription of the great Prophet in ſtrict propriety of the words vſed by him, peculiar vnto Chriſt. who was as the ſymbole, or proportional
meane betweene him and leſſer Prophets. Others in theſe few
gifts wherein they reſembled their father, came farre ſhort of
him: Chriſt in all, farre exceeded him. Others, were all of Iacobs
line, raiſed vp by Gods appointment, ſo to inſtruct their brethren
in doubtfull caſes, as they ſhould not need to conſult ſorcerers,
or entertaine familiarity with wicked ſpirits. Chriſt (to
omit the eminency of his Propheticall function till hereafter)
beſides this common fraternity with his people was in more
eſpeciall manner Abrahams ſeed, and in particular ſort raiſed vp by
Iehouah his God, by intrinſique aſſumption into the vnitie of his

perſon, not by externall aſſiſtance or impulſion of his ſpirit. Raiſed
likewiſe hee was in a ſtrict and proper ſenſe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , from amid
this people, being as it were extracted out of the pure virgin,
as the firſt woman was out of the man by Iehouahs owne
immediate hand, from his craddle to his croſſe, moſt exactly anſwering
to that delineation of the Great Prophet, and Mediatour
to bee reuealed, which was exhibited firſt in Moſes, when hee
ſtood before the Lord in Horeb, his ſtrange deliuerance from Herodian
butcherie, whiles al the Infant males beſides did periſh, was
fully parallel to the others exemption from Pharaohs cruelty, like
to Moſes hee was, in theNumb. 11. 16. vid. 8▪ Luk. 10. v. 1. &c. number of his Diſciples, inSo Exodu
                           •
                        
                      24. God commands Moſes to come vp to the Lord in the Mount, with Aaron, Nadab and Abihu. and 70. of the Elders of Iſrael, which were to worſhip a farre off while Moſes himſelfe alone went neer vnto the Lord: ſo ſaith S. Peter, God cauſed Chriſt to bee ſhewed openly not to all the people, but to the witneſſes choſen before of God, to ſuch as did eat and drinke with him, after he aroſe from the dead His Diſciples alo
                        •
                      were preſent when God called Chriſt into heauenly places, v. Exod. 24. v. 10. 11. communication
of his ſpirit vnto them, in admitting them to more ſpeciall
participation of his ſecrets, in the peculiar teſtifications of
his familiarity with God, in his faſting, in his transfiguration, in
multitude of miracles. But theſe and the like I leaue to the Readers
obſeruation.
               10The excellency of the great Prophet in reſpect of Moſes gathered from the difference betwixt Moſes and the leſſer Prophets, The peculiar and proper vndoubted notes of the great Prophet
there ſpoken of, will bee moſt conſpicuous in our Sauiour,
if we compare him, firſt, with Moſes, then with ordinary Prophets,
according to that difference the Lord himſelf made between theſe
and Moſes;
                  Numb. 12. v. 6. 7. 8. 
                  If there be a Prophet of the Lord among you, I will bee
knowne to him by a viſion, and will ſpeake vnto him by dreame. My ſeruant
Moſes is not ſo, who is faithfull in all mine houſe. Vnto him will
I ſpeake mouth to month, and by viſion not in darke words, but he ſhall
ſee the ſimilitude of the Lord. Wherefore then were yee not afraide to
ſpeake againſt my ſeruant, euen againſt Moſes? It is ſaid ſignanter, he
ſhould ſee the ſimilitude of God, not God; for as the Euangeliſt
ſaithIohn 1. ver. 18. 
                  No man hath ſeene God at any time; ſo was it told Moſes
from the Lords owne mouth, that hee could not ſee his face and
liue. Yet ſaw this great Prophet more of God, then all the Prophets
beſide. Herein then was Chriſt like vnto him, but farre aboue
him, that hee was in the boſome of his father, (not admitted to
ſee his backe parts onely) and hath declared him to the world. Moſes
from the abundance of his Propheticall ſpirit, ſo perfectly foretold
the perpetuall eſtate of his people, from the Law giuen, to the
time of their Meſſias, as the beſt Prophets may ſeeme to be but his

ſchollers. From participation of that fulnes which was in Chriſt,
hath that Diſciple whom hee loued, farre exceeded Moſes, as well
in the extent, waight and variety of matters foretold, as in the
determinate manner of foretelling them. And I know not whether
if it were poſſible to call both Chriſt and Moſes from heauen,
their preſence (though more glorious then it was vpon Mount
Tabor) would be more forcible to illuminate the Iew or Atheiſt,
then ſerious reading the bookes of Deutoronomy, and the Reuelation,
comparing the one with the Iewes known miſery, the other
with Eccleſiaſticall Stories, the late abominations of the Papacy,
and Romaniſts more then Iewiſh blindneſſe. The one, ſhewes
Moſes to haue been the father of Prophets, the other Chriſt (from
whoſe immenſurable fulneſſe Iohn had that extraordinary meaſur
of the ſpirit) to bee the fountaine of Propheſies, whoſe ſupereminencies
and inexhauſtible fulneſſe, may yet bee made more apparent
by comparing him, not with Moſes the ſymbole or meane;
but with the other extreame, to witte, the ranke of leſſer Prophets.
               11 It is rightly obſerued by the Schoolemen,The gift of propheſie not habituall to ordinary Prophets. 
                  Lumen Propheticum
erat aliqualiter aenigmaticum; theſe ordinary Prophets illuminations
were not ſo euident or diſtinct, as certaine; they diſcerned
rather the proportion then featur of truth, which they ſaw
but as it were through the couer, or in the caſe, not in it ſelf. And
albeit the euent did alwayes proue their anſweres true, oftimes in
an vnexpected ſence: yet could they not alwayes giue ſuch anſweres
when they pleaſed. Nor did the light of Gods countenance
perpetually reſide vpon them, as the Sunnes brightneſſe doth by
reflexion vpon the ſtarres: they had their viciſſitude of day and
night, dayly Eclipſes, ouercaſtings many; their chiefe illuminations
came but as it were by flaſhes. ThusIer. 28. 
                  Ieremy in the late
cited controuerſie dares not aduenture to giue the people a ſign
for confirmation of his doctrine, or other more diſtinct, or determinate
prediction, beſides that of the generall euent, about
which the contention was: That, hee knew (becauſe the Lord
had put it into his mouth,) would in the end condemne his aduerſarie
of preſumption. But after Hananiah had outfaced him
with a ſenſible ſigne of his owne making, breaking the yoake
which he had taken from Ieremiahs necke, on which the Lord had

put it,Ier. 28. v. 10. 12. and boldly auouched in the preſence of all the people [Thus
ſaith the Lord, euen ſo will I breake the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar King
of Babel, from the necke of all nations within the ſpace of two yeeres:] the
word of the Lord came vnto Ieremiah again, and ſends him backe
with this meſſage to his aduerſarie;Ver. 12. 15. 16▪
                   
                  Heare now Hananiah, the Lord
hath not ſent thee, but thou makeſt this people to truſt in a lie. Therefore
thus ſaieth the Lord, Behold, I will caſt thee from off the earth: this yeere
thou ſhalt die, becauſe thou haſt ſpoken rebelliouſly againſt the Lord. So
Hananiah the Prophet died the ſame yeere, in the ſeuenth moneth. Not
long after this euent were both Prince and people of Iudah rooted
out of the land the Lord had giuen them, becauſe contrary to
Moſes admonition, they reuerenced the Prophet that ſpake preſumptuouſly,
and would not hearken vnto the words which the
Lord had put in Ieremiahs mouth: Eliſha likewiſe to whom Elias
had giuen a double portion of his ſpirit in reſpect of his fellowes,
of all the Prophets, (vnleſſe Elias might be excepted) moſt famous
for the gift of miracles, a liuely type of the Meſſias, in rayſing
from death and giuing life, had his ſpirit of Diuination but
by fittes, and needed Muſicke to tune his ſpirites vnto it. He gaue
the barren Shunamite a ſonne, of whoſe death notwithſtanding
hee knew not as the Lord of life did of Lazarus in his abſence: nor
ruled hee by her vnuſuall geſture or ſtrange ſignes of ſorrow, diſtinctly
diuine the true cauſe of her comming: onely, when Gehezi
went to thruſt her away, he ſaid as much as hee knew:2. King. 4. v. 2
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   
                  Let
her alone, for her ſoule is vexed within her, and the Lord hath hid it frō
me, and hath not told it me.
               
               12 But from the perpetuall and internall irradiation of the
Deitie,
                     Iohn Baptiſt more then a Prophet▪ from the vicinity of the great Prophet. bodily or perſonally (ſuch as the Apoſtle ſpeakes) dwelling
in Chriſt, and incorporate in his ſubſtance, this ſpirite of propheſie,
(if without preiudice ſo wee may call it) did neuer waine, was
neuer eclipſed, alwayes moſt ſplendent in him, as light in the
Moone at the full. As hee neuer foretold any thing which came
not to paſſe, ſo could hee at all times when he pleaſed, foretell
whatſoeuer at any time ſhould befall his friends or foes, with all
the circumſtances and ſignes conſequent, or precedent. From
this brightneſſe of his glory did Iohn Baptiſt (who was ſent from
God as the morning ſtarre to vſher this Sunne of righteouſneſſe
into his Kingdome) become more then a Prophet for diſtinct illuminations,

concerning matters to come. A Prophet hee was
in the wombe, and bare witneſſe of that light which enlightneth
euery man that commeth into the world, before hee came into it
himſelfe, or ſaw this bodily Sunne when he could not ſpeake, he
daunced for ioy at his preſence, and at his firſt approach, after
Baptiſme, hee thus ſalutes him;Ioh. 11. v. 29. 
                  Behold the Lambe of God that taketh
away the ſinnes of the world. What Prophet did euer ſo diſtinctly
propheſie of his paſſion, and ſo fully inſtruct the people what
was foreſignified by the ſacrifice of the Paſchall Lambe? yet was
Iohn himſelfe ſecured by the former rule, that he ſpake this by the
ſpirit of the Lord, not out of fancy, not preſumptuouſly. For til
this Baptiſme,
                  Iohn 1. 33. See the ſtimulator chap. 10. Parog. 5. 
                  he knew him not, but he that ſent him to baptize with
water, he ſaid vnto him, Vpon whom thou ſhalt ſee the ſpirit come down
and tarrie ſtill vpon him, that is, hee which baptizeth with the Holy
Ghoſt. And he ſaw it ſo come to paſſe, and bare record that this was
the ſonne of God. From this more then Propheticall ſpirit of Iohn,
manifeſted by this and the like teſtifications of Chriſt, all afterwards
approued by the euent, did the people gather, Chriſt not
Iohn, to be that great Prophet, mighty in wordes and deed. For
after hee had eſcaped the violence offered him at Ieruſalem,
                  Iohn 10. v. 40. 41. 42. 
                  and
went againe beyond Iordan, into the place where Iohn firſt baptized,
Many (ſaith the Euangeliſt) reſorted vnto him and ſaid; Iohn did
no miracle, but all things which Iohn ſpake of this man, were true. And
many belieued in him there; For his workes ſake not doubt, but
for theſe as accompanied with the former circumſtances of place
and Iohns predictions. Iohn had witneſſed hee was the ſonne of
God, mighty in deed and word: and reaſon they had to think his
works were the works of his father, that his priuiledges were the
priuiledges of the onely begotten ſonne, and heire of all things;
When Iohn though a Prophet, and more then a Prophet for his
portion of the diuine ſpirit, was yet reſtrained (by reaſon of his
approach that was before him) from doing ſuch wonders as meaner
Prophets had done. To ſuch as rightly obſerued this oppoſition
betweene Iohns power in words, and his defect in deedes:
or Chriſts ſuperabundant power in both, the caſe was plaine, Iohn
was but theIſai 40. v. 3. 
                  Cryer, the other (in whoſe preſence his authority
decreaſed,) the Lord, whoſe wayes hee was ſent to prepare.
               
               
                  
13 If vnto the variety of Chriſts miracles,The matter of our Sauiours predictions compared with the precedent propheſies of him, declare his Godhead. compared with
Iohns predictions, and other propheſies, wee ioine his arbitrarie
vſuall manner, either of foretelling future, or knowing preſent
matters of euery kind, many ſuch as no Prophet durſt euer haue
profeſſed to belong vnto himſelfe: our faith may clearely behold
the ſure foundation whereon it is built, That hee, euen hee
himſelfe, who had ſaid by the Prophet, [Iſaiah 42. v. 8. 9. 
                  I am the Lord, this is my
Name, and my glory will I not giue vnto another, neither my praiſe
to grauen Images. Behold the former things are come to paſſe, and new
things do I declare: before they come forth, I tell you of them] did at
the fulneſſe of time manifeſt his Glory in our fleſh, by the practiſe
there mentioned, of fortelling things ſtrange, and vnheard of
to the world. Propheſies of former times were fulfilled in his
perſonall appearance, and made their period at the beginning of
his preaching. Whatſoeuer concernes the ſtate of the world,
chiefly the Gentiles, ſince, came from him either as altogether
new, or was refined and renewed by him. For what man among
the Nations, yea what Maſter in Iſrael did from the Law or prophets
conceiue aright ofIohn 3. v. 5. 
                  the new birth, by water and the ſpirit, or
of that euerlaſting Kingdom, whereunto onely men ſo borne, are
heires predeſtinate? Theſe were the new things, which he only could
diſtinctly declare before they came forth.
               
               14 That their Meſſias was to bee this God here ſpoken of by
Iſaiah,
                  Our Sauiours arbitrary diſcouery of ſecrets and predictions of futures contingent fully conſonant to the receiued notions of the Meſſias. dwelling and conuerſing with them in their nature & ſubſtance,
might haue beene manifeſted to the Iewes (had they not
beene hood-winked with pride and malice) from that common
notion, euen the moſt vulgar amongſt them had, of his diuine ſpirit,
in declaring ſecrets, and foretelling things to come. What
one miracle done by Chriſt, did euer take ſo good effect with ſo
great ſpeed in beſt prepared ſpectators, as his diſcouery of Nathaniels
heart in preſence, and outward cariage, in ſo great diſtance?
Iohn 1. v. 49. 
                  Rabbi (ſaith Nathaniel) thou art the ſonne of God, thou art the king
of Iſrael. Though faith be the true gift of God, onely wrought
by his ſpirit; yet, no queſtion, but Nathaniel was more inclined
to this confeſſion from the generall notion of the Meſsias diuine
ſpirit; euen by it hee was capable of that promiſe, habenti dabitur.
And our Sauiour highly approues, and ſo rewards this his
docility;Ver. 50. 51. 
                  Becauſe I ſaid vnto thee, I ſaw thee vnder the figge tree, belieueſt

thou? thou ſhalt ſee greater things then theſe: What were they?
Miracles? Yes, for ſo hee ſaith to him, and the reſt of his hearers:
Verely, verely, I ſay vnto you, hereafter ſhall you ſee heauen open,
and the Angels of God aſcending and deſcending vpon the ſonne of
man. Then miracles, it ſeems, were more effectuall to confirme
faith, then this experience of his Propheticall ſpirit: not of
themſelues, but ioyned with it, or as thus foretold by him, and
foreſignified byGen 28. v. 12. 13. 19. 
                  Iacobs viſion, which compared with the euent,
(whether that were at his aſcenſion or no, I now diſpute not) did
plainely declare him to be the way and the doore, by which all enter
into the houſe of God.
               
               15 Vpon the firſt apprehenſion of like diſcouerie made by
him, did the poore Samaritane woman acknowledge hee was a
Prophet, and vpon his auouching himſelfe to be more then ſo, ſhe
takes him indeed for the expected Meſstas, of whom ſhee had this
conceit before,Ioh. 4. v. 25. 
                  That when hee came, he ſhould tell them all things.
From this preconceiued notion, working with her preſent experience
of his diuine ſpirit, able to deſcrie all the ſecrets of her hart,
ſhee makes this proclamation to her neighbours:Ver. 29. 
                  Come and ſee
a man that hath told mee all things that euer I did: is not he the Chriſt?
Vpon their like experience, fully conſonant to the ſame common
notion or conceit of the Meſsias, did a many of that City conceiue
faith from the womans report; but moe
                  Ver. 42. 
                  becauſe of his own words;
And they ſaid vnto the woman; Now we belieue, not becauſe of thy ſaying:
for wee haue heard him our ſelues, and know that this is indeed the
Chriſt, the Sauiour of the world. From the like, but more liuely
experience of his diſcouering ſecrets, did his Diſciples make that
confeſſion,Iohn 16. v. 30. 
                  Now know wee that thou knoweſt all things, and needeſt
not that any man ſhould aske thee. By this we belieue that thou art come
out from God.
               
               16 The manifeſtation of this Propheticall ſpirit,Our Sauiours Diſciples and Apoſtles did (according to his inſtructions) more rely vpon his predictions then his miracles. did giue life
vnto his greateſt miracles in working faith: for his Diſciples belieued
in him after his reſurrection, becauſe he had foretolde his
reedefying the temple in three dayes ſpace. Which ſpeech of his
the fooliſh Iewes, not knowing his body to bee the true temple,
wherein their God did dwell after a more excellent manner then
betweene the Cherubins, take as meant of the materiall Temple,
which had beene 46. yeeres in building. But (ſaith SaintIoh. 2. v. 22. 
                  Iohn)

Aſſoone as he was riſen from the dead, his Diſciples remembred that
he thus ſaid vnto them: and they belieued the Scripture, and the word
which Ieſus had ſaid. Nor did they compare theſe two together
by chance: for our Sauiour often inculcated this Methode, as
of purpoſe to imprint the former oracle of Iſaiah in their hearts.
To aſſure them of his going to his father, he expreſly tels them:
Iohn 14. 29. 
                  Now I haue ſpoken vnto you before it come, that whē it is come to paſſe
yee might belieue. Foretelling the perſecution of his Diſciples, he
addes,Iohn 16. ver. 4 
                  Theſe things haue I told you that when the howre ſhall come, ye
might remember that I told you them. That glory likewiſe which
God had profeſſed hee would not giue to any other,Foretelling the fulfilling of that Scripture [He that eateth bread with me hath lift vp his heele againſt mee] in Iudas, hee gaue this generall rule, from henceforth tell I you before it come that when it is come to paſſe, yee might belieue that I am He, Iohn 13. v. 19. he foretels
ſhould bee giuen him, and ſo demands it, as if He that did glorifie,
and He that was glorified, were both one:Iohn, 12. v, 28 
                  Father, Glorifie thy
Name. Then came there a voice from heauen ſaying, I haue both glorified
it, and will glorifie it againe. How had hee glorified it before?
By glorifying this great Prophet, who did fully expreſſe, but
farre exceede Moſes, in all thinges wherein former Prophets
did reſemble him, but came farre ſhort of him. When
was hee ſo glorified? At his tranſfiguration vpon Mount
Tabor, which none without ſacrilegious impiety could haue
foretolde, as likely to befall himſelfe, ſaue hee alone, that had,
not as Moſes, onely ſeene the ſimilitude of the Lord, but being in
the forme of God, thought it no robbery to bee equall with him.
Yet this Prophet of whom we ſpeake, though like to his Brethren
in ſhape and ſubſtance, to aſſure them hee ſhould come in the
glory of his father, foretelles his Diſciples that ſome of them
ſhould notMarc. 9. v. 1. Math. 16. v. 28. Luk. 9. 27. 2. Pet. 1. 17. die vntill they had ſeene the Kingdome of God come
with power: which was accompliſhed in that tranſfiguration,
where, as Saint Peter witneſſeth, He receiued of God the father, honour
and glory, when there came ſuch a voyce vnto him from the excellent
glory, This is my beloued ſonne in whom I am well pleaſed; Yea, ſo
wel pleaſed, as for his ſake the world might henceforth know how
ready he was to heare all, that through faith in his name ſhould
call vpon him, euen ſuch as had diſpleaſed him moſt. For this
cauſe, the Codicill annexed to the diuine will and Teſtament here
ſignified, immediately after to be ſealed with the blood of this
beſt beloued ſoune, was that reciprocall duety before intimated in
the Law, Heare him: as is ſpecified byMark. 9. v. 7 Luk. 9. v. 35, Math. 17. v. 5. three Euangeliſts. For more
publike manifeſtation of his Maieſty, as then reuealed but to a

few, was that glorious commemoration of it lately mentioned,
celebrated againe in the audience of the multitude:Iohn 12. v. 30. 
                  This voice
ſaith our Sauiour,Our Sauiour in his laſt con
                     
                        •
                     erence with the Iewes proclaimes himſelfe to bee the great Prophet foretolde by Moſes.
                   
                  came not becauſe of me, but for your ſakes. And in
that place againe, after his wonted predictions of things ſhould
after come to paſſe, as of his victory ouer death, he teſtifies aloud
to all the people that he was the great Prophet foretold by Moſes,
ſweetly paraphraſing vpon his words;Iohn 12. v. 44. 
                  And Ieſus cried and ſaid,
He that belieueth in me, belieueth not in mee, but in him that ſent me.
And if any man heare my words, and belieue not, I iudge him not: for
I came not to iudge the world, but to ſaue the world. Hee did not accurſe
ſuch as would not acknowledge his authority, or derogated
from his perſon or miracles; nor needed he ſo to do:Iohn 12. ver. 48 for he that
refuſeth him, and receiueth not his words, hath one that iudgeth him;
the word which he had ſpoken, it ſhall iudge him in the laſt day. This
was that which Moſes had ſaid;Deut. 18. v. 19 
                  And whoſoeuer will not hearken vnto
my words, which he [the great Prophet] ſhall ſpeake in my Name, I
will require it of him, to wit, in the laſt day of accompts,Iohn 12. v. 49. & 50. 
                  For I
haue not ſpoken of my ſelfe, but the Father which ſent me, hee gaue me
a commandement what I ſhould do, and what I ſhould ſpeake. And I know
that his commandement is life euerlaſting: the things therefore that I
ſpeake, I ſpeake them ſo as the Father ſaid vnto me. VVhat is this,
but that ſpeech of Moſes improued to it ful value, according to the
circumſtances and ſignes of thoſe times, and as it concerned the
Lord and Prince of Prophets?
                     Deut. 18. v. 18. Our Sauiours propheticall ſpirit gaue life to his miracles though his miracles were good preparatiues to beleefe 
                  I will raiſe them vp a Prophet, frō
among their brethren like vnto thee, and will put my wordes in his
mouth, and hee ſhall ſpeake vnto them all that I ſhall commaund
him.]
               
               17 This being the laſt conference our Sauiour was willing
to entertaine with the Iewes, this his laſt farewell giuen in Moſes
words, warrants mee to conſtrue that ſpeech of S. Iohns
                  Iohn 12. v. 37. 
                  [though
hee had done ſo many miracles before them, yet belieued they not on him]
as I haue done the like before: to wit, that not his miracles conſidered
alone, but with Moſaicall and Propheticall writings, or
common notions of the Meſſias thence conceiued, or (eſpecially)
as they concurred with his owne predictions, did immediatly condemne
the Iewes. Vnder the name of workes, his words are comprehended;
ſuch at the leaſt, as foretell his admirable works, or in
generall, all thoſe ſolemne inuocations of his Fathers name, in

ſuch predictions, as had hee not beene the ſonne of God, would
rather haue brought ſpeedy vengeance from heauen vpō his head
then ſuch glorious teſtimonies of his Diuinity. And to me our
Sauiour ſeemes to call his very words works, in that ſpeech to Philip,
                  Iohn. 14. v. 10 
                  Beleeuest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in
me? the words that I ſpeake vnto you, I ſpeake not of my ſelf, but the father
that dwelleth in mee, hee doth the workes. Howſoeuer as all the
workes of God were created by this eternall word: ſo did his
words giue life vnto his greateſt workes; his Diuinations were to
his miracles, as his humane ſoule was to his body. And no queſtion,
but the conception of their faith that heard him preach, was
as immediately from thoſe words of eternall life which iſſued from
his mouth, as ours is from the Word preached by his meſſengers.
To what other vſe then could miracles ſerue, ſaue onely to breed
a praeuiall admiration, and make entrance for them into his hearers
hearts? though his bodily preſence at all times was not; yet
were his vſuall workes in themſelues truely glorious, more then
apt to diſpell that veile of preiudice, commonly taken againſt the
meanneſſe of his perſon, birth, or parentage; had it been meerely
naturall, not occaſioned, through willfull neglect of extraordinary
meanes precedent, and ſtubborne oppoſition to preſent
grace moſt plentifully offered. His raiſing others from death to
life, was more then ſufficient to remoue that offence the people
tooke at that ſpeech,Iohn 12. ver. 32. 
                  If I were lift vp from the earth, I ſhould draw
all men vnto me. To which they anſwered, Wee haue heard out of
the Law, that the Chriſt bideth for euer: and how ſayeſt thou that the
ſonne of man muſt be lift vp? Who is that ſonne of man?
               
               18 To conclude then,The peculiar ſimilitude between Chriſt & Moſes in the office of mediation. his diſtinct and arbitrary foretelling euents
of euery ſort any Prophet had mentioned, many of them
not producible, but by extraordinary miracles, withall including
diuine teſtifications of farre greater glory aſcribed to him, then
Moſes or any Prophet euer challenged, was the demonſtratiue
rule (according to Moſes prediction) whereunto all viſible ſigns
and ſenſible miracles ſhould haue beene reſolued by their ſpectators:
as knowne effects lead contemplators vnto the firſt and
immediate cauſes, on which their truth and being depends. That
Encomium, [This is my beloued ſonne in whom I am well pleaſed, Heare
him;] with the like giuen by Iohn Baptiſt [Behold the Lambe of God

that taketh away the ſinnes of the world] vnto all ſuch as tooke him
for a true Prophet, did more diſtinctly point out the ſimilitude peculiar
to him with Moſes, expreſſed (in the forecited place of Deuteronomy)
literally: though not ſo plainly, as moſt Readers would
without direction obſerue it, ſeeing euen interpreters moſt followed
either neglect the words themſelues, in which it is directly
contained, or w
                     •
                  eſt their meaning.Deut. 18. v. 15 16. 
                  Vnto him ſhall yee hearken,
according to all that thou deſiredſt of the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the
day of the aſſembly. Their requeſt then was; Talke thou with vs,
and we will heart; but let not God talke with vs leſt we die. Here the
whole multitude bound themſelues to hear the word of the Lord,
not immediately from his mouth but by Moſes. For whiles the people
ſtood a farre off, he onely drew neere to the darkeneſſe where God was.
This their requeſt and reſolution, elſewhere more fully expreſſed,
the Lord highly commended;Deut. 5. v. 28. 29. 
                  I haue heard the voice of the wordes
of this people, which they haue ſpoken vnto thee: they haue well ſaide,
all that they haue ſpoken, Oh that there were ſuch an heart in them, to
feare me, and to keepe all my commandements alway, that it might goe
wel with them, and with their children for euer. If we obſerue that increment,
the literall ſenſe of the ſame words may receiue by ſucceſſion
of time, or as they reſpect the body, not the type, both
which they iointly ſignifie; the beſt reaſon can be giuen of Gods
approuing the former petition and Iſraels peculiar diſpoſition at
that time aboue others, will bee this; That as poſterity in reiecting
Vide lib. 1. part. 2. Sect. 3. cap. 11. Parag. 8. 9. 10. 
                  Samuel, reiected Chriſt, or God the ſecond perſon in Trinity:
ſo here the Fathers, in requeſting Moſes might bee their
ſpokeſman vnto God, requeſted that Great Prophet ordained to
bee the author of a better couenant euen that promiſed womans
ſeed, their brother according to the fleſh, to be Mediator betwixt
God and them, to ſecure them from ſuch dreadfull flames as they
had ſeene,Heb 3 v. 3. ſo they would hearken (as then they promiſed) vnto his
words, as vnto the words of God himſelfe, eſteeming him (as the
Apoſtle ſaith) ſo farre aboue Moſes, as he that builds the houſe, is
aboue the houſe. And in the Emphaſis of that ſpeech [Deut. 18. v. 18. 
                  Whoſoeuer
will not hearken vnto my words which he ſhall ſpeake in my name,
I will require it of him:] purpoſely reſumed by Moſes with theſe
threates annexed, as if hee had not ſufficiently expreſſed his mind
in the like precedent, [Vnto
                  Deut. 18. v. 18. 
                  him yee ſhall hearken] the ſame difference,

betweene Moſes and the Great Prophet then meant, is
included which the Apoſtle in another place expreſſeth,Heb. 10 ver. 28 20. 
                  He that
deſpiſeth Moſes Law, dieth without mercy vnder two or three witneſſes.
Of how much ſorer puniſhment, ſuppoſe ye he ſhall be worthy, which treadeth
vnder foot the ſon of God, and counteth the blood of the Teſtament
as an vnholy thing? Vntill the ſoueraignety of the Law and Prophets
did determine; that Encomiū
                   of Moſes did beare date [Deut. 24. v. 10. 
                  There
aroſe not a Prophet ſince in Iſrael like vnto Moſes, whom the Lord knew
face to face:] but vaniſhed vpon the Criers voice, when the kingdom
of heauen beganne to appeare. The Iſraelites to whom both promiſes
were made, did farre exceed all other nations, in that they
had a law moſt abſolute giuen by Moſes, yet to bee bettered by an
euerlaſting Couenant; the former being as an earneſt penny giuen
in hand, to aſſure them of the latter. In reſpect of both, the
name of a Soothſayer or Sorcerer was not to bee heard in Iſrael,
as in the nations which knew not God, much leſſe expected a Mediator,
in whom the ſpirit of life ſhould dwell as plentifully, as
ſplendor doth in the body of the Sunne; from whoſe fulneſſe ere
hee viſibly came into the world, other Prophets were illuminated
(as thoſe lights which rule the night, are by that great light
which God hath appointed to rule the day) at whoſe approch
the Prince of darkeneſſe with his followers, were to auoide the
Hemiſphere wherein they had raigned. In the meane time, the
teſtimonies of the Law and Propheſies, ſerued as a light or candle
to miniſh the terrors of the night. Euen Moſes himſelf, and al that
followed him, were but as meſſengers ſent from God to ſollicite
his people to reſerue their alleageance free from all commerce, or
compact with familiar ſpirits, vntill the Prince of glory came in
perſon.
               19 Thus without cenſure of their opinion, that otherwiſe
thinke or teach,The chiefe grounds of Moſes diſſwading Iſrael for ſo
                        •
                     ce
                        •
                     y, was their expectation of the great Prophet. albeit the continuance of Prophets amongſt this
people, were a meane to preuent all occaſions of conſulting forcerers
or witches: yet the chiefe ground of Moſes diſſwaſion from
ſuch practiſes, acording to the literall connexion of theſe words.
Deut. 18. v. 14. 
                  The nations which thou ſhall poſſeſse, hearken vnto thoſe that regarde
the times, and vnto ſorcerers, as for thee, the Lord thy God hath not ſuffered
thee ſo,] with thoſe following hitherto expounded. [The
Lord thy God will raiſe vp vnto thee a Prophet] was the conſideration

of their late mighty deliuerance by Moſes, the excellency of
their preſent law, and their expectation of a greater law-giuer,
(when the firſt couenant ſhould waxe old, and Propheſies for a
long time faile) vnto ſtrict obſeruance of whoſe precepts they
ſolemnely bound themſelues (as was lately obſerued euer whileſt
the former was eſtabliſhed. That which moues me to embrace
this interpretation, is Balaams Propheſie vttered of Iſrael, conſidered
in the abſtract, as he might haue beene, not as he proued (as
cap. 1. 
                  Malachie ſpeakes of Leuy) or according to the excellency of his
calling in Moſes and in Chriſt, or Gods promiſe, which he for his
part was ready to performe;Num. 23. v. 22. 
                  God brought them (ſaith hee) out of
Egypt, their ſtrength is as an Vnicorne: For there is no ſorcery in Iacob,
nor ſoothſaying in Iſrael, according to this time it ſhall be ſaid of
Iacob, What hath God wrought? And in theGod brought him out of Egypt, his ſtrēgth ſhall be as an Vnicorne. He ſhall eate the Nations his enemies, and bruiſe their bones, & ſhoot them thorow with his arrows. He coucheth & lieth downe as a young Lion, & as a Lion: who ſhall ſtirre him vp? Bleſſed is he that bleſſeth thee, and curſed is he that curſeth thee. I ſhall ſee him, but not now: I ſhall behold him, but not neere. There ſhall come a ſtarre of Iacob, and a ſcepter ſhall riſe of Iſraell, and ſhall ſmite the coaſts of Moah, and deſtroy all the ſonnes of Sheth: And Edom ſhall be poſſeſſed, and Seir ſhall be a poſſeſſion to their enemies: but Iſraell
ſhall do valiantly. He alſo that ſhall haue dominion ſhall be of Iacob, and ſhall deſtroy the remnant of the Citie. Num. 24. v. 8. 9. & 17. 18. 19. Chapter following,
he ioines Iſraels deliuerance from Aegypt, as the foundation or
beginning, and his victory in Chriſt, as the accompliſhment or finiſhing
of his glory. Of that Iacob meant by Balaam, euen wee
Gentiles are a part, euery way as ſtrictly bound by Moſes law, as
Iſrael was to abandon ſoothſaying and ſorcery, but eſpecially
bound to abhorre theſe and like works of darkeneſſe, from that
light, the ſtarre of Iacob hath afforded vs. Theſe two great Prophets
then, Chriſt and Moſes, appointed ſucceſſiuely to declare
Gods will vnto his people, were the maine ſupporters of true religion
in Iſraell, by whoſe doctrine all curious and ſuperſtitious
arts weer to vaniſh. And, if my obſeruation faile not, Iſraell was
much leſſe giuen to ſorcerie after ordinary Prophets ceaſed, then
before: becauſe this great Prophet, the Hope of Iſraell, was at
hand.
               20 The apprehenſion of what we now by long ſearch hardly
find; was more facile to the ancient Iewes, from the knowen conceipts, or receiued traditions thereto pertinent. Before the Law
That our Sauiours authoritie might haue been and was more manifeſtly proued out of Moſes and the Prophets to the ancient: then it can be to the moderne Iewes altogether vnacquainted with the right manner of interpreting prophecies, or ſuch common notions or traditions, as the Scribes and Phariſes had in our Sauiours time.
                  
was written, one they had heard ſhould be ſent from God, a mightie
deliuerer of his people: vnto whome Moſes thought himſelfe
much inferiour, as appeares by his reply to God when he was firſt
ſent to viſit his brethren;Exod. 4. v. 13 
                  Mitte, quaeſo, quem miſſurus es; Send,
I pray thee, whom thou wilt ſend: as if he had ſaid, One thou haſt
appointed from euerlaſting, to declare thy name vnto his brethren,
to ſhew mercie to thy people, and thy power vpon thine
enemies; and I beſeech thee ſend him now, for this is worke befitting
his ſtrength, not my weakneſſe. From the like notions or
receiued opinions, did the Phariſees vnderſtand this place, as
meant of the Prophet that was to come: albeit it may be doubted,
whether they tooke him to be the ſame with the Meſſiah. For ſo
they demaund of Iohn ſeuerallie;Iohn. 1. v. 20. & 21. 
                  Art thou the Chriſt? Art thou
Eliah? Art thou the Prophet? Eliah was plainly diſtinguiſhed from
the Meſſias by Iſaiah, or perhappes they knew the Meſſias
and the Prophet to bee the ſame: yet, like ſtrict examiners,
propoſed theſe two ſeuerall names, to leaue Iohn no euaſion.
It was likewise a truth preſuppoſed and knowne, at leaſt amongſt
theSome interpreters obſerue that S. Iohn doth purpoſely inſert theſe words, Now they which were ſent were of the Phariſees, Ioh. 1. ver. 24. though other Euangeliſts call them onlie Leuites; to notifie vnto vs that this was a traditiō known vnto that ſect. Phariſees, that Eliah, Meſsias, the Prophet, one or all,
ſhould baptiſe. Hence they further queſtion the Baptiſt;Ioh. 1. ver. 25. 
                  Why
baptizeſt thou then, if thou be not the Chriſt, neither Elias, nor the Prophet?
And of himſelfe he ſaith, becauſe He
                  ver. 31. (to wit, the Chriſt)
ſhould be declared to Iſraell, therefore am I come baptizing with water.
This anſwere, with his practiſe permitted by the Phariſees, and
approoued by the people, ſo fullie concurring with the former
notion, but eſpecially his praediction of Chriſts baptizing with the
holie Ghoſt, and (as SaintMat. 3. ve. 11. 
                  Mathew addes) with fire; were moſt
pregnant teſtimonies againſt vnbelieuers, after they had notice of
the Holy Ghoſts deſcending (vpon the ſame day their Law was
giuen) from heauen. for the plentifull manner of effuſion, and
placide illapſe into the ſoules of euery ſort, reſembling water
powred out (as theIoel 2. 28. Prophets phraſe imports;) but for outward
appearance, and inward effects of ardent zeale, like vnto fire. And
likely it is, as well theEx. 13. 21. 22. pillar of fire which enlightened Iſraell by
night, as the cloud that reſted vpon the tabernacle, vnder which
(S.1. Cor. 10. 1. 2. 
                  Paul ſaith) the Fathers being, were baptized in it, were ſuch
praeluding types of baptiſme by water and the Holy Ghoſt: as
the Rocke was of Chrik; or the waters thence flowing, of thoſe
ſprings of life, which iſſue from him to the refreſhing of euery

faithfull thirſtie ſoule. The miſticall ſignifications of ſuch ſhadowes
of good things to come, were ſufficiently knowne to the
Iewes liuing in our Sauiours time. Whence, (as the two iudicious
Commentatours, Bucer and Martyr obſerue) his aduerſaries
mouths were inſtantly ſtopt, at the firſt allegation of thoſe places
the moderne Iewes barke moſt againſt, as not inferring what the
Euangeliſts report their forefathers granted: becauſe theſe had a
peculiar manner of interpreting ſcriptures not acknowledged by
the later, grown out of vſe for the moſt part amongſt Chriſtians,
or rather ouergrowen with the abuſe of luxuriant a
                     •
                  legories, and
miſticall ſenceleſſe, ſences, framed by Monkiſh or rather Apiſh imitation
of orthodoxall antiquity. The weeding out of ſuch
tares, as, through theſe bad husbands ſloath and negligence, haue
abounded in Gods harueſt, will not (we truſt) be either difficult,
or dangerous to the good ſeed primitiue antiquitie hath ſowen:
whoſe generall methode and manner of interpreting prophecies
(though in particulars it often faile; partly, th
                     •
                  ough aduenturous
imitation of ſome Philoſophers in vnfolding heatheniſh
miſteries; partly, through want of skill in the originall tong
                     •
                  es)
holds the iuſt meanes betweene barbarous Poſtillers, and ſome
late preachers, worthily famous, yet too nice and ſcrupulous in
this ſubiect, as ſhall appeare when we come to handle it.
               21 But to finiſh what we had laſt in hand,Our Sauiours prediction of his death and reſurrection, was that which according to Moſes propheſie, did moſt condemne, the Iewes▪
                   the moſt remarkeable,
moſt publique document our Sauiour gaue to vnbelieuers,
of his deſignment to that great office foretold by Moſes, was the
conſtant auouchment of his death and reſurrection, vnto ſuch as
ſo well obſerued his words, that after they had taken away his life,
Mat. 27. v. 63. procured a ſtrong watch to be ſet about his ſepulcher leaſt his
Diſciples ſhould take his body thence, and by emptying it ſeeme
to fulfill his prophecie. Nor did he once onely, butMat 12. v. 39. Math. 16. v. 14 twiſe foretell;
not barely, hee would riſe againe: but that thus much was
preſignified by the Prophet Ionahs three daies impriſonment in
the Whales bellie; thus inuiting them to obſerue all congruitie
of circumſtance betweene the hiſtoricall type already exhibited,
and the ſubſtance prophecied: which methode, as hereafter (God
willing) will appeare▪ is, of all the beſt, for inſinuating faith into
ſuperſtitious, peruerſe, and crooked hearts, otherwiſe moſt vnapt
to recieue truths late reuealed. Since Chriſts glorification, ſundry

impoſtors haue done many works, hardly diſtinguiſhable by ſpectators
from true miracles: but the end of all their purpoſes, which
they ſought thence to perſwade, was alwaies ſo diſſonant to the
vncorrupt notions, praecedent types, or prophecies of the Meſsiah;
as, vnto hearts well ſetled, and ſurely grounded vpon ſcriptures
formerly eſtabliſhed and confirmed, their greateſt wonders
ſeemed but apiſh toyes, howſoeuer difficiles nugae. And ſome of
theſe iuglers, either out of the ſtrength of their owne illuſions, or
vpon the preſumption of their profane skill in deceiuing others,
haue aduentured to foretell their reſurrection; but were not able
to diſſolue the bands of death: their euerlaſting durance in whoſe
priſons, hath openly ſhewed they ſpake preſumptuouſly; that not
Mahomet himſelfe the greateſt of them, was that Great Prophet
foretold by Moſes. What was the reaſon then the Iewes would
not; the Turkes, vnto this day, will not belieue in Chriſt crucified?
For the
                  Act. 13. v. 27. 
                  inhabitants of Ieruſalem, Saint Paul hath anſwered, Becauſe
they knew him not, nor yet the words of the Prophets which are read euerie
Sabbath day, they haue fulfilled them in condemning him. The
ſame apoſtle, thogh indued with the power of miracles, yet in that
place rather vſeth Dauids words, then his owne workes, to proue
Chriſts reſurrection. Of which, that ſaying of his was moſt truly
verified in the obſtinate Iewes,
                  Luk. 16. v. 31. 
                  Not hearing Moſes, and the Prophets
(ſo as to bee mooued by them to true repentance,) neither
were they perſwaded, though this great Prophet of whome they wrote,
was raiſed from the dead againe.
               
               22 Were we well acquainted either with that manner of interpretation,
or thoſe praenotions the Apoſtle ſuppoſed as known,
when he vſed that teſtimonie of the PſalmiſtAct. 13. 33. Pſal. 2. v. 7, 
                  [Thou art my Sonne
this day haue I begotten thee] to prooue our Sauiours reſurrection:
it would not bee hard to perſwade vs Moſes words, hitherto expounded,
were as litterally meant of Gods raiſing his Sonne out
of his Maiden grane as out of his virgin Mothers wombe. And
I make no queſtion but the concluſion of Saint Peters. Sermon,Act. 3. 26. 
                  Vnto you (whom a little before hee had termed children of
the Prophets) hath God raiſed vp his Sonne, were meant by him of
his raiſing Chriſt from the dead. And yet are theſe words but an
application of the former principall text hee there inſiſts vpon
Ve 3. 
                        •
                     r. 2
                        •
                     , 
                  Moſes ſaid vnto the Fathers▪ 
                  The Lord your God ſhall raiſe vp vnto

you a Prophet euen of your brethren like vnto me, ye ſhall heare him all
things whatſoeuer he ſhall ſay vnto you. And vnto this reſurrection
doth the ſtrict propriety of that phraſe [Deut. 18. 15. 
                  from the middeſt of thee]
well agree.Act. 26. 26. 
                  For theſe things were not done in a corner, but in Hieruſalem,
the metropolis of Iudea, not without expreſſe notice giuen
to the rulers. Moſes indeed foretold his owne death, and whatſoeuer
other Prophets, (raiſed vp by God vnto this people,) did
foretell, came ſtill to paſſe: yet none euer foretold his owne raiſing
vp. But ſeeing Chriſts firſt raiſing from the virgins wombe,
though moſt miraculous, was yet more priuate: he forwarned the
world to expect this ſecond, altogether as powerfull, but more
publique. And in it againe hee is like to Moſes raiſed vp by God,
to be a Sauiour of his people, out of that Arke which without diuine
eſpeciall prouidence had beene his tombe. This ſimilitude
amongſt the reſt, betwixt Chriſt and Moſes, as well in their latter
as firſt birth, but eſpecially the notice our Sauiour gaue vnto his
enemies of the latter; hath made them vnwittingly Prophets to
their woe. For ſeeing it hath left their vnbeliefe without excuſe,
Math. 27. 64. 
                  their laſt errour concerning his reſurrection, is become worſe then
the firſt concerning his birth. Neither could haue ſeemed incredulous
(though both moſt miraculous) to this vngratious ſeede
of Iacob; had they looked (as the Prophet willed them;)Iſaiah. 51. v. 1. 
                  vnto the
rocke whence they were hewen, and to the hole of the pit whence they
were digged. The mightie increaſe of Sarahs wombe, no better
then dead, and ſtrange multiplication of Iſaacks ſeed beyond the
poſteritie of all the people with whom he ſoiourned, did but portend
the fruitfull of-ſpring of the Virgins onely ſonne ſhould in
number and dignitie farre ſurmount the ſonnes and daughters of
all the fertile mothers in Iudea, Iſaackes poſteritie had beene great;
yet able to be numbred, by Dauid.
                  Iſai 53. v. 8. 9. 
                  But his generation who ſhall declare,
that was cut out of the land of the liuing?
                  Heb. 11. 12. 
                  Therefore ſprang
there euen of one, and him as dead: (or deſtinated to death, as Iſaack
was; yea of one truely dead, that made his graue with the wicked, as
many as the Starres in the skye in multitude (in dignitie greater,) and
as the ſand by the ſeaſhore innumerable. Mighitier was the encreaſe
of that Rocke wherin he made his graue, whence we are hewen,
then of that pit whence Iſrael according to the fleſh, was digged. His
exaltation ſince, hath beene their fall. For ſeeing they would not

beleeue his predictions, as their Lawgiuer had commanded; the
world may clearely ſee the curſe indefinitely there denounced againſt
all ſuch as would not heare, fulfilled vpon that ſtubborne generation,
according to the full extent of Saint Peters paraphraſe

                     Act, 3. ver. 23. For it ſhal be that euery perſon which ſhall not neare that Prophet, ſhalbe deſtroyed out of the people. vpon it, Not one or a fewe onely were deſtroyed out of the people (as
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, for diſobedience vnto Moſes:) but
the whole people, or nation, were vtterly rooted out of the land. All
which, with all particular circumſtances and ſignes precedent or
enſuing, this great Prophet in his life time had ſo diſtinctly foretold;
that, if wee compare former Prophets with him, they may
ſeeme to haue but dreamed; he alone, that put theſe vnknowne
ditties into their heads, to haue had the perfect skill of right interpreting
their meaning.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               That the method vſed by the great Prophet himſelfe after his reſurrection
for planting faith, was ſuch as we teach: The exceſſe of Anti-chriſts
exaltation aboue Chriſt: The Diametricall oppoſition betwixt
the ſpirit of God, and the Spirit of the Papacie.
               1 
                     MOſes was to bee acknowledged a great Prophet,
becauſe the whole hoſt of Iſrael infallibly knewe
the Lord was with him in all hee did; euery Prophet
after him to bee knowne by the rules which
he had giuen, for their diſcrement; Chriſt Ieſus
to be taken for the great Prophet and mediator of the euerlaſting
couenant, becauſe in words, in workes, in all his wayes, exactly
anſwerable to Moſaicall and propheticall Characters of the
Meſſiah that was to come. This ſweete harmonie of legall types
or ancient prophecies, as well with the whole courſe of his bleſſed
life, as with his ignominious and cruell death, or manner of
his glorious reſurrection, I ſhould either haue eſteemed or
regarded leſſe, had not my Sauiour himſelfe preferred the aſſurāce
of prophetical teſtimonies before the certainty of their ſēſes that
had conuerſed with him in their life time, admitted to conference
with him after his riſing from the dead. For ſo wee read of two Diſciples
which had ſeene his miracles, heard his doctrine, and

acknowledged him for a Prophet, mightie in word and deed: but yet
diſtruſted the report of his reſurrection after it had beene the ſecond
time confirmed by ſuch of their fellowes as had doubted
with them: yea their Maiſter himſelfe had told them as much before
his death. And had he not good reaſon then to vpbraid them
with diſtruſt, hauing now met them as liue-like as they themſelues
were? Was he to them a Prophet, mightie in word and
deed: and yet not able to performe what hee had conſtantly ſpoken?
But what was the chiefe matter of their iuſt reproofe? That
they had not beleeued his wordes, nor giuen due credence to his
workes? Dull, no doubt, they had beene, in not eſteeming better
of both; vnwiſe, in not learning more of him, that taught as neuer
man taught: but (as in them hee teacheth vs) moſt dull and
moſt vnwiſe, euenLuk. 24. 25. 
                  fooles and ſlowe of heart, in not beleeuing all
that the Prophets had ſpoken. Ought not Chriſt to haue ſuffered theſe
things (as if hee had ſaid, Is it poſſible your ignorance in them
ſhould be ſo groſſe, as not to knowe that Chriſt was thus to ſuffer)
and ſo to enter into his glory?
               
               2. You will ſay perchance they did not well in giuing ſo little
attention and credite to the Prophets, whoſe light ſhould haue
led them vnto Chriſt: but now that they haue light on him in
perſon, without their helpe, onely by his ſeeking them, ſhall not
hee who was the end and ſcope of all propheticall writings, teach
them all? He will: but not by relying onely vpon his infallible
authoritie. This aedifice of faith muſt bee framed vpon the foundation
laide by the Prophets. For this reaſon happily our Sauiour
would not bewray himſelfe to be their infallible teacher, vntill he
had made them by euidence of Scripture, by true ſence and feeling
of his ſpirit, beleeue and knowe the truth, which he taught,
to be infallible. Hee had opened their hearts, by opening the
Scriptures vnto them before their eyes were open to diſcerne
his perſon: forLuk. 24. 27. 
                  he began at Moſes and at all the Prophets, and interpreted
vnto them in all the Scriptures the things which were written
of him. Stedfaſt beliefe then of any mans authoritie, muſt
ſpring out of the ſolide experience of his skill, and trueth of his
doctrine. Theſe two diſciples might now reſolue their hearts, that
this was he who Iohn ſaid ſhould baptize with the holy Ghoſt and
with fire; when by the working of his ſpirit,v. 32. 
                  their hearts did burne

within them, whiles hee talked with them, and opened the Scriptures
vnto them. Though before they had receiued Iohn Baptiſts witneſſe
of the trueth, as a tie or feſt to ſtay their fleeting faith;Ioh. 5. 34. 32. 
                  yet
now they would not receiue the record of man; there is another that
beareth witneſſe of him; the ſpirit of trueth, which hath imprinted
his doctrine in their hearts.
               3. Would the Pope who challengeth Chriſts place on earth
amongſt his liuing members, and requires we ſhould beleeue his
wordes, as well as theſe Diſciples did Chriſts, but expound thoſe
Scriptures vnto vs which Chriſt did to them, with like euidence
and efficacie; could hee make our hearts thus burne within, by
opening the ſecret myſteries of our ſaluation: wee would take
him for Chriſts Vicar, and beleeue indeede hee were infallibly aſſiſted
by the holy ſpirit. But ſeeing hee and his followers inuert
our Sauiours methode by calling the certaintie of both Teſtaments
in queſtion, telling vs we cannot knowe them to be Gods
word vnleſſe it ſhall pleaſe this Romane God to giue his word
for them, or confirme their trueth; ſeeing this his pretended
confirmation is not by manifeſting the myſteries of our ſaluation
ſo diſtinctly and clearely as Chriſt did vnto theſe Diſciples,
nor by affoording vs the true ſence and feeling of the ſpirit, in
ſuch ardent manner as they enioyed it, and yet accurſeth vs if we
beleeue not his words as well as they did their Redeemers: wee
may hence take a perfect meaſure of thatA briefe ſuruey of the mouth of blaſphemies ſpokē of by S. Iohn.
                   
                  mouth of blaſphemies
ſpoken of by Saint Iohn, according to all the three dimenſions
contained in the three aſſertions prefixed to the beginning of this
Section. Nor can the reader imagine either any other forepaſſed,
like vnto it; or yet to come, likely to proue more abominable:
if it ſhall but pleaſe him to ſuruay the length and breadth of it,
but eſpecially the profunditie.
               4. The length of it I make that aſſertion; The Pope muſt bee as
well beleeued, as either Chriſt was whileſt hee liued on earth, or his Apoſtles
after his glorification. The breadth; His abſolute authoritie
muſt be for extent as large and ample as Chriſts ſhould be, were he on
earth againe; or that commiſſion he gaue to his Diſciples, Goe
Preach the Goſpell to euery creature: his directions muſt goe foorth
throughout all the earth, and his wordes vnto the endes of the world.
The depth is much greater then the ſpace betweene heauen and

hell. For if you would drawe a line from the Zenith to the Nadir
through the Center, it would ſcarce be a gag long enough
for this monſtrous mouth; ſo wide as hell cannot conceiue a greater.
The depth I gather, partly from the exceſſe of Chriſts worth,
either ariſing from his perſonall vnion with the Godhead; his
ſanctitie of life and conuerſation; or from his hyperpropheticall
ſpirit and aboundant miracles. For looke how much he exceedes
any but meere man in al theſe: by ſo much doth the Pope (though
ſuppoſed as not obnoxious to any crime) make his authoritie and
fauour with God greater then Chriſts, which is the ſemidiameter
of this mouth of blaſphemies. The other part, equall herevnto
in quantitie, but for the qualitie more tainted with the
dregges of Hell, ariſeth from that oppoſition the Popes ſpirit
hath vnto Chriſt; or from the luxury and beaſtly manners of the
Papacie, erected by Satan as it were of purpoſe to pollute the
world with monſtrous ſinnes, and to derogate as much from
mankinde, as true Chriſtianitie doth aduance it: finally to make
the Chriſtian world as much more wicked, as Chriſts Diſciples,
Apoſtles, and faithfull followers are better then the heathen.
Nor doth the Pope exact beliefe onely without miracles or manifeſtation
of a propheticall ſpirit:The chiefe arguments brought by Romiſh Writers to proue the excellency of their church directly contrarie to the principles of Senſe & Nature. but contrary to all notions
of good and euill, common to Chriſtians and Heathens, and as
it were in deſpite of the prophecies that haue deciphered him for
Antichriſt. What heathen Philoſopher could with patience
haue endured to heare, that a diſſolute luxurious tyrāt could not,
though in matters of this life, giue wrong ſentence out of the
ſeate of Iuſtice? The Ieſuites teach it as an Article of faith, that
the Pope, albeit a diſſolute and vngracious tyrant, Mankinds reproach,
the diſgrace of Chriſtianity, cannot poſſibly giue an erroneous
ſentence ex cathedra, no not in myſteries of religion. But
as if it were a ſmall thing thus impudently to contradict nature,
and grieue the ſoules of ingenuous men, vnleſſe they alſo grieue
theirIſa. 
                        •
                     , 
                        ••
                     er. 13. God, ſeeking as it were to croſſe his ſpirit by holding opiniōs
not onely contradictory but moſt cōtrary to his ſacred rules;
they importune the Chriſtian world with tumultuous clamours,
to take that, which the ſpirit hath giuen as the demonſtratiue
character of great Antichriſt, the olde ſerpents chiefe confederate,
for the infallible cogniſance of Chriſts Vicar, the very ſignet

of his beloued Spouſe. Nor will they (I know) though friendly
admoniſhed, ceaſe henceforth to vrge their outworn arguments,
drawne from antiquity, vniuerſality; from that reuerence and allegiance
which moſt Kingdomes of Europe haue for theſe thouſand
yeeres and more borne to the See of Rome; or from the
bloudy victories ouer all other inferiour Churches or priuate ſpirits,
that haue oppugned her. Theſe or like allegations in their
iudgement abundantly proue their Church to be Chriſts beſt beloued,
the Pope to be his Deputy, or rather his corriuall here on
earth, whoſe words ſound as the word of God, and not of Man;
albeit the ſpirit hath plainely foretold, thatReuel. 13. v. 4. 6. 7. 
                  the beaſt which had
his power from the Dragon, and ſhould open his mouth vnto blaſphemies
against God, to blaſpheme his name and his tabernacle, and them
that dwell in heauen, ſhould haue power giuen withall to make warre
with the Saints, and to ouercome them, yea, ouer euery kindred, tongue
and nation, ſo as all that dwell vpon the earth ſhould worſhippe him,
whoſe names were not written in the Booke of life of the Lambe, which
was ſlaine from the beginning of the world.
               
               5 To the Ieſuites bragges, that no viſible Church ſince the
world beganne, did either ſpread it ſelfe ſo farre, or flouriſh ſo
long as theirs hath done; I onely oppoſe that of our Sauiour, Ex
tuo ipſius ore iudicabere ſerue nequam, Thine owne confeſsion ſhall condemne
thee, thou bondſlaue of Sathan. For if the Romiſh Hierarchy
bee or hath been in the worlds eye, the moſt potent and flouriſhing
that euer was: This deſcription of the Beaſts power cannot
agree ſo well to any as vnto it, Nor doth the Scripture any
where intimate the true Church militant ſhould dominere ouer
all Nations, or be ſo triumphantly victorious, as they boaſt theirs
hath beene. To thinke the Antichriſt whom they expect ſhould
in three yeeres ſpace ſubdue as many Nations as haue beene tributary
to the See of Rome, is a conceit that iuſtifies the Iew as
well in his credulity of things to come which are impoſſible, as in
his hypocriticall partiality towards his preſent eſtate, which hee
neuer ſuſpects of Apoſtaſie. Vnto this obſeruation the Reader
may adde other like deſcriptions of this ſcarlet Whore; all ſo fitly
agreeing to the Papacy, as hee that will not acknowledge it for
the Kingdome of great Antichriſt, hath great reaſon to ſuſpect
his heart, that if hee had liued with our Sauiour, he would ſcarce

haue taken him for his Meſſias; nor can the Ieſuites bring any
better reaſons, why the Pope ſhould not be the Antichriſt; then
the Iewes did, why Chriſt ſhould not be the Great Prophet. Yet
this I ſay, not to diſcourage ſuch as doubt whether the Pope bee
that Man of ſinne; or to bring them out of loue with their beliefe,
which may be ſound without expreſſe or actuall acknowledgement
of this truth, not as yet reuealed vnto them: as thoſe
two Diſciples, no doubt, were neither hypocrites nor infidels,
albeit they miſtruſted the report of Chriſts reſurrection; for they
were farther from approuing the practiſes of the Iewes againſt
him, then from actuall acknowledgement of it. If any man thus
doubt, whether the Pope be Antichriſt, ſo hee doe not approue
his hatred and warre againſt Gods Saints, or his other diueliſh
practiſes: Gods peace bee vpon him; and in good time I truſt
his eyes ſhall bee enlightned to ſee the truth in this particular, as
thoſe two Diſciples did in the Article of the reſurrection.
               6 Seeing wee haue proued the Popes authority ſo farre to exceede
Chriſts; it may ſeeme needleſſe to compare it with the
Apoſtles. Yet leſt any Ieſuite ſhould except, that their authority
might be greater after their Maſters glorification, then his was
before: let vs a while examine, what they aſſumed vnto themſelues;
what they gaue vnto the Scriptures before extant.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               That the authority attributed to the preſent Pope, and The Romiſh rule
of faith, were altogether vnknowne vnto Saint Peter
                     •
                   the oppoſition
betwixt Saint Peters and his pretended Succeſſors doctrine.
               1 TO beginne with Saint Peter, the firſt ſuppoſed to
be enſtalled in this See of Rome. It may be preſumed
that this Supremacy ouer his fellow Apoſtles,
were it any, was in his life time, whiles
his miracles were freſh, & the extraordinary efficacy
of his Miniſtery dayly manifeſted, as well knowne amongſt
the faithfull, as the Popes now amongſt Romane Catholickes. If
neceſſary it had beene to acknowledge him, or his ſucceſſors, as a

ſecond Rocke or foundation: the commendation of this doctrine
vnto poſterity, had bin moſt requiſite at the time he wrote
his ſecond Epiſtle,Pet. 2. c. 1. v. 14. as knowing then the time was at hand hee ſhould
lay downe his Tabernacle; when hee endeuoured his auditors might haue
remembrance of his former doctrine, to make their calling and election
ſure. If euer there had beene a fitte ſeaſon for notifying the neceſſity
of the See Apoſtoliques infallibility, all the circumſtances
of this place witneſſe this was it.2. Pet. 1. 14. If any, they to whom hee wrote,
were moſt bound to obey it: Their faith had beene planted by him:
his preſent intent and purpoſe was, more and more to confirm them
in the truth wherein they were in ſome meaſure eſtabliſhed. And being
thus mindfull, will hee not make choice of meanes moſt effectuall
to preuent hereſie or Apoſtaſie? What are theſe then? abſolute
repoſall in his and his Succeſſors infallibility? Had this
beene the beſt rule of faith, hee knew his fault were inexcuſable
for not preſcribing it, to ſuch as moſt willingly would haue vſed
it. His perſonall teſtimony and authority was, I confeſſe, as great
as any mortall mans could be: with his owne eyes he had beheld
2. Pet. 1. 16. 
                  the Maiesty of our Lord Chriſt, whom hee preached vnto them.
If any truſt there bee in humane ſenſes, this Saint of God could
not poſſibly be deceiued. If any credence to bee giuen vnto miracles,
or ſanctity of life: his flocke might reſt aſſured hee would
not deceiue; his workes ſo witneſſe the ſincerity of his doctrine:
or if his eyes were not, in theſe his auditors iudgements, ſufficient
witneſſes of this truth: he further aſſures them, when his Lord receiued
of God the Father.2. Pet. 1. 17. 
                  honour and glory, there came ſuch a voice
vnto him from the excellent glory, This is my beloued ſonne in whome
I am well pleaſed. And this voyce ſayth he, wee heard when it came
from heauen, (being not a farre off) but with him in the mount. If
Saint Peters ſeat or chaire had beene as the Pole-ſtarre, whereto
our beliefe, as the Mariners needle, ſhould bee directed, leſt wee
floate wee know not whether in the Ocean of opinions: were the
boſome of the viſible Church the ſafeſt harbour our ſoules in all
ſtormes of temptation could thruſt into: this Apoſtle was either
an vnskilfull Pilot, or an vncharitable man, that would not before
his death inſtruct them in this courſe for the eternal ſafety of their
ſoules, whoſe bodily liues hee might haue commanded to haue
ſaued his owne. Had perpetuall ſucceſſion in his See, or Apoſtolicall

tradition neuer interrupted, beene ſuch an Ariadnaes
thread, as now it is thought, to guide vs through the Labyrinth
of errors: Such was Saint Peters loue to truth, that hee would
haue ſo faſtned it to all faithfull hearts, as none ſhould euer haue
failed to follow it, in following which hee could not erre. Doubtleſſe
had any ſuch conceit lodged in his breaſt, this diſcourſe had
drawne it out, his vſuall form of exhortation had been too mild,
his ordinarie ſtile too low. This doctrine had beene proclaimed
to all the world, with Anathemaes, as loud and terrible, as the
Canons of any Papiſticall Councell report.
               2 But hee followed no2. Pet. 1. v. 16. ſuch deceitfull fables, when hee opened
vnto them the power and comming of Christ: whoſe Maieſty as hee
had ſeene with his owne eyes, ſo would hee haue others to ſee
him too. But by what light? By Scriptures. What Scriptures?
Peter feede my ſheepe? Nay, but by the light of Propheſie. That is a
light indeed, in it ſelfe, but vnto priuate ſpirites it is no better,
(ſaithVide lib. 2
                        •
                      Sect 2. cap 5. Parag. 6. 
                  Valentian) then a light put vnder a buſhel, vnleſſe the viſible
Church doe hold it out. Where did the viſible Church keep
reſidence in thoſe dayes? In Saint Peter, I trow. How chances it
then hee ſaith not; fixe your eyes on mine that haue ſeene the
glory of the Lord, and the Prophets light ſhall ſhine vnto you?
If by his commendation and propoſall it were to ſhine, hee had
ſaid better thus:2. Pet. 1. v. 19. 
                  Ye do well in that you giue heede vnto me, as to
your onely infallible teacher, that muſt confirme you in the truth of
Propheticall Writings, and cauſe them ſhine in your hearts: but now he
ſaith: Yee doe well in that yee take heede vnto the Prophets, as vnto a
light that ſhineth in a darke place, vntill the day-ſtarre ariſe in your
hearts. This light of Prophets illuminated the eyes of Peters
faith, albeit with his bodily eyes hee had ſeene Chriſts glory. For
ſpeaking comparatiuely of that teſtimony which he had heard in
the Mount, hee addes, Wee haue alſo aſurer
                  
                     Propheticall predictions of Chriſt ſurer grounds of faith, then the liue teſtimonies of the Apoſtles, that had ſeene Chriſt, and conuerſed with him. Amplectendus eſt Commentarius qui interpretatur in hunc modum, habemus ſirmiorem, id eſt, certiorem & compertiorē [rationem] Id enim temporis ſermo Propheticorum ſpectatior erat, & latius receptus quā ſermo Apoſtolorum & Euangeliſtariū. Sasbout in hunc locum.
                   
                  word of the Prophets.
That the Lord had beene glorified in the Mount, his Auditors
were to take vpon his credite and authority; nor could hee make
them to ſee this particular, as hee himſelfe had done: but that
Chriſt Ieſus whom he ſaw glorified in the Mount, was the Lord
of Glory; he had 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a ſurer teſtimony then his bodily
ſenſe, the light of Prophets. This then was the commendations
of his flocke, that they looked vpon it which ſhined as well

vnto them, as him; to all without reſpect of perſons, that take
heed vnto it; able to bring them not to acknowledge Peters infallibility,
but to the day-ſtarre it ſelfe whoſe light would further
aſcertaine them euen of the truth the Prophets and the Apoſtles
taught. For Chriſt is in a peculiar manner, the firſt and the laſt
in the edifice of faith, the loweſt & the higheſt ſtone in the corner,
refuſed by the maſter builders or viſible pillars of the Iewiſh
Church: their faith was not grounded vpon the Prophets, whoſe
words they knew not; and not knowing them, they knew not him:
but vnto ſuch as rayſe their faith by this 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the true
ſquare and line, Chriſt is both the fundamentall Rocke, which
ſupporteth; and the chiefe corner ſtone, that bindes the whole
houſe of God, and preſerues it from clifts and ruptures.
               3. But leaſt his followers might looke amiſſe vpon this prophetical
light,2. Pet. 1. v. 19. rightly eſteemed in the general, Saint Peter thought
it neceſſarie to advertiſe them, not to content themſelues with
euerie interpretation, or accuſtomarie acknowledgement of their
truth, grounded on others relations, reports, or skill in expounding
them, or multitude of voyces that way ſwaying. This had
beene as if a man that hath eyes of his owne, ſhould belieue there
was a Moone or ſtarres, becauſe a great many of his honeſt neighbours
had tolde him ſo, A thouſand witneſſes in ſuch a caſe as
this, were but priuate teſtimonies, in reſpect of that diſtinct
knowledge which euery one may haue that liſt. That the
Lord ſhould preſerue light in Goſhen, when darkeneſſe had couered
the whole face of Egypt beſides, ſeems vnto me leſſe ſtrange,
but more ſenſibly true then before: whileſt I conſider, how in
this age wherein the light of his countenance hath ſo clearely
ſhined throughout thoſe parts of Europe whence the Goſpell
came to vs, Ingolstade ſhould ſtill ſit in darkneſſe, enuironed
with the ſhadow of death. That her great profeſſor Valentian,
borne I take it, within theſe foureſcore yeeres, ſhould grope at
noone day, as if he had been brought forth in the very midnight
of Popery, or died well nigh three hundred yeeres ago. Scarſe
Scotus himſelfe, not Ockam (queſtionleſſe) though ſhut vp in a
priſon, where no light of any expoſitor had euer come, could
haue made a more dunſticall collection of the Apoſtles wordes,

then he hath done.Cum tam ſerio ac grauiter admonuit beatus Petrius, vt hoc inprimis intelligeremus, quod omnis inquit, Prophetia ſcripturae, propria interpretatione non fit. 2. Pet. 1. ali quid è tribus ſignificare voluit, nempe, 1. aut non poſſe vllo modo, ſcilicet certo vel prohabili, exponi ſcripturā propria induſtia & ingenio: Aut. 2. non poſſe certo quidē exponi vnum aut alterum ſcripturae locum ex ingenio proprio, ſine collatione aliorū ſcripturae locorū, cum ea vero collatione poſſe: Aut. 3. non poſſe certo quidem & infallibiliter vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eam expani ſine ſententia ali
                        •
                     uius alterius communis & infallibilit authoritatis, quae proinde in Eccleſia ſit fides Iudex. Sed nec primum nec ſecundum ſignificare voluit, Ergo tertium. Non quidem primum; Nam conſtat multa poſſim Scripturae loca eſſe probabiliter expoſita à ſanctis Patribus, propria eorum ingenij ſolertia at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      induſtria. Non etiam ſecundum, nempe vt non putet aliquis ſe poſſe vnum aut alterum ſcripturae locum ingenio proprio infallibiliter ac certo exponere, non conſultis & collatis alijs Scripturae locis. Nam quis omnino haereticorum hoc putat? Aut quid opus crat hoc tam ſerio admonere? Item, ſi vnum aut alterum Scripturae leci
                        •
                     , ingenio ſenſu
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      proprio interpretari certo nemo poteſt: ſuanto minus locos ſcripturae plures inter quos collatio inſtitui
                        ••
                      Vnde ipſe D. Petriu: Omnis, inquit, Prophetia Scripturae, &c. Non dicit, haec aut illa tantū, ſed abſolutè ac ſine vlla acceptione, omnis Prophetia Scripturae, propria interpretatione non fit. § Reſtat igitur vt tertium illud, quod diximus, ſignificauerit hoc loco D. Petrus: Nempe vt vis at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſapientia huius Apoſtolicae monitionis ſit, Neminem priualo ſuo labore at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      proprio ſtudio, quacun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      demum ratione, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      adeo etiam ne ex ipſa quidem Scriptura, doctrinam ſcripturae certo ac infallibiliter in controuerſis quaeſtionibus intelligere poſſe ſed opus eſſe vt diſcat ex aliqua alia authoritate in Eccleſia communi, per quam ſpiritus ſanctus communiter loquatur, ac omnes doceat. § Nam vt ipſe Apoſtolus ibidem ſubiungit, quemadmodum non authoritate humana, ſed diuina, locuti in Scripturis ſunt ſancti Dei homines, ita etiam non humna ac propria induſtria huius vel illius hominis vllo modo, ne ex ipſa quidem ſcriptura, ſententia ſcripturae certo cognoſcenda eſt, ſed ex aliqua authoritate, item diuina, per quam ipſe ſpiritus ſanctus, qui Scripturae author eſt, ſit etiam certiſſimus Scripturae interpres. Ita fit, vt ſola Scriptura non ſufficiat nobis, ad certo dijudicandas fidei quaeſtiones. Valen. Tom. 3. in Aquinat. diſp. 1. quaeſt. 1. de obiect. fidei. Punct. 7. §. 9. Saint Peter meant one of theſe Three. Firſt,
that there can bee no certaine or probable way of expounding Scriptures
by our proper wit or industry: or Secondly, that one or other
place of Scripture cannot be rightly expounded by humane wit or industry,
but ſo compared they rightly may: or, Thirdly, that the Scriptures
cannot certainely and infallibly be expounded euery where without the
ſentence of ſome other common infallible authority, which in this reſpect
is to be held as iudge of faith in the Church. The Apostle (hee inferres)
did not meane the firſt or ſecond: ergò, the third. So as the
force and wiſdome of the Apoſtolicall admonition, is this; No man by
his priuate induſtry or study, howſoeuer imployed (eyther hee thougt
not of the holy Ghoſts direction or aſſiſtance, or did not except
it,) no not by any ſearch of Scripture it ſelfe, can certainely and infallibly
vnderſtand the doctrine of Scriptures, in controuerſies (of which
Saint Peter in that place ſpeakes not one word) but it is neceſſary
he learne this of ſome other publike authority in the church, by which the
Holy Ghost ſpeakes publikely, and teacheth all. His reaſon followes more
duncticall then the collection it ſelfe: For the Apoſtle ſtraight (ſubions:
As the holy men of God did ſpeake in Scriptures, not by humane authority,
but diuine: ſo likewiſe cannot the Scriptures bee poſsibly vnderſtood
by any humane or priuate induſtry of this or that man, but by
ſome other authority, likewiſe diuine, by which the holy ſpirite which is
the Author of Scriptures, may be likewiſe the moſt certain interpreter
of Scriptures
               
               
                  
4 Had another read thus much vnto me, and bid me read the
Author or his workes wherein it was found: I ſhould preſently
haue named eyther Eraſmus Moriae Encomium, Friſhlins Priſcianus
Vapulans, or ſome ſuch like Comedian, diſpoſed in meriment
to pen ſome olde Dunces part. Cannot the Sun of righteouſneſſe
infuſe his heauenly influence, by the immediate operation
of his ſpirit?Participation of that ſpirit, by which the ſcriptures were written, makes priuate mens interpretations of them not priuate but authentique. or doth his influence want force without coniunction
with this blaſing Comet, or falling ſtarre? Was it not
the authority of this ſpirit which made Saint Peter himſelfe to be
ſo authentique in his doctrine? Is it not the pretended priuiledge
of the ſame ſpirit which exempts the Pope from priuateneſſe, &
makes his authority oecumenical and infallible? Whoſoeuer then
by participation of this ſpirit vnderſtands the Propheſies, eyther
immediately, or expounded by others, whomſoeuer; his conceit
of them, or their right interpretation, is not priuate, but authentique.
AndLib. 2. loc. Theol. cap. 8. Vide Sect. 4. cap 1. Parag. 3. 
                  Canus, though a Papiſt, expreſly teacheth, that the
immediate ground or formall reaſon of ours and the Apoſtles
beliefe, muſt be the ſame; both ſo immediately and infallibly depending
vpon the teſtimony of the ſpirit, as if the whole world
beſide ſhould teach the contrary, yet were euery Chriſtian bound
to ſticke vnto that inward teſtimony which the ſpirit hath giuen
him. Though the Church or Pope ſhould expound them to vs,
wee could not infallibly belieue his expoſitions; but by that ſpirit,
by which hee is ſuppoſed to teach: ſo belieuing, wee could
not infallibly teach others the ſame; for it is the ſpirit onely that
ſo teacheth all. The inference then is as euident, as ſtrong; that
priuate in the forecited place, is oppoſed to that which wants authority,
not vnto publike or cōmon. The Kings promiſe made to
me in priuate, is no priuate promiſe: but will warrant mee, if I
come to pleade before his Maieſty, albeit others make queſtion
whether I haue it or no. In this ſenſe that interpretation of ſcriptures
which the ſpirit affordes vs that are priuate men, is not priuate
but authentique, though not for extent or publication of it
vnto others, yet for the perfection of our warrant in matters of
ſaluation or concerning God. For where the ſpirite is, there is
perfect liberty, yea free acceſſe of pleading our cauſe, againſt
whomſoeuer before the Tribunall ſeate of iuſtice; eſpecially being
wronged in matters of the life to come. To this purpoſe ſaith

our ApoſtleCor. 1. 2. 15 
                  But hee that is ſpirituall diſcerneth all things: yet hee
himſelfe is iudged of no man. In thoſe things wherein hee cannot
be iudged by any; hee is no priuate man but a Prince and Monarch,
for the freedome of his conſcience. But if any man falſly
pretend this freedome to nurſe contentions, or to withdraw his
necke from that yoke whereto hee is ſubject; hee muſt anſwere
before his ſupreme Iudge and his holy Angels, for framing vnto
himſelfe a counterfeit licence without the aſſured warrant of his
ſpirit. And ſo ſhall they likewiſe that ſeeke to command mens
conſciences in thoſe matters, wherein the ſpirite hath ſet them
free. This is the height of iniquity, that hath no temporall puniſhment
in this life: but muſt bee reſerued as the obiect of fierceſt
wrath in that fearefull day; the very Idea of Antichriſtianiſme.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               That Saint Paul ſubmitted his doctrine to examination by the Words
before written. That his doctrine, diſpoſition and practiſe, were quite
contrary to the Romanists in this argument.
               1 SAint Paul, as well as other Apoſtles, had the gift
of miracles, which amongſt Barbarians or diſtreſſed
ſoules, deſtitute of other comfort, likely
to bee wonne to grace by wonders, hee did
not neglect to practiſe: but ſought not to enforce
beliefe vpon the Iewes, by fearefull ſignes, or ſudden deſtruction
of the obſtinate, albeit hee had power to anathematize, not
onely in word, but in deed, euen to deliuer men aliue vnto Sathan.
When hee came to Theſſalonica, hee went as his maner
was into the Synagogue,Act. 17. v. 2. 
                  & three Sabboth daies diſputed with his
countrimen by the Scriptures, opening and alleadging that Chriſt
muſt haue ſuffered, and riſen againe from the dead: and this is Ieſus
Chriſt whom I preach to you. Theſe Iewes had Moſes and the Prophets,
and if they would not heare them, neither would they belieue,
for any miracles: which to haue wrought amongſt ſuch had been
as the caſting of pearles before ſwine. What was the reaſon they
did not belieue? becauſe the Scriptures which hee vrged, were

obſcure? but Saint Paul did open them. Rather they ſaw the
truth, as Papiſts doe, but would not ſee it. They rightly belieued,
whatſoeuer God had ſaid, was moſt true; that hee had ſaid what
Moſes and the Prophetes wrote: and yet Saint Paul taught nothing
which they had not foretold. But that was all one; theſe
Iewes had rather belieue Moſes and the Prophets meant as the
Scribes and Phariſees, or other chiefe Rulers of their Synagogues
taught, then as Paul expounded them: albeit his expoſitions
would haue cleared themſelues to ſuch as without preiudice
would haue examined them. But the Beroeans were of a more
ingen
                     •
                  ous diſpoſition (ſo the wordActs 17. v. 11. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   imports) they were
not vaſſals to other mens interpretations or conceites, but vſed
their liberty to examine their truth.Acts 17. v. 11. 
                  They receiued the word with
all readineſse, and ſearched the Scriptures whether theſe things were ſo
or no. If they beleeued in part before, their practiſe confirms the
truth of our aſſertion, that they were not to belieue the infallibility
of Paul, but of his doctrine, albeit they were well perſwaded
of his perſonall authority. If they beleeued neither in part, nor
wholly, before they ſee the truth of his doctrine confirmed by
that ſcripture which they had formerly acknowledged; their ingenuity
herein likewiſe confirmes our doctrine, and condemnes
the Papiſts of inſolent blaſphemy, for arrogating that authoritie
vnto the Popes decrees, which is onely due vnto Gods word already
eſtabliſhed.
               2 I would demand of any Papiſts, whether the Beroeans did
well or ill in examining Saint Pauls doctrine: if ill, why hath the
ſpirit of God commended them? if well, why is it not lawfull
and expedient for all true Chriſtians to imitate them? Vnleſſe the
Reader bite his lippe, I will not promiſe for him hee ſhall not
laugh at Bellarmines anſwere, albeit I knew him for another Heraclitus,
or Craſſus Agelaſtus, who neuer laughed in all his life ſaue
once when he ſaw an Aſſe feed on thiſtles. Surely he muſt haue
an Aſſes lippes that can taſte, and a ſwines belly that can digeſt
this great Clerks Diuinity in this point.Reſpondeo, etſi Paulus erat Apoſtolus, & non poterat falſam doctrinam praedicare, tamen non conſtabat hoc initio Beroenſibus, nec tenebantur mox credere, niſi prius viderent miracula, aut alias probabiles rationes credendi. Ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      cum Paulus probaret illis Chriſtumex oraculus Prophetarum, merito illi ſcrutabantur Scripturas, an haec ita ſe haberent. Bellar. de verb. Dei, lib. 3: cap. 10. reſp. ad 7. 
                  I anſwere (ſaith he) albert
Paul were an Apoſtle, and could not preach falſe doctrine: thus

much notwithſtanding was not euident to the Beroeans at the firſt, nor
were they bound forthwith to belieue vnleſse they had ſeene ſome miracles
or other probable inducements to belieue. Therefore when Paul
proued Chriſt vnto them out of the Propheticall Oracles, they did well
to ſearch the Scriptures, whether thoſe things were ſo. If Saint Paul
had thought miracles a more effectuall meanes then Scriptures,
for begetting faith in ſuch as acknowledged Moſes and the Prophets:
no doubt hee had vſed miracles rather then their authority.
Or if the Pope cannot expound the ſcriptures, as effectually
and perſpicuouſly as S. Paul did: why doth he not at the leaſt work
miracles? are we bound abſolutely to belieue him, & is he bound
to doe neither of theſe, without which the people of Beroea were
not bound (as Bellarmine acknowledgeth) to belieue Saint Paul?
Wee are if his reaſon be worth beliefe.At Chriſtiani quibus constat Eccleſiam non poſſe errare in explicanda doctrina fidei, tenentur eam recipere, & non dubitare, an haec itaſe habeant. Ibidem.
                   
                  Chriſtians, which know the
Church cannot erre in explicating the doctrine of faith, are bound to
embrace it without questioning, whether the places alleadged bee to the
purpoſe or no. Let ſuch Chriſtians as belieue the Pope cannot erre,
in the name of God belieue what ſoeuer he ſhall teach, without
examination; yet remember withall, that thus to belieue is to
worſhip the dragon, by giuing their names vnto the Beaſt. But vnto
what Chriſtians is the Popes infallibility better known, then S.
Paules was to the Beroeans? Not vnto vs whoſe fathers haue forſaken
him for his Apoſtaſie from God, & taught vs to eſchew him,
as Antichriſt; to hold his doctrine as the very doctrine of diuels.
Vnto vs at leaſt, his Holines ſhould ſeeke to manifeſt his infallibility,
by ſuch means as S. Paul did his euen vnto ſuch as had ſeen his
miracles, and had experience of his power in expounding ſcriptures.
Beſides, Pauls conuerſatiō in al places was continually ſuch
as did witnes him to be a choſen veſſell full of the ſpirit of grace.
He did not make marchandiſe of the word of God, as moſt Popes
doe:2. Cor. 2. v. 17. 
                  but as of ſincerity, but as of God, in the ſight of God, ſo he ſpake
thorow Chriſt▪
                   he did not walk in craftines (yet who greater polititians
then Popes?)2. Cor. 4. ver. 2. 
                  Nor did he handle the word of God deceitfully: but
in declaration of the truth, he did approue himſelf to euery mans conſcience
in the ſight of God. This one amongſt others, he acounts as an
eſpeciall motiue to perſwade men of his heauenly calling, in that
he did not preach himſelfe, but Chriſt Ieſus and himſelfe their ſeruant
for Ieſus ſake. For ſo our Sauiour had ſaid:Iohn 7. v. 18. 
                  He that ſpeaketh of

himſelfe, ſeeketh his owne glory. The Pope (that we might know him
to be Chriſts oppoſite) ſeekes almoſt nothing elſe, nothing ſo
much, as to be abſolute Lord ouer all other mens faith. If this any
Ieſuite will deny: let him define what Prince amongſt the nations,
what Tyrant in the world, did euer challenge greater ſoueraignty
in affaires of this life, then the Pope doth in all matters
whatſoeuer concerning the life to come?
               3 But it may be Bellarmine was either afraid or aſhamed of this
anſwere: wherefore he addes another (as wiſe) to keepe it from
bluſhing.Addo etiam, quod etſi haereticus peccat dubitando de authoritate Eccleſiae in quam per baptiſmum regeneratus eſt, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eſt eadem conditio haeretici, qui ſemel fidem profeſſus eſt, & Iudaei aut Ethnici, qui nunquam fuit Chriſtianus: tamen poſito hoc dubio, & hoc peccato, non malè facit ſcrutando, & examinando, an loca ſcripturae & Patrum, à Concilio Tridentino prolata, ita ſe habeant, modò id faciat intentione inueniendi veritatem non calumniandi. Deberet quidem ille ſine examine recipere doctrinam Eccleſiae. tamen melius eſt, vt examinando praeparetur ad veritatem, quàm negligendo remaneat in ſuis tenebris. 
                  I adde (ſaith he) albeit an Heretike ſin in doubting of the
Churches authority, into which he hath beene regenerate by Baptiſme,
(nor is the caſe the ſame in an Heretike, which hath once made profeſſion
of faith, and in a Iew or Ethnique which neuer was Chriſtian:) yet
this doubt (which is a ſin) being ſuppoſed, he doth not amiſſe in ſearching
and examining, whether the places alleadged by the Trent Councell out
of ſcriptures or fathers, be true or pertinēt; ſo he do this with an intent to
finde the truth, not to calumniate. A man at the firſt ſight wold deem
Bellarmine, for his own part at leaſt, had giuen vs leaue to examine
the Popes doctrine by ſcripture: but that, as you heard before, hee
abſolutely denies: nor will he (I am ſure) pawne his hat, that hee
which ſearcheth the Scriptures and Fathers alleadged, & cannot
find any ſuch meaning in eyther, as the Trent Councell would
thence infer, ſhalbe freed by their Church from hereſie: although
he be not ſo vnciuill, as to calumniate the Pope, but onely (ſaluâ
reuerentiâ) ingenuouſly profeſſe, that he thinks on his conſcience
the ſcripture meant no ſuch matter as the Councell intended.
This none of their church dare promiſe: for dubius infide (by their
doctrine) eſt haereticus: he that doubts after ſuch an authentique determination,
is condēned for an heretike: and yet without ſuch aſſurance
of beeing freed from hereſie, this permiſſion of reading ſcriptures
is not worth God a mercy, ſeeing he muſt at length be conſtrained
to belieue the ſcripture ſaith iuſt ſo as the Pope ſaith; albeit his
priuat conſcience inform him to the contrary; ſo that by reading
them, he muſt either wound his own conſcience, more then if the
vſe of thē had bin denied him; or els vſe thē but as a court fauor or
grace beſtowed vpō him by the Pope, for which he muſt in good
maners yeeld his full aſſent to his doctrine, with infinit thanks for
his bounty. Howſoeuer (if he be doubtful in their tenents) he may

not reade the Scriptures with Caluin, Beza, or any of our writers
expoſitions, or in any edition ſaue ſuch as they approue, or with
the Rhemiſh animaduerſions or gloſes, or according to the analogy
of that faith wherein the Ieſuites haue catechized him. So that
the reading of ſcriptures, if their opinions be erroneous (as wee
hold the Popes deciſions are) ſerues to as good purpoſe for confirming
one of their catechizing in the right faith, as the ringing
of belles doth to bring a melancholy man out of ſome fooliſh
conceit, which runnes in his mind: both of them will belieue
their former imaginations (though neuer ſo bad) the better, becauſe
the one thinkes the belles ring, the other, that the ſcriptures
ſpeake, iuſt ſo as hee imagines. This Bellarmine cannot
diſſemble in his next words: Bound hee is to receiue the Churches
doctrine without examination: but better, hee were prepared vnto the
truth by examining, then by neglecting it to perſiſt ſtill in his blindneſſe.
His meaning in plain Engliſh, is this; He and his fellowes
could wiſh reformed Churches would all come off at once, and
belieue as Romaniſts doe, without all examination, whether they
belieue as Chriſtians, or Magicians: but if we will not be ſo forward
as they could wiſh wee were, they could in the ſecond place
be very wel content to admit vs into their Church again, though
after a yeere or twoes deliberation, rather then looſe our company
for euer.
               4 The learned Doctor Whitakers, of famous memory, out of
the former place gathered theſe two corollaries: [Euery doctrine
is to bee tried by Scripture: The Apoſtle taught nothing but what
might haue beene confirmed out of Moſes and the Prophets.] Sacroboſcus
reply to theſe Orthodoxall collections, confirmes me in that
conceit I entertained of Romiſh Schoolemen, when I firſt began
to reade them. They ſeemed to me then, much more now, to
handle matters of greateſt moment in diuinity, after the ſame faſhion
(for all the world) nimble Artiſts doe Philoſophicall Theorems
in the Schooles, whiles they are courſed by ſuch as would
triumph in their diſgrace. Bee the argument brought, in it ſelfe
neuer ſo good or forcible to euince the contradictory to their
tenents: yet if the opponent in his inference of what was laſt denied,
chance but to omit ſome petty terme or clauſe impertinent
to the maine queſtion, or make his propoſitions more improbable

by framing them more vniuerſall then he needs, occaſion will
quickly be taken to interrupt his progreſſe and put him off, eſpecially
(if the Anſwerer bee ſo well prouided) with ſome ſhew of
inſtance to the contrary, or abſurditie likely to follow, if all were
true his Antagoniſt would ſeeme to prooue. Nor doe I cenſure
this as fault in youth, or whileſt we are in Ariſtotles forge, ſo the
fire be out of vs when wee come into the ſanctuary. But iuſt in
this manner doth the Mimicall Ieſuite reply to the former truth.
Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      praetermittenda puto duo corollaria, quae ex hoc malo argumento peius collgit doctor iſte. Vnum eſt: Omnem doctrinam ex ſcripturis eſſe diiudicandam. Alterum. Apoſtolos nihil praedicaſſe, quod non ex ſcripturis propheticis confirmari poſſet. quaero enim num illi probetur haec conſecutio? Paulus praedicans Athenienſibus, ſuam doctrinam confirmauit teſtimonio Arati poetae, rectèque feciſſent Athenienſes, ſi Aratum ſcrutati fuiſſent, an ita ſe haberet: Ergo omnis doctrina ex poc
                        •
                     is d
                        •
                     udicanda eſt. Sacro Boſ. def. Decr. Tre. pag. 122. 
                  I demaund (ſaith he) whether the Doctour would approue this conſequence;
Paul preaching to the Athenians confirmed his Doctrine
with the teſtimonie of the Poet Aratus, and the Athenians had done
well if they had ſought whether Aratus had ſaid ſo or no: therefore all
Doctrines must be iudged by Poets. But what if the Beraeans practiſe
conſidered alone, or as Ieſuites doe Scriptures, onely Mathematically,
doe not neceſſarily inferre thus much? The Learned
Doctors charitable minde would not ſuffer him to ſuſpect any
publique profeſſor of Diuinitie, as Sacroboſcus was, could bee ſo
ignorant in Scriptures, as not to conſider (beſides the different eſteeme
of Prophets, and Poets amongſt the Iewes) what Saint
Paul had elſe where expreſſely ſaid;Act. 26. ve. 22. 
                  I obtained helpe of God, and
continue vnto this day, witneſſing both vnto ſmall and great, ſaying
none other things, then thoſe which the Prophets and Moſes did ſay
ſhould come. Vnleſſe he could haue proued Chriſts reſurrection &
other articles of Chriſtian faith, out of Moſes and the Prophets,
the Iewes exceptions againſt him had beene iuſt. For they were
bound to reſiſt al Doctrines diſſonant to their ancient ordinances,
eſpecially the aboliſhment of Rites and Ceremonies which Paul
laboured moſt; as knowing the Lawgiuer meant they ſhould continue
no longer then to the alteration of the Prieſthood: but in
whoſe maintenance his adverſaries ſhould haue ſpent their bloud
whiles ignorant they were, without default, of the Truth Paul
taught, as not ſufficiently prooued from the ſame authority, by
which their lawes were eſtabliſhed. NorVide c. 8. pa. 6. was any Apoſtle, either
for his miracles, or other pledges of the Spirit that hee could
communicate vnto others, to bee ſo abſolutely beleeued in all
things during his life time, as Moſes and the Prophets writings.
For ſeeing the gift of miracles was beſtowed on hypocrites, or
ſuch as might fall from any gifts or grace of the ſpirit they had:

though the ſpectators might beleeue the particular concluſions:
to whoſe confirmation the miracles were fitted, yet was it not
ſafe, without examination, abſolutely to rely vpon him, in all
thinges that had ſpoken a diuine truth once or twice. In that he
might be an hypocrite or a diſſembler, for ought others, without
euidence of his vpright conuerſation, and perpetuall conſonance
to his former Doctrine, could know, he might abuſe his purchaſed
reputation to abet ſome dangerous errour. Nor doe our aduerſaries
(though too too credulous in this kinde) thinke themſelues
bound to beleeue reuelations made to another, much leſſe
to thinke that he which is once partaker of the Spirit ſhould for
euer bee infallible. Vpon theſe ſupporters the forementioned
Doctours reaſon (which the Ieſuite abuſeth to eſtabliſh the
Churches authoritie) ſtands firme and ſound;Credo id verum eſſe quod Deus dicit, quia ille dicit, nec aliam vllam quaero rationem; non audeo vero homini tantum tribuere, ne ipſum Deo aequalem faciam. Whitt. q. 5. c. 8. arg. 3. citante Sacrobo. p. 122 
                  I abſolutely belieue
all to be true, that God ſaith, becauſe hee ſaith it, nor doe I ſeeke any other
reaſon: but I dare not aſcribe ſo much vnto man, leaſt I make him equall
to God; for God alone, and hee in whom the Godhead dwelleth
bodily, is immutably iuſt and holy. Many others haue continued
holy and righteous, according to their meaſure vntill the
end: but who could be certaine of this beſides themſelues? no
not they themſelues alwayes. And albeit a man that neuer was
in the ſtate of grace, may oft times deliuer that Doctrine which
is infallible: yet were it (to ſay no worſe) a grieuous tempting
of God to rely vpon his Doctrine as abſolutely infallible, vnleſſe
we know him (beſides his skill or learning) to be alwayes in ſuch
a ſtate, Though both his life and death bee moſt religious, his
Doctrine muſt approue it ſelfe to the preſent age, and Gods prouidence
muſt cōmend it to poſterity Nor did our Sauiour though
in life immutably holy & for doctrine moſt infallible, aſſume ſo
much vnto himſelfe before his aſcenſion, as the Ieſuits giue to the
Pope. For he ſubmitted his doctrine to Moſes & the Prophets writings.
And ſeeing the Ieſuits make leſſe acount of Him then the
Iewes did of Moſes; it is no maruell if they be more violently miſcaried
with enuious or contemptuous hatred of the Diuine
truth it ſelfe, then the Iewes were againſt our Sauiour or his doctrine.
Theſe euen whē they could not anſwere his reaſons, drawn
from ſcriptures receiued, though moſt offēſiue to their diſtemperate
humor, were aſhamed to cal Moſes & the prophets authority

in queſtiō, or to demand him, how do ye know God ſpake by thē?
Muſt not the Churches infallibility herein aſſure you? andSo Canus argueth before cited L. 2. Sect. 3. c. 4. parag 8. if it
teach you to diſcerne Gods word from mans, muſt it not likewiſe
teach you to diſtinguiſh the diuine ſenſe of it from humā? This is
a ſtraine of Atheiſme, which could neuer finde harbor in any profeſſing
the knowledge of the true God, before the brood of Antichriſt
grew ſo fluſh, as to ſeeke the recouery of that battaile
againſt Gods Saints on Earth, which Lucifer their Father and
his followers loſt againſt Michael and his holy Angels in Heauen.
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               A briefe taſte of our aduerſaries blaſphemous and Atheiſticall aſſertions
in this argument from ſome inſtances of two of their greateſt
Doctours Bellarmine and Valentian: That if faith cannot be perfect
without the ſolemne teſtification of that Church, the raritie of
ſuch teſtifications will cauſe infidelitie.
               1 FOR a further competent teſtimonie of blaſphemies
in this kinde wherewith wee charge the
Church of Rome, let the Reader iudge by theſe
two inſtances following, whether the Chriſtian
world haue not ſucked the deadlieſt poyſon that
could euaporate from the infernall lake, through Bellarmines and
Valentians pennes. Valentian, as if he meant to outflout the Apoſtle
for prohibiting all beſides the great paſtor Chriſt Ieſus, for
being Lords ouer mens faith, will haue an infallible authoritie
which may ſit as Iudge and miſtreſſe of all controuerſies of faith, and
this to be not the
                  Quod ſi igitur aliquam humanam auctoritatē diuina aſſiſtentia infallibilem, magiſtram ac iudicem omnibus quaeſtionibus fidei, extare neceſſe eſt, vt ſuperius, §. 1. probauimus: ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      verò ea eſt illorum hominum propria, qui olim diuinam doctrinam aut verbo, aut ſcripto tradiderum, & vita 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſunt vt iam etiam probatum eſt▪ reſtat, vt viuet haec auctoritas, ſucceſſione ſemper inter fidiles praeſens, quemadmodum in aſſertione noſtra poſuimus. Valē, Tō. 3. in Aquin diſ. 1. q. 1 de obiect. fidei punct. 7. §. 11. vide annot. Lib. 2. Sect. 4. Cap. 5. §. 21. 
                  authoritie of one or two men deceaſed, not peculiar
to ſuch as in times paſt haue vttered the diuine truth either by mouth or
pen, and commended it vnto poſteritie; but an authoritie continuing
in force and ſtrength amongſt the faithfull throughout all ages, able perſpicuouſly
and openly to giue ſentence in all controuerſies of faith. Yet
as theſe Embaſſadors of God deceaſed, cannot bee Iudges: ſhall
they therefore haue no ſaye at all in deciding controuerſies of

faith? You may not thinke a Ieſuite would take Ieſus name in
vaine: he will neuer for ſhame, exclude his Maſter for hauing at
leaſt a finger in the gouernment of the Church: Why, what is his
office? or what is the vſe of his authoritie, regiſtred by his Apoſtles
and Euangeliſts? Not ſo little as you would weene. For, his
ſpeeches, amōgſt others that in their life time haue infallibly taught
diuine truthes by mouth or pen, may be conſulted as a witneſſe or written
law in caſes of faith, but after a certaine ſort and manner, eyther
to ſpeake the truth, or ſomewhat thereto not impertinent, as ſhalbee declared
in due place. The place he meanes, is, where hee diſputes
whether the Pope be bound to conſult other authoritie beſides
his owne, or vſe any meanes to ſearch the truth before hee paſſe
ſentence ex cathedra, that is, before he charge the whole Chriſtian
World to beleeue his deciſion. This he thinkes expedient, but ſo
farre forth onely, as if it pleaſe his Holineſſe to enioyne the beleefe
of ſome particular point vpon the whole World, all muſt
beleeue that he hath conſulted Scripture and antiquitie as farre as
was requiſite for that point, as you ſhall after heare.
               2 That in ſuch controuerſies he includes the meanes of knowing
Scriptures to bee the word of God: is euident out of his owne
words in the forecited place. For the knowledge of Scriptures
he would haue to be an eſpeciall point of faith, yet ſuch as cannot
be proued by Scripture, but by this liuing and ſpeaking authoritie,
as he expreſſely contends in the eleuenth paragraph of
the ſame queſtion. His concluſion is; If it bee neceſſarie, there
ſhould be ſome authoritie, though humane, yet by diuine aſſiſtance
infallible, to ſit as miſtreſſe and Iudge in all controuerſies
of faith, and not to be appropriated to any deceaſed, as is alreadie
proued: it remaines that it be alwaies liuing in the Church, alwayes
preſent amongſt the faithfull by ſucceſſion, hee meanes, of
Popes. Thus you ſee the preſent Pope muſt be Iudge, and Chriſt
& his Apoſtles muſt be brought in as witneſſes. And yet whether
there were ſuch a Chriſt, as Saint Mathew, Luke, Marke, and Iohn
tell vs there was; or whether the Goſpels which goe vnder their
names be Apocryphall, and that of Bartholmewes onely Canonicall;
we cannot know but by the Popes teſtimonie: ſo that in
the end, he is the onely Iudge, and onely witneſſe, both of Chriſt,
the Apoſtles, and their writings, yea of all diuine truthes, at leaſt

aſſiſted with his Biſhops and Cardinals. Which Bellarmine though
otherwiſe a great deale more wary then Valentian, hath plainly
vttered.Tertium teſtimonium eſt Concilij Triden
                        ••
                     i 
                        •
                     eſſ
                        •
                     r Can. 1 vbi additur anathema negantibus ſep
                        ••
                      eſſe vera & propria Sacramenta: quod teſtimoniū etiamſi nullum haberemus aliud deberet ſuſſicere. Nam ſi tollamus authoritatem preſetis Eccleſiae, & praeſentis Concilij, in dub
                        •
                     um reuocari poter
                        •
                     
                     ̄e omnium aliorum Conciliorum decreta, & tota fides Chriſtianae. Semper enim haec fuit conſuetudo apud Chriſtianos, vt exortas controuerſias definirent Epiſcop
                        •
                     , qui tunc viuebant. Et praeterea omnium Conciliorum veterum, & omnium dogmatum firmitas pedet ab authoritate praeſentis Eccleſiae. Non enim habemus teſtimonium infallibile, quod Cōc
                        •
                     lia ill
                        •
                      fuerint, & legit mo fuerint, & hoc aut illud deſinur
                        ••
                     t, niſi quia Eccleſia, quae nunc eſt, & errare non poteſt, ita ſentit & docet: quod enim hiſtorici quidam meminerint eorum Conciliorum, non p
                        •
                     est parere fidem, niſi humanam, cui poteſt ſubeſſe falſum. Bellarm. De 
                           •
                        ff. Sac. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. 
                  Vnleſſe (ſaith he) it were for the authoritie of the preſent
Church of Rome (he meanes the Trent Councell) the whole Chriſtian
faith might be called in queſtion; ſo might all the acts and decrees
of former Councels: his reaſon was, becauſe wee cannot know
theſe antiquities but onely by tradition and hiſtoricall relation,
which are not able to produce diuine, firme, infallible
faith.
               3 Thus whileſt this great Clerke would digge a pit for the
blinde (for he could not hope (I thinke this blocke ſhould ſtumble
any that hath eyes in his head) he is fallen into the middeſt of
it himſelfe: by ſeeking to vndermine vs, he hath ſmothered himſelfe
and buried the cauſe he was to maintaine. For if without the
Trent Councels teſtification wee cannot by diuine faith beleeue
the Scriptures, or former Councels, to bee of diuine authoritie;
How can ſuch as were borne within theſe thirty yeares, beleeue
that Councell it ſelfe, which ended aboue fortie yeares agoe?
Few this day liuing were auditors of the Cardinals and Biſhops
deciſions there aſſembled; not hearing them, their faith muſt
needs be grounded vpon heare ſayes. Againe, if it bee true, the
Scriptures cannot be knowne to be diuine, but by the authoritie
of the preſent viſible Church: if this Church doe not viua voce
confirme all Chriſtians in this fundamentall truth, their faith can
not be diuine, but humane. VVhat the Pope or his Cardinals
thinke of theſe pointes, is more then any liuing knowes vnleſſe
they heare them ſpeake, and then it may be a great queſtion whether
they ſpeake as they thinke. Pope Alexander the ſixts deciſions
ſhould haue beene negatiue, like the fooles boult in the
Pſalme, There is no God, No Chriſt, No Goſpell, for ſo his meaning
might haue beene interpreted, as they ſay dreames are, by contraries,
ſeeing hee neuer ſpake as hee thought. Laſtly, if the Trent
Councel were ſo neceſſary for the confirmation of Scriptures and
other Orthodoxall writings, how deteſtable was your Cleargies

backwardneſſe to affoord the Chriſtian World this ſpirituall cō
                  fort?
For, whether feare it were the Popes authoritie ſhould bee
curbed, or meere ſlouth and neglect of matters diuine that did
detaine them; their ſhifts to put the Emperour off, the Reader
may ſufficiently coniecture fromQuod tam longum fuerit mearum literarum 
                        •
                     nteruallum & de quaeſtione corrigendi anni ſilentiū, mallem equidem aliqua mea deſidia vel obliuione commiſſum fuiſſet, & in eo culpam agnoſcere ſolicitè
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      deprecari, quam ex veſtra, hoc eſt, ſacerdotum Romanorum (vt liberè loquar) negligentia, verā cauſam afferre, quos nimirum 
                        •
                     rigere & nihil minus quam de cogendo concilio cogitare video, cuius, vt ſpes me prius acuebat, & incitabat, ſic deſperatio iampridem hebetat at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      retardat: quos enim maximè in publicam Eccleſiae ſalutem excubare, atque eius dignitatis 
                        •
                     ugendae nullam occaſionem praetermittere oportebat, abijs Concilij rei ſalutaris, & ſi vnquam ali
                        •
                     s, nunc maximè neceſſariae, mentionem fieri non alio tempore video, quam cum bellum aut geritur inter Principes Chriſtianos, aut impendet. Sepul. Lib. 2. Epiſt 27. In his pijs deliberationibus, illud pervetuſtum, & iuſtiſſimum decretum inprimis vſurpari renouarique ſolet, ne quae haereſis in aliquo rite coacto Concilio priorum ſententijs damnata in dubium ac diſputationem reuocetur. Cuius ſacroſancti decreti ea vis eſt, vt hoc vno cuncta dogmata Lutheranorum corruant. Quid enim noui excogitarunt ingenioſi artifices? quid vero afferunt quod non hauſerint ex veterum haereticorum damnata ſententia? Haec cum ita ſint, religionis morumque ſummam in huiuſmodi controuerſia paucorum doctorum hominum diſputationi, & quaſi certamini aequatis vtrinque claſſibus, & quidem loco noſtrorum iniquiore Pontificis Maximi voluntate permitti, nonne ſimile eſt, ac ſi quos capitalium, & manifeſtorum ſcelerum reos, quos liceat iuſtiſſimis legibus grauiſſime, & cum ſummae auctoritate damnare, ſummus Magiſtratus ſic ſuam cauſam agentes audiat, vt crimina plaene confeſſi, in leges receptas ſacro ſanctas que, argute diſputent, & cum iuſtitiae, & innocentia virtutes omnes in diſcrimen vocent? eaſdemque devetere ſua paternaque poſſeſſione iudicibus quoque damnatis, pellere nitantur? Sepulveda L. 2. Epiſt. 28. 
                  Sepulueda at that time Chronicler
to the Emperour in his Epiſtle to Cardinall Contarene one
of the Popes Legates in that Councell; That my intermiſsion of
writing, and ſilence in that queſtion concerning the correction of the
yeare, hath beene ſo long; I wiſh the fault had laid in my ſlouth or
forgetfulneſſe, that I might haue beene hence occaſioned to acknowledge
and deprecate the blame, rather then (as now I freely muſt) impute the
true cauſe to the negligence of you Romane Prieſtes, whome I perceiue to
wax cold and to thinke of nothing leſſe then of calling the Councell:
with hope whereof as heretofore I was excited, ſo now deſpaire hath made
me dull. For I ſee well that ſuch as are moſt bound to haue a vigilant care
of the Churches publique welfare, and not to foreſlow any opportunitie
of increaſing her dignitie; neuer ſo much as mention the Councell, (at
this time as neceſſarie, as alwayes vſefull) but when Chriſtians eyther
are alreadie, or are likely to be at variance. In one word, neuer but them,
when there is ſure hope it may bee hindered by their diſcord. For when
peace gets it turne, and all is quiet, not a word of the Councell.
So as what they aime at by theſe vnſeaſonable edicts, is ſo
manifeſt, as will not ſuffer the ſloweſt capacitie to liue in doubt or ſuſpition:
               
               4 This great Learned Antiquaries Learned aduice, in another
Epiſtle ſent to the ſame Cardinall, then imployed by the
Pope in the Councell, was, not to ſuffer matters decreed in any
former Councell lawfully aſſembled together, to bee diſputed or

called in queſtion. Sufferance hereof was in his iudgment no leſſe
preiudiciall to the State Eccleſiaſtique, then vnto the temporall
it would be, to permit malefactors trauerſe the equitie of publique
lawes eſtabliſhed and knowne, after ſufficient proofe or
confeſſion made of Capitall offences committed againſt them.
The marginall quotations of the Trent Councell, compared
with this graue admonition, which had antiquitie-cuſtomes Canonicall,
as the Author vrgeth, to giue it countenance, may ſerue
as a perfect index for our inſtruction, with what preiudice the
Biſhops there aſſembled came to determine, by whoſe manuduction
or ſet rules they drew their ſuppoſed inerrable lines of life.
Now it is impoſſible any determination, that takes it force from
multitude of voyces, ſhoud be eyther in it ſelfe more certaine, or
more forcible to perſwade others, thē are the motiues or inducements
that ſwayed the ſuffragants ſo to determine; and theſe in
this caſe could, by Bellarmines reaſon, be but hiſtoricall perſwaſions
or preſumptions. For no Ieſuite I thinke, will ſay theſe Biſhops
had the Popes ſentence ex Cathedra, to aſſure them before
hand what Councels had beene lawfully called, and fully confirmed;
or whether all the ancient Canons they afterwardes reeſtabliſhed
were alreadie as authentique and certaine as they could
be made: For ſo it had beene a labour altogether loſt, yea a matter
no leſſe prophane then rebaptization, to haue confirmed them by
ſuffrages of Biſhops, after their Cathedrall confirmation by the
Pope. Euen of his Holineſſe himſelfe, whoſe verdict (as in this
caſe muſt finally be ſuppoſed) addes diuine credence vnto teſtifications
in their owne nature fallible and merely humane, the
queſtion propoſed in the former Section remaines ſtill inſoluble.
For without the relation of ſome Hiſtorian, or Regiſter, or eſpeciall
reuelation from aboue, no Pope can diuine how many
Councels haue beene held, much leſſe what was finally determined
in euery ancient Canon confirmed by the Biſhops aſſembled
at Trent. Speciall reuelations, ſuch as the Prophets had, they acknowledge
none. And yet diſtinctly to tell what hath been done
in times paſt, or places a farre off, without relying on others relations,
is an extraordinarie effect of ſpeciall reuelation, a worke
of higher nature and greater difficultie, then Propheticall prediction
of things to come. Are then the relations of Hiſtorians, or

Regiſters of Ancient Councels diuine and authentique. Not
without the Popes ratification with it they are? Yes, or elſe a
great part of Roman faith by Bellarmines reaſon can bee but humane.
               5 Hence may we ſafely annex a corollary, as neceſſary, as ſuretable
to the maine concluſion propoſed, for the principal ſubiect
of this ſection. [As the Popes authority is, by Ieſuitical Doctrine
made much greater then our Sauiours, ſo may the aſſiſtance or
countenance of his omnipotent ſpirit, make the reports of any tē
                  porizing
Hiſtorian, or mercenary Regiſter, as diuine, authentique
and certaine, as any Propheticall or Apoſtolicall teſtimonies
of the Meſſiah.] Yea, if it ſhould pleaſe him to authorize Baronius
Annals, or relations of former Councels, their credit ſhould
be no leſſe than the Euangeliſts. Yea hence it followes, (as the
diſcreet Reader, without further repetition of what hath here
beene ſaid, or new ſuggeſtion of the reaſons whereon the inference
is grounded will (I hope) of his owne accordCha: 6. parag. 5. Sect. 4. hereafter
collect) That determinations proceeding vpon any knaues or looſe
companions teſtimonies; though more looſely examined, ſo examined
at all, or taken for examined by the Pope, ſhall, by his approbation,
be of force as all-ſufficient, eyther for producing Diuine
beliefe of mens ſpirituall worth wee neuer heard of, or for
warranting daily performance of Religious worſhip to their memorie,
as any declaration he can make vpon our Sauiours promiſes
vnto his Apoſtles. For we may no more doubt of any Religion
he ſhall authorize, or any mans ſaluation canonized by
him (whoſoeuer be the Relatours of their life and death,) then of
Saint Peters, though our Sauiour promiſed hee ſhould bee ſaued. The reaſon is plaine. The Pope is ſole Iudge of all diuine
Oracles: our Sauiour (as you haue heard out of
Valentian) is but a witneſſe, and ſo may
others be, whomſoeuer he
ſhall admit.
            
         
         
            
            SECT. IIII.
            Containing the third branch of Romiſh blaſphemie or the last degree
of great Antichriſts exaltation, vtterly ouerthrowing the whole
foundation of Chriſtian Religion, preposterouſly inuerting both
Law and Goſpell to Gods diſhonour, and aduancement of Sathans
Kingdome.
            
               THat the authoritie chalenged by the Romiſh
Church is altogether preiudiciall to Gods
word, greater then eyther the viſible Church
of Iſrael from Moſes till Chriſt, or Chriſt
himſelfe or his Apoſtles, eyther before or
after his reſurrection, did eyther practiſe or
lay claime to; is euident from the former
treatiſe. It remaines we demonſtrate, how the acknowledgement
of this moſt abſolute, moſt infallible authority, doth quite alienate
our faith and allegeance from God and the Trinitie, vnto the
Pope and his triple Crowne. The Propoſition then wee are to
proue is this, Whoſoeuer ſtedfaſtly beleeues the abſolute authoritie
of the Romiſh Church, as now it is taught, doth truly and properly beleeue
no article of Chriſtian faith, no God, no Trinitie, no Chriſt, no redemption,
no reſurrection, no heauenly ioyes, no hell.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               The Ieſuites vnwillingneſſe to acknowledge the Churches propoſall for
the true cauſe of his faith: of differences and agreements about the finall
Reſolution of faith, eyther amongſt the Aduerſaries themſelues,
or betwixt vs and them.
               1 THE concluſion propoſed followes out of their
principles beforeIn the beginning of the ſecond Section. mentioned, and afterwards to
bee reiterated, that they may be more throughly
ſounded. But ere wee come to raze the very
foundation of their painted walles, a few weake
fortes muſt be ouerthrowne, which ſome haue erected in hope

thereby to ſaue their Church from battery.Valentian Tom. 3. in Aquin. diſ 1. q. 1. de obiect. fidei puncto. 1. Vide verba integra L. 2. Sect. 4. c. 5. parag. 16. & 17 
                  Valentian (as you
heard before) ſeeing his Mother wouldly more open to our aſſaults,
if they ſhould admit this manner of ſpeech, [I beleeue this or
that propoſition or article of faith, becauſe the holy Church doth ſo inſtruct
me;] would mitigate the harſhneſſe of it, thus; [If you aske
me, why I beleiue a Trinitie, or God to be one in three perſons, I would
anſwere, becauſe God hath reuealed this mysterie.] The diuine reuelation
then is the cauſe of your beleefe in this particular. But how
doe you know, how can you beleeue, that God hath reuealed
this? by an other diuine reuelation? No. For ſo we ſhould runne
from reuelation to reuelation without end. If by reuelation you
doe not beleeue it, by what meanes elſe? By the infallible propoſall of
the Church, as a condition, without which I could not beleeue it. Marke
the myſticalneſſe of this ſpeech, Ob propoſitionē Eccleſiae infallibilem,
For the Churches infallible propoſall. Is not this as much as if he had
ſaid, becauſe the Church, which is infallible, propoſeth it to me?
Why then doth he make it but a cōdition neceſſary or requiſite to
this aſſent? Belike he ment not ſo, but would haue vs to ſee the cō
                  ditiō,
not the true & principal cauſe of his beleefe. The Churches
authority, by his doctrine, may in diuers reſpects be truly ſaid both
a cauſe and condition; Or, to ſpeake more diſtinctly; the Churches
propoſal is a condition without which no man can ordinarily beleeue
propoſitions of faith: the infallibility of her propoſall is the
true and only cauſe of euery Romane Catholikes beleefe in all
points. This denial of the churches authority to be (according to
their principles) the true cauſe of beleef, Is the ſconſe that muſt firſt
be ouerthrown; but after a frendly parly of the differēce betwixt vs.
               2 Valentian, if we wel obſerue his proceſſe in the forecited place,
proues only that, which none in reformed churches did euer deny;
albeit hee profer more in his premiſes: which whileſt hee ſeekes
to performe, he hath only proued himſelfe a ridiculous Atheiſt; as
partly is ſhewed, in the former treatiſes, & ſhal more fully appeare
in the end of this. To eaſe his fellowes hereafter of ſuch vnneceſſary,
or impertinent paines, as oft times they take, I dare auouch
in the behalfe of all my brethren in reformed Churches, no
Ieſuite ſhal be more forward to demand, then wee to grant, That
God in theſe latter dayes doth not teach men the Goſpel in ſuch
ſort, as he did S. Paul, Without the helpe or ministery of man
                  In what ſence it is true: hee that hath not the Church for his mother hath not God for his father. We

maintaine as wel as they, God is not a father to ſuch as will
not acknowledge the Church for their Mother. Notwithſtanding,
thus we conceiue and ſpeake of the Church indefinitely taken,
not confined to any determinate place, not appropriated
to any indiuiduall, or ſingulariſed perſons. Now to verifie an
indefinite ſpeech or propoſition, the truth of any one particular
ſufficeth: As hee that ſhould ſay, Socrates by man was
taught his learning, doth not meane the ſpecificall nature, or
whole Mankind; but that Socrates, as others, had one man or
other at the firſt to inſtruct him. The ſame Dialect wee vſe,
when wee ſay, euery one that truely cals God father, receiues
inſtructions from the Church his Mother, that is, from ſome in
the Church lawfully ordained for planting faith; vnto whome
ſuch filiall obedience,Lib. 2. Sect. 1. cap. 46. & 7. ſeq. as elſe where wee haue ſpoken of, is due.
The difference likewiſe betweene the Romaniſts and vs, hath
Lib 2 ſect 3. cap. 1. Parag. 6. partly beene diſcuſſed before. In briefe, it is thus: We hold
this Miniſtery of the Church is a neceſſary condition, or mean
precedent, for bringing vs to the infallible truth, or true ſenſe
of Gods word; yet no infallible rule whereon finally or abſolutely
wee muſt relie, eyther for diſcerning diuine Reuelations,
or their true meaning. But as thoſe reſemblances of colours,
which wee tearme Species viſibiles, are not ſeene themſelues,
though neceſſary for the ſight of reall colours: ſo this
Miniſtery of the Church, albeit in it ſelfe not infallible, is yet neceſſarily
require, for our right apprehenſion of the diuine
truth, which in it ſelfe alone is moſt infallible; yea as infallible
to vs as it wasThe obiect of the Apoſtles faith, and ours the ſame, though the manner of our app
                        •
                     ehending it differ. to the
Apoſtles or Prophets, after it be rightly
apprehended. The difference is in the manner of apprehending
or conceiuing it. They conceiued it immediately, without
the Miniſtery or inſtruction of man; ſo cannot wee. This difference
elſewhere I haue thus reſembled, As trees and plants,
now growing vp by the ordinary husbandry of man from ſeedes
precedent, are of the ſame kind and quality, with ſuch as were
immediately created by the hand of God: ſo is the immediate
ground of ours, the Prophets and Apoſtles faith the ſame, Albeit
theirs was immediately planted by the finger of God, ours
propagated from their ſeed, ſowne and cheriſhed, by the dayly
induſtry of faithfull Miniſters.
               
                  
3 Neither in the ſubſtance of this aſſertion, nor manner of the
explication, doe we much differ, if ought, from Canus in his ſecond
booke,Eorum hic errorem diſſimulare non poſſum, qui aſſerunt, fidem noſtram eò tanquam in vltimā credendi cauſam reducendam eſſe, vt credamus eccleſiam eſſe veracem, cui prius (inquiunt) aſſen timur per fidem acquiſitam, quam per infuſam. Quod ſi verum eſſet, prima ratio formalis infuſae fidei non eſſet veritas increata, ſed creata. Praeterea Apoſt
                        •
                     
                     li & Prophetae reſoluebant vltimo fidem ſuam in diuinā & authoritatem & veritatem. Ergo nos in humanam Eccleſiae authoritatem fidem noſtram non reſ
                        •
                     luimus. Eadem enim fides est, idem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      proinde habet obiectum, rationem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      formalem. Confirmat autem hoc, vel maximè, quod ea quae per accidens contingunt, obiecto alicuius habitus, non variant illius obiecti formalem rationem: ſed articulos credendos proponi per hos, aut illos homines, per accidens omnino contingit. Cum erga Prophetae & Apoſtoli aſſentirentur articulis fidei, quia Deus reuelauit: eandem quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nos credendi rationem habebimus; Niſi fortè fides noſtra non eſt virtus Theologica, cuius videlicet prima & formalis ratio, ſi his credimus, non diuina, ſed humana verita
                        •
                      eſt. Canus. Lib. 2. de loc. Theol.
                   where he taxeth Scotus, Durand, and others for affirming
the laſt reſolution of our faith was to be made into the veracity
or infallibility of the Church. The Apoſtles and Prophets
(ſayeth he) reſolued their faith into truth and authority diuine: Therfore
wee muſt not reſolue our faith into the humane authority of the
Church: For the faith is the ſame, and muſt haue the ſame formall reaſon.
For better confirmation of which aſſertion hee addes this
reaſon; Things incident to the obiect of any habite by accident, do not
alter the formall reaſon of the obiect. Now that the Articles of faith
ſhould bee propoſed by theſe, or theſe men, is meerely accidentall: wherefore
ſeeing the Apoſtles and Prophets did aſſent vnto the Articles of
faith, becauſe God reuealed them, the reaſon of our aſsent muſt bee the
ſame. Laſtly, hee concludes, that the Churches authority, miracles,
or the like, are onely ſuch precedent conditions, or meanes
for begetting faith, as ſenſitiue knowledge, exhortations, or aduiſe
of Maſters, are for bringing vs to certaine knowledge in demonſtratiue faculties. Had eyther this great Diuine ſpoken conſequently
to this doctrine in his 5. Booke, or would the Ieſuites
auouch no more then here hee doth; wee ſhould bee glad to
giue them the right hand of fellowſhippe in this point. But they
goe all a wrong way vnto the truth, or would to God any way to
the truth, or not directly to ouerthrow it. Catharinus, though in a
manner ours, in that queſtion about the certainety of ſaluation,
ſayeth more, perhaps, then they meant, whom Canus late taxed;
Auouching (asAt (inquit Catharinus) ſoli fidei Catholicae conuenit, vt ei fallum ſubeſſe nequeat, quoniam eſt de obiecto probato ab Eccleſia. Fidei autem diuinae particulari falſam ſubeſſe poteſt, quoniā eſt de obiecto non probato ab Eccleſia. Reſpondeo nouam, atque inauditam hanc eſſe doctrinam, vt fidei diuinae poſſ
                        ••
                      ſubeſſe falſum, antequam eius obiectum probatum fuerit ab Eccleſia. Probatio enim Eccleſiae facit vt omnibus innoteſcat, obiect
                        •
                     m illud eſſe reuelatum à Deo, & propter hoc certum, & indubitatum; non autem tribuit firmitatem verbo Dei aliquid reuelantis. Ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      implicat contradictionem, vt aliquid ſit reuelatum à Deo, & poſſit ei ſubeſſe falſum, ſiue illud ab Eccleſia probatum ſit ſiue non ſit. Alioqui quod CHRISTVS Paralitico & Magdalenae dicebat, Remittuntur tibi peccata tua, poterat eſſe falſum, quia nondum fuerat ab Eccleſia approbatum; quis ita deſipiat vt verba CHRISTI ab Eccleſiae approbatione pendere arbitretur: Et ſi quis infantem baptizet, cum intentione vere baptizandi, nonne hereticus cenſebitur, ſi dabi
                        •
                     et an 
                        〈◊〉
                      ille ſu verè iuſtiſi catus? Et tamen non eſt hoc obie
                        ••
                     um ab Eccleſia approbatum, &c. Bell. lib. 3. de iuſtific. cap. 3. 
                  Bellarmine cites his opinion) that diuine faith

could not be certaine and infallible, vnleſſe it were of an obiect approued
by the Church. Whence would follow, what Bellarmine there
inferres, that the Apoſtles and Prophets ſhould not haue beene
certain of their Reuelations, immediately ſent from God, vntill
the Church had approued them; which is a doctrine well deſeruing
a ſharper cenſure then Bellarmine beſtowes on Catharinus.
Albeit, to ſpeake the truth, Bellarmine was no fitte man to cenſure,
though the other moſt worthy to bee ſeuerely cenſured. Catharinus
might haue replyed, that the Prophets and Apoſtles, at
leaſt our Sauiour, in whom Bellarmine inſtanceth, were the true
Church, as well as they make the Pope. Nor canVide 
                        •
                     . ſeq. Parag. 3. 
                  Valentias with
other late Ieſuites opinions, by any pretence or ſhew, hardly Bellarmines
owne, be cleared from the ſame inconueniences he obiectes
to Catharinus, as will appeare vpon better examination to
bee made hereafter.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               That the Churches propoſall is the true, immediate, and prime cauſe of
all abſolute beliefe any Romanist can haue, concerning any determinate
diuine Reuelation.
               1 WHereas Valentian and (as he ſayes) Caietan, deny
the Churches infallible propoſal to be the cauſe
why we belieue diuine Reuelations: This ſpeech
of his is equiuocall, and in the equiuocation of
it (I thinke) Valentian ſought to hide the truth.
The ambiguity or fallacie, is the ſame which wasSect. 2. cap. 1. diſcloſed in
Bellarmines reply vnto vs obiecting, that Pontificians make the
Churches authority greater then Scriptures. In this place, as in
that, the word of God, or diuine reuelations, may bee taken, eyther
indefinitely, for whatſoeuer God ſhall hee ſuppoſed to ſpeake, or, for
thoſe particular Scriptures or Reuelations which wee ſuppoſe hee hath
already reuealed and ſpoken. Or, Valentian may ſpeake of the obiect
of our beliefe, not of beliefe it ſelfe. If wee take his meaning in
the former ſenſe; what hee ſayth is moſt true. For the Churches
infallibility is no cauſe why wee belieue that to bee true which

wee ſuppoſe God hath reuealed: nor did wee euer charge them
with this aſſertion. This is an Axiome of nature preſuppoſed in
all Religions; yet of which none euer knew to make ſo great ſecular
vſe as the Romiſh Church doth. But if wee ſpeake of that
Canon of Scripture which wee haue, or any things contained in
it; (all which wee and our aduerſaries iointly ſuppoſe to haue
come from God) the onely cauſe why wee doe or can rightly
belieue them, is, by Ieſuiticall doctrine, the Churches infallibility
that commends them vnto vs.
               2 If that Church which Valentian holdes ſo infallible ſhould
haue ſaide vnto him totidem verbis: you muſt beleeue the books
of Maccabes are canonicall, euen for this reaſon, that your holy
Catholike Mother tels you ſo: hee durſt not but haue belieued
as well the reaſon as the matter propoſed; [To witte, That theſe
Bookes were Canonicall, becauſe the Church had enioyned him ſo to
think:] albeit his priuate conſcience, left to Gods grace & it ſelfe,
would rather haue held the Negatiue. For if wee beleeue, as the
Papiſts generally inſtruct vs, that wee our ſelues, all priuate ſpirites,
may erre in euery perſwaſion of faith, but the Church which
onely is aſſiſted by a publike ſpirite, cannot poſſibly teach amiſſe
in any: Wee muſt vpon termes as peremptory, and in equall degree,
beleeue euery particular point of faith, becauſe the Church
ſo teacheth vs, not becauſe wee certainely apprehend the truth
of it in it ſelfe. For wee may erre, but this publike ſpirite cannot.
And conſequently wee muſt infallibly belieue theſe propoſitions
Vide Chap. 4. Paragr. 2. 
                  [Christ is the Redeemer of the world, not Mahomet,
                  Vide Chap. 4. Paragr. 2. 
                  There is
a Trinity of perſons in the diuine nature] for this reaſon only that
the Church commends them vnto vs for diuine reuelations: ſeeing
by their arguments brought to diſproue the ſufficiency of
Scriptures, or certainety of priuate ſpirites, no other means poſſible
is left vs. Nay, were they true, wee ſhould be onely certain,
that without the Churches propoſall, wee ſtill muſt be moſt vncertain
in theſe and all other points; becauſe the ſonnes are perpetually
obnoxious to error, from which the mother is euerlaſtingly
priuiledged. The ſame propoſitions and concluſions we
might condicionally belieue to be abſolutely authentike, vppon
ſuppoſall they were Gods word: but that they are his word, or
reuelations truly diuine, wee cannot firmely belieue, but onely

by firme adherence to the Churches infallible authority, as was
in the ſecondCap. 8. Parag. 4 &c. 2. Parag. 10 Section deduced out of the Aduerſaries principles.
Hence it followes that euery particular propoſition of
faith, hath ſuch a proper cauſall dependance vpon the Churches
propoſall, as the concluſion hath vpon the premiſſes, or any
particular vpon it vniuerſall. Thus muchThe place is quoted in the ſecond Annotation, Parag. 5. 
                  Sacroboſeus grants.
               3 Suppoſe God ſhould ſpeake vnto vs face to face, what reaſon
had wee abſolutely and infallibly to belieue him, but becauſe
wee know his words to bee infallible? his infallibility then ſhould
be the proper cauſe of our beliefe. For the ſame reaſon, ſeeing he
doth not ſpeake vnto vs face to face, as hee did to Moſes; but as
our aduerſaries ſay, reueales his will obſcurely, ſo as the Reuealer is
not manifeſted vnto vs: but his meaning is by the viſible Church,
(Vide Annot. cap. 4. Parag. 5. which is to vs in ſtead of Prophetes, Apoſtles, and Chriſt himſelfe,
and all the ſeuerall manners God vſed to ſpeake vnto the
world, before he ſpake to it by his onely ſonne) this Pantheas infallibility
muſt bee the true and proper cauſe of our beliefe: And
Ex quo intelligitur eos qui in Scriptura reprehenduntur, quod priuatis reuelationibus non crediderint, vt Sara Geneſ 18. Zachaerias Lucae 1. non propter infidelitatem propriè, vt eſt vitium contra fidem Catholicam, reprehendi, ſed propter imprudentiam & duritiem 
                        •
                     ordis. Pertinet enim ad prudentiam infuſam, & ad donum Conſilij, eiuſmodi reuelationibus priuatis aſſenſum praebere vel negare, conſideratis circumſtantijs, quae docent eas eſſe à Deo vel non: Et illae perſonae commemoratae, ex prudentia & dono conſilij credere illis debuiſſent. Valent. Diſp. 1. Quaeſt. 1. De obiecto fidei. Punct. 1. The ground of this Poſition is, becauſe, Sola Diuina Reuelatio ab Eccleſia propoſita eſt obiectum fide▪
                   
                  Valentian himſelfe thinks that Sara and others of the old world,
to whom God ſpake in priuate, eyther by the mouth of Angels,
his ſonne, or holy ſpirit, or by what meanes ſoeuer; did not ſinne
againſt the doctrine of faith, or through vnbeliefe, when they did
not belieue Gods promiſes. They did herein vnaduiſedly, not vnbelieuingly.
Why not vnbelieuingly? becauſe the viſible Church did not
propoſe theſe promiſes vnto them.
               
               4 If not to belieue the viſible Churches propoſals, be that which
makes diſtruſt or diffidence to Gods promiſes, infidelity: then
to belieue them, is the true cauſe of belieuing Gods promiſes: or if
Sara and others did (as Valentian ſayth) vnaduiſedly or imprudently,
in not aſſenting to diuine truthes propoſed by Angels:
ſurely they had done only prudently and aduiſedly in aſſenting to
them; their aſſent had not beene truely and properly beleefe:
So that by this aſſertion, the Churches propoſall hath the very
remonstratiue roote & character of the immediat and prime cauſe,
whereby wee beleeue and know matters of faith. For whatſoeuer

elſe can concurre without this, our aſſent to diuine truthes propoſed
is not true Catholike beliefe; but firmely beleeuing this infallibility,
we cannot erre in any other point of faith.
               5 This truthVide lib; 2. Sec. 4. cap. 5. Parag. 19. Ratio credendi eſt cauſa credendi 
                  Valentian elſewhere could not diſſemble, howſoeuer
in his profeſſed reſolution of faith hee ſought to couer
it by change of apparrell; Inueſting the Churches propoſall
onely with the title of a condition requiſite, & yet withall (ſo diſſonant
is falſity to it ſelfe) making it the reaſon of beleeuing diuine
Reuelations. If a reaſon it be why wee ſhould belieue them, needs
muſt it ſway any reaſonable mind to embrace their truth. And
whatſoeuer inclines our minds to the embracement of any truth,
is the proper efficient cauſe of beliefe or aſſent vnto the ſame:
Yea efficiency or cauſality it ſelfe doth formally conſiſt in this inclination
of the mind. Nor is it poſſible this propoſall of the
Church ſhould moue our minds to embrace diuine Reuelations
by any other meanes then by belieeuing it: And beliefe it ſelfe
being an inclination or motion of the mind, our minds muſt firſt
be moued by the Churches propoſall, ere it can moue them at all
to aſſent vnto other diuine truthes. Againe,Valent. Tom. 3, in Aquin. Diſp. 1 Quaeſt. 1. De obtest. fidei, Punct. 1. His words are quoted. lib. 2. ſect. 4. cap. 5, Parag. 16. 
                  Valentian grants
that the orthodoxall or catechiſticall anſwere to this interrogation;
[Why doe you belieue the doctrine of the Trinity to be a diuine reuelation?]
is [becauſe the Church propoſeth it to me for ſuch.] Hee
that admits this anſwere for ſound and Catholike, and yet denies
the Churches propoſall to bee the true and proper cauſe of
his beliefe in the former point, hath ſmothered, doubtleſſe,
the light of nature, by admitting too much artificiall ſubtlety
into his braines. For if a man ſhould aske, why do you belieue
there is a fire in yonder houſe? and anſwere were made, Becauſe
I ſee the ſmoake go out of the Chimney: ſhould the party thus
anſwering in good earneſt, peremptorily deny, the ſight of the
ſmoake to bee the cauſe of his beleefe there was a fire; hee deſerued
very well to haue eyther his tongue ſcorched with the
one, or his eyes put out with the other. Albeit if wee ſpeake of
the things themſelues, not of his beliefe concerning them, the
fire was the true cauſe of the ſmoake, not the ſmoake of the fire.
But whatſoeuer it be, [Cauſe, Condition, Circumstance, or Effect,]
that truly ſatisficeth this demand, [Why doe you belieue this or that]
                  
it is a true and proper cauſe of our beleefe, though not of the
thing beleeued. If then we admit the Churches propoſall to bee
but a condition annexed to diuine reuelations: yet if it bee an infallible
[medium] or meane; or as our aduerſaries all agree the only
mean infallible, whereby we can rightly beleeue this or that to be a
diuine reuelation; it is the true and only infallible cauſe of our beleefe.
That ſpeech of Valentian, which to any ordinary mans capacity
includes as much as we now ſay, wasLib. 2, Sect. 2. Cap. 5. §. 8. before alleadged.
[That Scripture which is commended and expounded vnto vs by the
Church, is, eo ipſo, euen for this reaſon, most authentike and cleare] He
could not, more emphatically, haue expreſſed the Churches propoſall
to be the true and prime cauſe, why particular or determinate
diuine reuelations become ſo credible vnto vs. His ſecond,
Sacroboſcus, hath many ſpeeches (to be inſerted hereafter) to the
ſame effect.Voluit igitur de fide ſupernaturali indiſtin
                        •
                     le l
                        •
                     qui prout differt à fide naturali & acquiſita: & vim generandi fidem habere, quicquid ad actum ſiue ex parte potentiae, ſiue ex parte obiecti eſt neceſſarium. Verum tunc, vt Scripturae vis haec concedi poteſt; ſic nequaquam debet excludi Eccleſia, quae reſpectu noſtri est cauſa proponens, vt eſt ſupra explicatum. And a little after; authoritas Eccleſiae proponentis, & loquentis Dei in Scriptura reſpectu actus fidei, ſe habent vt lumen, & color, reſpectu viſionis albi; vel quemadmodum potentia, & diſpoſitiones in materia ſe habent, reſpectu actus informationis formae ſubſtantialis: & quod conſequens eſt, quae habetur fides à Scriptura Dei mentem continente, eadem habetur ab Eccleſia & qui libri ſint verbum Dei, & quis ſit verus ſcripturae ſenſus indicante. Sacroboſcus Det. Decr. Trid. & Sentent. Bellarm. Cap. 6 Parag. 1. Pag. 105. Amongſt others, where Doctor Whittaker obiects, that
the principall cauſe of faith, is by Papiſts aſcribed vnto the
Church; he denyes it onely thus far [What we beleeue for the Churches
propoſall, we iointly beleeue for God ſpeaking eyther in his written
word, or by tradition:] Yet, if a man ſhould haue asked him why he
did, or how poſſibly hee could, infallibly beleeue that God did
ſpeake all the words eyther contayned in the Bible, or in their traditions:
he muſt haue giuen eyther a womans anſwere, [becauſe
God ſp
                        •
                     ke them] or this, [becauſe our holy mother the Church doth ſay
ſo.] For elſewhere he plainly
                     Vide Annot. Cap. 5. Parag. 4. Viget (Whittakerus) qui ſenſum aliquem amplectitur propter nullam aliam cauſam, riſi quia ſit Eccleſia ſtatuit, non propter Propheticam & Apoſtolicam Scriptur
                        •
                     m in, tribuit 
                        •
                     uguſtiorem authoritatem Eccleſiae quam Scripturae: ſed cum in fide haec du
                        •
                      ſint, quid & propter quid, Pap
                        •
                     ſtis, propter quid, eſt ſola authoritas Eccleſiae. Verūs eſpōdetur, id eſſe falſum: quae enim credimus propter Eccleſiam proponentem, ſimul etiam credimus propter Deum loquentem, verbo ſuo ſcripto vel tradito▪ vt eſt aliàs explicatum. Sacroboſ. pag. 125. auowes, the Bookes of Canonicall
Scripture need not be beleeued without the Churches propoſall,
whoſe infallible authority was ſufficiently knowne before
one title of the New Teſtament was written, and were to be acknowledged,
though it had neuer beene; hee plainly confeſſeth
withall, that hee could not beleeue the Scriptures taught ſome

principall Articles of faith moſt firmely beleeued by him vnleſſe
the churches authoritie did thereto moue him, againſt the light
of naturall reaſon. Now if for the churches propoſall, hee beleeue
that, which otherwiſe to beleeue he had no reaſon at al, but
rather ſtrong inducements to the contrarie, as ſtedfaſtly as any
other truth: the Churches infallibilitie muſt be the true and only
cauſe, both why he beleeues the myſtery propoſed, and diſtruſts
the naturall dictates of his conſcience to the contrary. In fine, hee
doth not beleeue there is a Trinitie, (for in that Article is his inſtance)
becauſe God hath ſaid it, but hee beleeues that God hath
ſaid it, becauſe his infallible Mother the Church doth teach it.
This is the miſery of miſeries, that theſe Apoſtates ſhould ſo bewitch
the World, as to make it thinke they beleeue the Church,
becauſe God ſpeakes by it, when it is euident they doe not beleeue
God, but for the Churches teſtimonie: well content to
pretend his authority, that her own may ſeeme more ſoueraigne.
Thus make they their ſuperſtitious, groundleſſe magical faith, but
as a wrench, to wreſt that principle of nature, [Whatſoeuer God
ſaith is true,] to countenance any villany they can imagine, as will
better appeare hereafter. But firſt the Reader muſt be content to
be informed, that by ſome of theirAt inquies, quā
                     do Papiſtae dicūt ſe certo ſtatuere, id quod Eccleſia definit eſſe verum: propoſitiones ipſas ſtatuunt eſſe vera
                        •
                     , vel quia Eccleſia id illis dicit, vel non quia Eccleſia dicit, ſed quia Scriptura dicit. Si primum, nullum diſcrimen inter Deum & Eccleſiam ſtatuetur, nam hoc proprium ſolius Dei eſt, vt id verum eſſe credamus quod ille dicit, nullam aliam quaerendo rationem. Sin ſecundum: ſumma authoritas deſiniendi, non Eccleſiae, ſed ſcripturae defertur. Verum ne in aere diſputemus, vt ſaepe ſolet adverſarius, Catholici omnes firma fide credunt Eccleſiam in nulla fidei quaeſtione determinanda errare poſſe: vbi igitur Eccleſia deſinit aliquid eſſe de fide, id illi hoc Theologico diſcurſu concludunt eſſe certum. Eccleſia non poteſt aliquid non verum profidei dogmate credendum proponere. At hoc Eccleſia pro d
                        •
                     gmate fidei proponit credendum: eſt hoc ergo certum. In qua ratiocinatione medius terminus eſt determinatio Eccleſiae, atque ita, quo ſenſu medius terminus dicitur cauſa cognoſcendi concluſionem, dici poteſt definitio Eccleſiae cauſa, propter quam haec concluſio, vt eſt terminus praedicti diſcurſus, cert
                        •
                      perſuadeatur. Ab ſit vero vt quicquid per modum medij eſt cauſa certae cognitionis, eo ipſo aequetur Deo. Secus enim angulus externus foret Deo aequalis, nam per hunc cognoſco omne triangulum habere tres angulos aequales duobus rectis. Atque haec ſolutio perſpicua eſt, ſolum aduertat, qui minus exercitatos habet ſenſus, dictam concluſionem, vt pendet ex diſcurſu facto. pertinere ad habitum Theologiae (qui quidem certus eſt; quemadmodum eſt habitus fidei & ſcientiae: eſt tamen ab vtroque diſtinctus; vt verior tenet Theologorum ſententia) nam aliae ratione pertinere poteſt ad habitum fidei, quatenus aſſenſu ſimplici ſine diſcurſu creditur, & tunc Eccleſiae definitio non ſe habet per modum medij termini, ſed per modum ſufficientis propoſitionis; & authoritas Dei loquentis verbo ſuo ſcripto vel tradito in loco ex quo petitur deſinitio, eſt formalis ratio credendi: ita vt iſtae duae rationes ſubordinatae, ſunt cauſae coniunctae actus fidei, qui exercetur circa propoſitionem definitam, ſicque, quemadmodum ait Ariſtoteles, non Policletus nec ſtatuarius, ſed Policletus ſtatuarius eſt cauſa ſtatuae, dicere poſſumus: non definitio Eccleſiae per ſe & ſolitariè, nec ſolus locus ex quo petita eſt definitio Eccleſiae, eſt cauſa aſſenſus fidei. Sed definitio & locus, illa vt cauſa ſi
                        •
                     e qua non, authoritas Dei loquentis in hoc, vt formalis ratio obiecti. Sacroboſ. def. Decr. Trid. & Sent. Bellarum, c. 6. §. 1. p. 115. tenents the ſame Diuine
reuelations may be aſſented vnto by the Habite either of Theologie
                  
or of faith; both which are moſt certaine, but herein different; That
the former is diſcurſiue and reſembles ſcience properly ſo called;
the latter not ſo, but rather like vnto that habite or faculty by
which we perceiue the truth of generall Maximes, or vnto our
bodily ſight, which ſees diuers viſibles all immediately, not one
after, or by another. Whilſt ſome of them diſpute againſt the certainty
of priuate ſpirits, their aguments ſuppoſe Diuine reuelations
muſt be beleeued by the Habite of Theology, which is as a ſword
to offend vs. Whiles we aſſault them, and vrge the vnſtabilitie of
their reſolutions, they fly vnto the non diſcurſiue Habite of faith infuſed,
as their beſt buckler to ward ſuch blowes as the Habite of
Theologie cannot beare off.
               6 Not heere to diſpute eyther how truly or pertinently they
denie faith infuſed to be a diſcurſiue habite; the Logicall Reader
need not (I hope) my admonition to obſerue, that faith or beleefe
whether habituall or actuall, vnleſſe diſcurſiue, cannot poſſibly
bee reſolued into any praeexiſtent Maxime or principle. From
which grant, this emolument will ariſe vnto our cauſe; that the
Churches authoritie cannot be proued by any diuine reuelation,
or portion of Scripture; ſeeing it is an Article of faith, and muſt
be beleeued eodem intuitu with that Scripture or part of Gods
word, whether written or vnwritten, that teacheth it; as light and
colours are perceiued by one and the ſame intuition in the ſame
inſtant. And by this aſſertion we could not ſo properly ſay, wee
beleeue the diuine reuelation becauſe we beleeue the church (nor
doe we ſee colours becauſe we ſee the light;) but wee may truly
ſay, that the obiects of our faith, (diuine reuelations) are therefore
actually credible, or worthy of beleefe, becauſe the infallible
Church doth illuſtrate or propoſe them; as the light doth make
colours though inviſible by night, viſible by day. This ſimilitude
of the light and colours is not mine, but Sacroboſcus; whom in the
point in hand I moſt mention, becauſe Doctor Whittakers Obiections
againſt their Churches Doctrine, as it hath beene deliuered
by Bellarmine and other late controuerſers, hath enforced him
clearely to vnfold, what Bellarmine, Stapelton, and Valentian left
vnexpreſſed, but is implicitely included in all their writings. But
ere we come to examine the ful incōueniences of their opinions,
I muſt requeſt the Reader to obſerue, that as oft as they mention

reſolution of faith, they meane the diſcurſiue habite of Theologie.
For al reſolution of beleefe or knowledge, eſſentially includes
diſcourſe. AndSee the annotations. Sect. 2. c. 2. Par. 1. 
                  Bellarmine directly makes,His words are quoted in the Annotat. §. 6. of this chapter. 
                  Sacroboſcus expreſſely
auoucheth, the Churches authority the medius terminus, or true
cauſe, whence determinate concluſions of faith are gathered.
From which and other equiualent aſſertions, acknowledged by
all the Romaniſts this day liuing, it will appeare that Valentian
was eyther very ignorant himſelfe, or preſumed hee had to deale
with very ignorant aduerſaries, when he denyed, that the laſt reſolution
of Catholique faith was into the Churches authoritie,
which comes next in place to be examined.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               Diſcouering eyther the groſſe ignorance, or notorious craft of the Ieſuite
in denying his faith is finally reſolued into the Churches veracity
or infallibility: that poſsibly it cannot bee reſolued into any
branch of the firſt truth.
               1 
                     IT were a fooliſh queſtion, as Caietan (ſayeth
                  Rectè illud quidem à Caietano dictum eſt, Fatuam eſſe quaeſtionem, ſi quis alterum interroget, cur credat primae veritati reuelanti. Nam in primam veritatem vltimò f
                        •
                     t reſolutio aſſenſus Fidei, atque aedeo propter illā vltimò fides aſſentatur. Ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nō eſt quaerend
                        •
                      vlterius ratio, quare fides aſſentiatur. Sed ſolum poteſt quaeri vlterius, vnde habeat illa prima veritas, vt ſit prima veritas 
                        •
                      Et tunc reſpondendum eſt, id habere ſecundum nostrum intelligendi modum ex diuinitate, cuius attributum et quaſi paſſio eſt, & quae neque falli neque ſallere poteſt. Valent. tom. 3. in Aquinat. Diſp 1 quaeſt: 1. de obiect. fidei. punct. 1. 
                  Valentian)
hath well obſerued, if one ſhould aske another
why he beleeues the firſt truth reuealing. For the
aſſent of faith is finally reſolued into the first truth. It
may bee Caietan was better minded towardes
Truth it ſelfe firſt or ſecondary, then this Ieſuite was, which vſed
his authority to colour his former rotten poſition, [That the
Churches propoſall by their doctrine is not the cauſe of faith:] but
our former diſtinction betweene belief it ſelfe & it obiect (often
confounded,) or between Gods word indefinitely, and determinately
taken, if well obſerued, will euince this laſt reaſon to be
as fooliſh as the former aſſertion was falſe. No man, ſayeth he,
can giue any reaſon, beſides the infallibility of the Reuealer, why
hee beleeues a diuine Reuelation. It is true, no man can giue,
nor would any aske, why wee beleeue that which wee are fully
perſwaded as a diuine Reuelation. But yet a reaſon by their poſitions

muſt bee giuen why we beleeue eyther this or that truth,
any particular or determinat portion of Scripture, to be a diuine
reuelation. Wherefore ſeeing Chriſtian faith is alwayes of definite
and particular propoſitions or concluſions, and, as Bellarmine
ſayeth, (and all the Papiſts muſt ſay) theſe cannot be known
but by the Church: As her infallible propoſall is the true and proper
cauſe why wee belieue them to bee infallibly true, becauſe
the onely cauſe whereby wee can belieue them to bee diuine reuelations:
ſo muſt it bee the eſſentiall principle into which our
aſſent or beliefe of any particular or determinate propoſition
muſt finally bee reſolued. Euery concluſion of faith (as is before
obſerued out ofSect. 2. cap. 2. §. 1. 
                  Bellarmine) muſt bee gathered in this or like
Syllogiſme [Whatſoeuer God or the firſt Truth ſayeth, is moſt true:
But God ſaide all thoſe words, which Moſes the Prophets and the Euangeliſts
wrote: Therefore all theſe are moſt true,] The Maior in
this Syllogiſme, is an Axiome of Nature, acknowledged by
Turkes and Infidels: nor can Chriſtian faith be reſolued into
it, as into a Principle proper to it ſelfe. The Minor, ſayBellar. loco citato. our aduerſaries,
muſt bee aſcertained vnto vs by the Churches authority,
and ſo aſcertained, becomes the firſt and maine principle of
faith, as Chriſtian;Vide Arnob. & Sacroboſco, c. 4. Parag. 5. whence all other particular or determinate
concluſions are thus gathered. [Whatſoeuer the Church propoſeth
to vs for a diuine Reuelation, is moſt certainly ſuch:
                  Vide Sect. 1. Parag. 7. 
                  But the Church
propoſeth the bookes of Moſes and the Prophets, finally, the whole volumes
of the olde and new Teſtament, with all their partes, as they
are extant in the vulgar Romane Edition, for diuine reuelations;
Therefore we muſt infallibly belieue they are ſuch.] So likewiſe muſt
wee beleeue, that to bee the true and proper meaning of euerie
ſentence in them contained, which the Church, to whom it belongs
to iudge of their ſenſe, ſhall tender vnto vs.
               2 For better manifeſtation of the Truth,Reſolution twofold: either of obiects belieued, or of our beliefe, or perſwaſions concerning them. wee now teach: the
young Reader muſt here bee aduiſed of a twofolde reſolution;
One of the things or matters beleeued, or knowne, into their
firſt parts or Elements; Another of our beliefe, or perſwaſions
concerning them, into their firſt cauſes or motiues. In the one,
the moſt generall or remoteſt cauſe; In the other, the moſt
immediate or next cauſe alwayes terminates the reſolution. The
one imitates, the other inuerts, the order of compoſition; ſo as

what is firſt in the one, is laſt in the other, becauſe that which is
firſt intended, or reſolued vpon by him, that caſteth the plotte, is
beſt effected by the executioner or manuall compoſer. In the
former ſenſe, wee ſay mixt bodies are laſtly reſolued into their
firſt Elements; houſes into ſtones, timber and other ingredients;
particular truthes into generall maximes: concluſions into their
immediate praemiſes; all abſurdities into ſome breach of the rule
of contradiction. Conſonantly to this interpretation of finall reſolution;
the first verity, or diuine infallibility, is that into which
all faith is laſtly reſolued. For (as wee ſaide before) this is the
firſt ſteppe in the progreſſe of true beliefe, the loweſt foundation
whereon any Religion, Chriſtian, Iewiſh, Mahometan, or
Ethnicke can be built. And it is an vndoubted Axiome, quod
primum est in generatione, eſt vltimum in reſolutione; when we reſolue
any thing into the parts whereof it is compounded, we end, in the
vndoing or vnfolding it, where nature begunne in the compoſition or
making of it. But he that would attempt to compoſe it againe, or
frame the like aright, wold terminate all his thoghts or purpoſes
by the end or vſe, which is fartheſt from actuall accompliſhment.
Thus the Architect frames ſtones and timber, and layes the firſt
foundation according to the platforme he carries in his head; &
that hee caſts proportionably to the moſt commodious or pleaſant
habitation: which, though laſt effected, determines all cogitations
or reſolutions precedent. Hence, if wee take this vltima
reſolutio, as we alwayes take theſe termes, when we reſolue
our owne perſwaſions, that is, [for a reſolution of all doubts or
demands, concerning the ſubiect whereof wee treat] A Roman
Catholiques faith muſt, according to his Principles, finally bee
reſolued into the Churches infallibility. For this is the immediate
ground, or firſt cauſe of any particular or determinate point
of Chriſtian faith; and the immediate cauſe is alwayes that, into
which our perſwaſions concerning the effect is finally reſolued,
ſeeing it onely can fully ſatisfie all demandes, doubts or queſtions
concerning it. As for example, if you aske why men, or
other terreſtriall Creatures, breath, when fiſhes doe not: to ſay
they haue lungs, and fiſhes none, doth not fully ſatisfie all demaunds
or doubts concerning this Subiect. For it may iuſtly
further be demanded, what neceſſity there was the one ſhould

haue lungs rather then the other. If here it bee anſwered, that
men and other perfect terreſtiall creatures, are ſo full of feruent
bloud, that without a cooler their owne heare would quickly
choake them, and in this regard, the God of nature who did not
make them 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or giue them life in vaine to bee preſently extinct,
did with it giue them lungs, by whoſe reſpiration their
naturall temper ſhould be continued: This anſwere doth fully
ſatisfie all demands concerning the former effect. For no man
of ſenſe would further queſtion, why life ſhould be preſerued,
whoſe preſeruation immediately depends vpon reſpiration, or
exerciſe of the lungs, & is therfore the immediate cauſe of both,
and that whereunto all our perſwaſions, concerning the former
ſubiect, are laſtly reſolued. Or, if it ſhould bee demanded, why
onely man of all other creatures hath power to laugh; to ſay, he
were indued with reaſon, doth not reſolue vs; for a Philoſophical
wit would further queſtion, [Why ſhould reaſonable ſubstances haue
this fooliſh faculty rather then others?] A goodLaurentin. de Riſu. Philoſopher would
perſwade vs the ſpirites which ſerue for inſtruments to the rationall
part, are more nimble & ſubtle, and ſo more apt to produce
this motion, then the ſpirites of any other creatures are. But this
I muſt profeſſe reſolues not me: for how nimble or ſubtle ſoeuer
they be, vnleſſe man had other corporeall Organes for this
motion, the ſpirits alone could not produce it: and all organicall
parts are framed for the operation or exerciſe of the faculty,
as their proper end. Whence, hee that would finally reſolue the
former probleme, muſt aſſigne the true finall cauſe why reaſonable
ſubſtances, more then others, ſhould ſtand in need of this
motion. Now ſeeing vnto reaſon onely it is proper to forecaſt
danger, and procure ſorrow and contriſtation of heart by
preconceit of what yet is not, but perhaps may bee: it was requiſite
that our mortality through reaſon obnoxious to this inconuenience,
ſhould bee able to correct this contriſtant motion
by the contrary, and haue a faculty to conceiue ſuch pleaſant obiects
as might dilatate the heart and ſpirites; that as man hurts
his body by conceited ſorrow, whereto no other Creature is ſubiect,
ſo he might heale it againe by a kind of pleaſance, whereof
hee alone is capable.
               
                  
3 Anſwerable to this latter acception of finall reſolution,
                  That acording to the Ieſuites owne Principles, the Churches infallibility doth ſo terminate all doubts or demands in matters of faith, as the immediate or prime cauſe, doth all doubts or queſtions concerning any demonſtrable effect.
if you demaund a Romane Catholike [why hee beleeues there
is a Trinity, there ſhall bee a reſurrection, or life euerlaſting;] his
anſwere would be, becauſe God, or the firſt verity hath ſaid ſo:
but this doth not fully ſatiſfie; for wee might further queſtion
him, as hee doth vs, why doe you belieue that God did ſay ſo?
Here it ſufficeth not to ſay, This truth is expreſly taught in Canonicall
Scriptures; for the doubt whereby hee hopes to ſtagger
vs moſt, is this, [Why doe you belieue, or how can you know,
thoſe Bookes which yee call Scriptures were from God.] The laſt
and finall anſwere (according to the Ieſuiticall Catechiſmes)
wherein (as you heard before out ofSect. 2. cap. 2. §. 1. 
                  Bellarmine) they thinke
they haue great aduantage of vs, would be this: The holy Church
our Mother doth ſo inſtruct▪ giuing vs this expreſſe admonition withall,
                  
                     Eccleſiaſtes, 12. ver. 11. Hoc loco Salomon docet, inquit Bellarminus, non eſſe vlterius inquirendum, ſed quieſcendum penitus, quando ſententia data eſt à ſummo Paſtore, adiuncto praeſertim conſilio ſapientum. Quod ſi haec dicuntur de Sacerdote veteris Teſtamē
                     ti, quanto m
                        •
                     gis dici poſſunt de Sacerdote Teſtamenti noui, qui longe maiores promiſsiones à Deo accepit. Bellar, de verb. Dei, lib. 3. c. 4. 
                  his amplius fili mine requiras. Here (vpon God their Father,
and the infallible Church their mothers bleſſing,) their ſoules are
bound to reſt without further doubt or demand. Whence vnleſſe
they vſe ſo me mentall reſeruation, or ſeeke to ſhrowd themſelus
in the former aequiuocation hetherto vnfolded, they muſt
of neceſſity account themſelues accurſed, if they deny the laſt or
finall reſolution of their beliefe to be into the Churches infallibility
or veracity. Againe, what reaſonable man would demand
further reſolution of any doubts incident to his faculty, bee it
reall or verball, ſpeculatiue or practicke, then into the prime and
immediate rules? He ſhould ſurely be laſht in a Grammer ſchoole,
that eyther for quantity of ſyllables, right accent, conſtruction of
wordes, or the like, would ſeeke a fu
                     •
                  ther reaſon, then a knowne
generall rule which admitteth no exception. So ſhould he with
diſgrace bee turned ouer the Barre amongſt the Lawyers, that
would demurre or ſeeke a deuolution of an euident ruled caſe,
which by his owne confeſſion, could neuer alter. Much more
groſſe would his abſurdity appeare, that in the Mathematiques
or other demonſtratiue ſcience, ſhould attempt to reſolue a probleme
or concluſion, further then into an vnqueſtionable theoreme
or definition. Finally, might wee haue a centum
                     •
                  irall
Court of all profeſſions vnder the ſunne, our aduerſaries would
bee condemned with ioint conſent, eyther of intollerable folly,

or impudency, if they ſhould, with Valentian, deny the laſt
reſolution of their faith to bee into the Churches infallibility;
ſeeing they make it ſuch a Catholike inerrable perpetuall rule
of Chriſtian faith, as admits no exception, no deuolution from
it, no appeale. It is to them more then he ſaid of Logicke, Ars
artium, & ſcientia ſcientiarum, a faculty of faculties, a Rule of
Rules, able, rightly to reſolue all doubts concerning the very
Canon of Scriptures, or Gods word, written or vnwritten, or
the true ſenſe or meaning of both; briefly able moſt authentically
to determine & define all controuerſies in Religion of what
kind ſoeuer.
               4 Nor will it boot them ought to ſay, that Gods word in the
Churches mouth is the Rule whereinto faith is finally reſolued,
ſeeing the Church defines nothing but by Gods word eyther
written or vnwritten. For this is more then the party which
beleeues it can know, nor hath hee any other motiue to belieue
it, beſides the Churches definition or aſſertion. Suppoſe then
wee ſhould conceiue ſo well of a temporall Iudge, as to preſume
hee did neuer ſpeake but according to the true meaning
eyther of ſtatute or cuſtomary law: yet if wee could not know
eyther the one or the other, or their right interpretation, but
onely by his determinations; the law were little beholden to
him (vnleſſe for a floute) that ſhould ſay, he were reſolued iointly
by the Iudge and it. For, ſeeing the Law is to him altogether
vncertaine, but by the Iudges auouchment or interpretation,
his laſt reſolution of any act of iuſtice, muſt bee onely into
the Iudges skill and fidelity. This inferenceAt dices, quando Eccleſia definit, ex verbo Dei ſcripto, vel tradito, ſemper definit: ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      enim amplius accipit nouas reuelationes & aſſiſtentia ſpiritus ſancti ibi promiſſa, eſt tantum ad ea, quae iam reuelata ſunt, cognoſcenda: ergo à primo ad vltimum, quod terminat controuerſias, & quod iudex eſt quaeſtionū fidei, eſt verbum Dei. Reſpondeo: quoniam nobis non conſtat certò, quis ſit verus Scripturae ſenſus, niſi per vocem Eccleſiae, quae noſtras audit contentiones, & reſpondet, Eccleſia Iudex eſt, quamuis iudicet ex Dei verbo, quod illa ſcrutando et examinando, propter aſſiſtentiam ſpiritus ſancti, ſemper rectè intelligit. Si autem quilibet noſtrum haberet infallibile donum intelligendi verbum Dei, alio iudice non indigeremus. Nam hoc, fidei veritates continet, ſed quoniam ita non eſt, verbum Dei reſpectu noſtri, non habet rationem iudicis: non quaſi certā & veram non contineat ſententiam, ſed quia de eius ſenſu per nos ipſi nequimus infallibiliter eſſe certi, ſicut certi ſumus de mente Eccleſ
                        •
                     ae, quae & audire & referre poteſt voces; vnde liquet deeſſe aliquid ſcripturae comparatione noſtri, quo minus noſter iudex eſſe queat, quod non deeſt Eccleſiae. Sacroboſ. Def. Decr. Trid. & ſentent. Bellarm. cap. 6. §. 1. Theſe words immediately f
                           •
                        llow vpon the laſt quotation (out of the ſame author) cap. 2 § 5. 
                  Sacroboſcus would
nor deny, hee himſelfe hath made the like, to proue that not the
Scripture but the Church muſt bee the infallible rule of faith.
You will obiect (ſaith he) when the Church defines, it alwayes defines
according to the word of God, eyther written or vnwritten. New
reuelations it receiues none: the promiſed aſſiſtance of the ſpirit helps

it onely to know what is alreadie reuealed: Therefore from the first to
the laſt, that which determines controuerſies, and is the Iudge in all queſtions
of faith, is the word of God. To this obiection thus hee anſweres,
becauſe we cannot be certaine of the true ſenſe of Gods word,
but by the voice of the Church which heares our controuerſies, and anſweres
them: The Church is Iudge although it iudge according to Gods
word, which vpon examination and by the ſpirits aſsistance it alwayes
vnderstands a right. And if euery one of vs ſhould haue the infallible
gift of vnderſtanding Gods word, wee ſhould not neede any other Iudge.
The Reader, I hope, will remember what was ſaid before; that
thoſe flowting hypocrites would faine beleeue the Pope ſaith nothing
but what God ſaith, that God may be thought to ſay all he
ſayes; which is the moſt abhominable blaſphemie, that euer Hell
broacht, worſe then worſhipping of Diuels as ſhal appeare hereafter.
               5 It may be ſome Nouice in Artes that hath late read ſome
vulgar Logicians vpon the demonſtrations, might here frame
this doubt in fauour of the Romiſh Churches Doctrine. As the
finall cauſe may be demonſtrated by the efficient, and the efficient
by the final: ſo may the Church be infallibly proued by Scriptures,
and the Scriptures againe by the Churches authority, both infallibly
beleeved each for others ſake, as both the former demonſtrations
are true and certaine, and yet mutually depending one vpon
the other.
               6 This obiection, had ſome late Logicians vnderſtood what
they ſaid, would carry ſome ſhew of truth to countenance Valentians
former circular reſolutiō; but they lace their Mrs. rule, vttered
by him Pingui Minerua, too too ſtraightly. For taking it as they do,
we ſhold admitA rule in Logick by ſome much miſconſtrued. Whoſe miſconſtructiō not impeched might in ſome ſort ſhroud the Romaniſts ſottiſhnes in this Argument. of circular demōſtrations, the conceit wherof can
haue no place but in a giddy braine. To demonſtrate the finall
cauſe in any worke of Nature, were to aſsigne a Counſailor to the
infinite wiſdome of the God of Nature; in whoſe intention the
end is firſt, and is the cauſe of all operation or efficiency. Who
could giue, or who would demaund a naturall cauſe why life
ſhould be preſcribed? for this is the will of him that gaue it. If
queſtion were made of the manner how the life of man and other
creatures is preſerued, when as their heat might ſeeme to choake
them? A man might truly anſwere, by reſpiration: and reſpiration

is from the lungs. But it is one thing to aske how or by what
meanes, another, for what end any effect is produced. The former
is an inquiry of the efficient, within theſe precincts of meanes
or motions alwayes prime and independent; The later of the final
cauſe abſolutely, indemonſtrable, becauſes it implies a contradiction
to giue a reaſon why that ſhould be, for whoſe ſake all other
things of that ranke haue being. Nor is the end it ſelfe (to ſpeake
properly) euer produced, though oftimes in common ſpeech, we
take the effect immediately thereto deſtinated (becauſe moſt ſenſible)
for the end it ſelfe, as we doe the ſtarre next to the pole, becauſe
viſible, for the pole or point immoueable. Thus we confound
reſpirations or actuall preſeruation of life with the finall
cauſe why men haue lungs; when as both are effects of the lungs,
both meanes of accompliſhing Natures or rather the God of
Naturs purpoſe, in whoſe will or pleaſure the finall cauſe of any
naturall effect alwayes conſiſts. And ſeeing nothing in Nature
can preoccupate his will, no cauſe can be precedent to the finall.
This conſideration of natural effects tending as certainly to their
propoſed end, as the arrowe flyes to the marke, cauſed the irreligious
Aueroes. Philoſopher to acknowledge the direction of an intelligent
ſupernaturall agent in their working, the accompliſhment
of whoſe will and pleaſure (as I ſaid) muſt bee the finall cauſe of
their motions; as his will or pleaſure which beſtowes the charges,
not the Architect (vnleſſe he be the owner alſo) is the finall
cauſe why the houſe is built. Finally, euery end ſuppoſeth the
laſt intention of an intelligent agent, whereof to giue a reaſon
by the efficient which onely produceth works or meanes thereto
proportioned, would be as impertinent, as if to one demaunding
why the bell rings out, it ſhould bee anſwered, becauſe a ſtrong
fellow puls the rope.
               7 Now that which in our aduerſaries Doctrine anſweres vnto
the cauſe indemonſtrable whereinto finall reſolution of Natures
workes or intentions of intelligent agents muſt be reſolued,Faith cannot be reſolued into any definite branch of the Firſt Truth.
                  
is the churches authoritie. Nor can that, if wee ſpeake properly,
be reſolued into any branch of the firſt truth; for this reaſon (beſids
others alleadged before) that all reſolutions, whether of our
perſwaſiōs or intentions, or of their obiects (works of Art or Nature)
ſuppoſe a ſtability or certainty in the firſt links of the chaine

which wee vnfolde; the latter alwayes depending on the former,
not the former on the latter. As in reſolutions of the latter
kinde lately mentioned (imitating the order of compoſition)
actuall continuation of life depends on breathing, not breathing
on it: breathing on the lunges, not the lunges mutually
on breathing: ſo in reſolutions of the other kind (which invertes
the order of compoſition) the vſe or neceſſitie of lunges
dependes vpon the vſe or neceſſitie of breathing; the neceſſity
or vſe of breathing vpon the neceſſity or vſe of life, or
vpon his will or pleaſure that created one of theſe for another.
Thus againe, the ſenſitiue facultie depends vpon the vital, that
vpon mixtion, mixtion vpon the Elements, not any of theſe mutually
vpon the ſenſitiue faculty; if wee reſpect the order of ſupportance
or Natures progreſſe in their production. Whence hee
that queſtions whether ſome kinds of plants haue ſenſe, or ſome
ſtones or mettals life, ſuppoſeth as vnqueſtionable, that the former
haue life, that the ſecond are mixt bodies. But if we reſpect
the intent or purpoſe of him that ſets nature a working; all the
former faculties dpend on the ſenſitiue, the ſenſitiue not on any
of them. For God would not haue his creatures indued with
ſenſe, that they might liue; or liue, that they might haue mixt bodies:
but rather to haue ſuch bodies that they might liue, to liue
that they might enioy the benefit of ſenſe, or the more noble faculties.
               8 Can the Ieſuite thus aſſigne any determinate branch of the
firſt truth, as ſtable and vnqueſtionable, before it be ratified by the
Churches authoritie? Euident it is, by his poſitions, that he cannot;
and as euident, that beliefe of the churches authority cannot
depend vpon any determinate branch of the firſt truth, much leſſe
can it diſtinctly be thereinto reſolued. But contrariwiſe, preſſe
him with what Diuine precept ſoeuer, written or vnwritten,
though in all mens iudgements (the churches authoritie ſet aſide)
moſt contradictory to their approoued practiſes: for example,
[That the ſecond Commaundement forbids worſhipping Images
or adoration of the conſecrate hoſt;] he ſtraight inuerts
your reaſon thus, Rather the ſecond commandement forbids neyther,
becauſe the holy Church, which I beleeue to bee infallible,
approueth both. Laſtly hee is fully reſolued to beleeue nothing

for true, which the Church diſproues, nothing for falſe or erroneous,
which it allowes Or, if he would anſwere directly to this
demaund, [To what end did God cauſe the Scriptures to be written?]
He could not (conſonant to his tenents) ſay [That wee might
infallibly rely vpon them,] but rather [vpon the Churches authoritie
which it eſtabliſheth.] For Gods word whether written or
vnwritten,Vide annor. cap. 15. Sect 3. paragr. 2. is by their Doctrine, but as the teſtimonie of
ſome men deceaſed, indefinitely preſumed for infallible, but whoſe
materiall extent the Church muſt firſt determine, and after wards
iudge, without all appeale, of their true meaning. Thus are all
parts of Diuine truthes, ſuppoſed to be reuealed, more eſſentially
ſubordinate to the Churches authoritie, then ordinary witneſſes
are to royall or ſupreme iudgment. For they are ſuppoſed able to
deliuer what they know, in termes intelligible to other mens capacities,
without the Prince or Iudges ratification of their ſayings,
or expoſitions of their meanings; and iudgment is not ordained
for producing witneſſes; but production of witneſſes, for eſtabliſhing
iudgement. Thus by our aduerſaries Doctrine, Gods
word muſt ſerue to eſtabliſh the Churches authority: not the
Churches authority, to confirme the immediate ſoueraigntie of
it ouer our ſoules.
               9 Much more probably might the Iew or Turke reſolue his
faith vnto the firſt truth, then the moderne Ieſuited Papiſt can.
For though their deductions from it be much what alike, all aequally
ſottiſh: yet theſe admit a ſtabilitie or certainty of what the
firſt Truth hath ſaid, no way dependant vpon their authority that
firſt propoſed or commended it vnto them. The Turkes would
ſtorme to heare any Mufti profeſſe he were as well to be beleeued
as was Mahomet in his life time; that without his propoſall they
could not know eyther the olde teſtament or the Alcoran to bee
from God. So would the Iewes if one of their Rabbines ſhould
make the like compariſon betwxit himſelfe and Moſes, as the Ieſuite
doth betwixt Chriſt and the Pope: who, beſides that hee
muſt bee as well beleeued as his Maſter, leaues the authority of
both teſtaments vncertaine to vs, vnleſſe confirmed by his infallibility.
But to ſpeake properly, the pretended deriuation of all
three hereſies from the firſt truth, hath a liuely reſemblance of

falſe petigrees, none at all of true doctrine and reſolutions. Of
all the three the Romiſh is moſt ridiculous, as may appeare by
their ſeuerall repreſentations. As, imagine there ſhould be three
Competitors for the Romane Empire; all pleading it were to deſcend
by inheritance, not by election; all pretending lineall ſucceſſion
from Charles the Great. The firſt, like to the Iew, alleageth
an authentique petigree, making him the eldeſt. The
ſecond, reſembling the Turke, replyes, that the other indeede
was of the eldeſt line, but long ſince diſinherited, often conquered
and enforced to reſigne; whence the inheritance deſcended
to him as the next in ſucceſſion. The third, like the Romaniſt,
pleades it was bequeathed him by the Emperours laſt wil and
teſtament, from whoſe death his Anceſtors haue beene intitled to
it, and produceth a petigree to this purpoſe, without any other
confirmation then his owne authority; adding withal, that vnleſſe
his competitors and others will beleeue his recordes and declarations
(written or vnwritten) to be moſt authentique, they cannot
be certaine whether euer there had beene ſuch an Emperour
as they plead ſucceſſion from, or at leaſt how farre his Dominions
extended, or where they lay. This manner of plea in ſecular controuerſies,
would be a meane to defeate him that made it. For
albeit the Chriſtian World did acknowledge there had beene
ſuch an Emperour, and that many parts of Europe of right belonged
vnto his lawfull heire: Yet if it were otherwiſe vnknowne
what parts theſe were, or who this heire ſhould bee; no Iudge
would be ſo mad as finally to determine of eyther vpon ſuch motiues.
Or if the Plaintiffe could by ſuch courſes as the World
knowes oft preuaile in iudgement, or other gracious reſpects,
effect his purpoſe: hee were worſe then madde
that could thinke the finall reſolution of his right were into
the Emperours laſt will and teſtament, which by his owne
confeſſion, no man knowes beſides himſelfe; and not rather,
into his owne preſumed fidelitie, or the Iudges apparant
partialitie. So in this controuerſie whatſoeuer the
Pope may pretend from Chriſt, all in the end comes to
his owne authority; which wee may ſafely beleeue, herein
to bee moſt infallible, that it will neuer prooue partiall

againſt it ſelfe, or define ought to his Holineſſe diſaduantage.
               10 Here againe, it ſhall not be amiſſe to admoniſh yonger
Students of another gull, which theSecundum legem Dei ordinariam, vt quis per habitum fidei Chriſtianae alicui veritati reuelatae aſſentiatur, praeter ipſam reuelationem, neceſſe eſt huiuſmodi veritatem ab Eccleſia proponi, tanquam à Dèo reuelatam, & ſide credendam: non quia haec Eccleſiae propoſitio ſit de ratione formali obiecti fidei, ſed quiae eſt conditio quaedam requiſita: ſine qua ordinariè aſſenſus fidei Chriſtianae non elicitur. Valent. Tom. 3. in Aquinat. Diſp. 1. Quaeſt. 1. de obiecto Fidei. Punct. 1. Aſſert. 3. Ieſuite would put vpon
vs, to make their Churches doctrine ſeeme leſſe abominable in
this point, leſt you ſhould thinke they did aequalize the authority
of the Church with diuine reuelations. Valentian would perſwade
you, it were no part of the formall obiect of faith. It is true
indeed, that the Churches authority by their doctrine is not
comprehended in the obiect of belieefe, whileſt it onely propoſeth
other Articles to bee beleeued. No more is the Sunne
comprehended vnder the obiects of our actuall ſight, whileſt we
behold colours, or other viſibles, by the vertue of it. But yet,
as it could not make colours, or other things become more viſible
vnto vs, vnleſſe it ſelfe were the firſt and principall viſible,
[that is, vnleſſe it might bee ſeene more clearely then thoſe
things which wee ſee by it, ſo wee would direct our ſight vnto
it:] ſo would it bee impoſſible the Churches infallible propoſal
could make a Romane Catholikes beliefe of Scriptures or
their orthodoxal ſenſe the ſtronger; vnleſſe it were the firſt
and principall, credible or primary obiect of his beliefe; or that
which muſt bee moſt clearely, moſt certainely, and moſt ſted
faſtly belieued; ſo as all other Articles beſides, muſt be belieued
by the beliefe or credibility of it. This is moſt euident out of
Sacroboſcus and Bellarmines reſolution, or explication of that
point, how the Churches propoſall confirmes a Roman Catholiques
beliefe. To giue this doctrine of their Churches infallibility,
the right title, according to the truth: it is not an Article of
Catholike beleefe, but a Catholike Axiome of Antichriſtian vnbeliefe:
which from the neceſſary conſequences of their aſſertions,
more ſtrictly to be examined, will eaſily appeare.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               What maner of cauſall dependance Romiſh beleefe hath on the Church:
that the Romanist truly and properly beleeues the Church onely, not
God or his word.
               1 THe 2. main aſſertions of our aduerſaries, whence
our intended concluſion muſt be proued, are
theſe, often mentioned heretofore. Firſt, that
wee cannot be infallibly perſwaded of the truth
of Scriptures, but by the Churches propoſall.
               Secondly, that without the ſame, wee cannot bee infallibly
perſwaded of the true ſenſe or meaning of theſe ſcriptures, which
that Church and we both belieue to be Gods word.
               How wee ſhould know the Scriptures to be Gods word, is a
probleme in Diuinity, which in their iudgement cannot be aſſoiled
without admiſſion of Traditions, or diuine vnwritten verities,
of whoſe extent and meaning the Church muſt be infallible
Iudge. It is neceſſary to ſaluation (ſaithQuarto, neceſſe eſt noſſe, extare libros aliquos verè diuinos, quod certè nullo modo ex Scripturis haberi poteſt. Nam etiamſi ſcriptura dicat, libros Prophetarum, & Apoſtolorum eſſe diuinos, tamen non certo id credam, niſi prius credide ro Scripturam, quae hoc dicit, eſſe diuinam. Nam etiam in Al
                        •
                     orano Mahumeti paſſim legimus, ipſum alcoranum de coe
                        •
                     o à Deo miſſum, & tamen ei non eredimus. Ita que hoc dogma tam neceſſarium, quod ſcilicet aliqua ſit Scriptura diuina, non poteſt ſufficienter haberi ex ſola Scriptura. Proinde cum fides nitatur verbo Dei, niſi habemus verbum Dei non ſcriptum, nulla nobis erit fides. Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo Dei. Cap. 4. 
                  Bellarmine,) that wee know
there bee ſome bookes diuine, which queſtionleſſe cannot by any meanes
be knowne by Scriptures. For albeit the Scriptures ſay, that the Books of
the Prophets or Apoſtles are diuine: yet this I ſhall not certainely
belieue, vnleſse I firſt belieue that Scripture, which ſaith thus, is diuine.
For ſo wee may read euery where in Mahomets Alcoran, that the
Alcoran it ſelfe was ſent from heauen; but wee belieue it not. Therefore
this neceſſary point [that ſome Scripture is diuine,] cannot ſufficiently
be gathered out of Scriptures alone. Conſequently, ſeeing faith must rely
vpon Gods word; vnleſſe wee haue God word vnwritten, we can haue
no faith. His meaning is, wee cannot know the Scriptures to be
diuine, but by Traditions; and what Traditions are diuine, what
not, wee cannot know, but by the preſent viſible Church: as
was expreſly taught by the ſame Author before. And the finall
reſolution of our belieuing what God hath ſaid, or not ſaid, muſt

bee the Churches authority. To this collection,Dices Catholicos quoſdam reieciſſe nonnullas Scripturae veras partes, quas caruiſſe Spiritu ſancto nos inde non affirmamus: Reſponde, quod ſi illi caru
                        •
                     ſſent propoſitione Eccleſiae pro al
                        •
                     s libris ſicut pro illis, potuiſſent quoque de tota Scriptura ſiue peccato dubitare, iuxta illud Auguſtini: Ego Euangelio non crederem, niſi me Eccleſiae commoneret authoritas. Et pari modo, vos qui Eccleſiae authoritatem in praeſcribendo, & de fi niendo, quae ſunt fidei, facilis inſuff
                        •
                     cientem, qua ratione aliquas Scripturae partes ſine ſcclere (vt dicilijs) repudiatis; eadem poſſetis & reliquas. Sacroboſ. Def. Decr. Trid, & Sent. Bellar. cap. 6. §. 1. Par. 85. Vide eundem pag. 109. 
                  Sacroboſeus thus
farre accords: Some Catholiques reiected diuers Canonicall
Books without any danger, and if they had wanted the Churches
propoſall for others, as well as them, they might without ſinne
haue doubted of the whole Canon. This he thinks conſonant
to that of Saint Auſtin; I would not belieue the Goſpell, vnleſſe the
Churches authority did thereto moue me. He addes, that we of reformed
Churches making the viſible Churches authority in defining
points of faith vnſufficient, might diſclaime all without any
greater ſinne or danger to our ſoules, then wee incurre by diſobeying
ſome parts of Scripture, to wit, the Apocryphall books,
canonized by the Romiſh church. The Reader (I hope) obſerues
by theſe paſſages, How Bellarmine aſcribes that to Tradition,
which is peculiar to Gods prouidence: Sacroboſcus, that to blind
beliefe, which belongs vnto the holy Spirit, working faith vnto
the former points, by the ordinary obſeruation of Gods prouidence,
and experiments anſwerable to the rules of Scriptures.
               2 Conſequently to theVide Sect. 1. § 2, &c. et 7. Trent Councels decree, concerning
the ſecond aſſertion,Septimo neceſſe eſt, non ſolum Scripturam poſſe legere, ſed etiam intelligere. At ſaepiſſimè Scriptura ambigua et perplexa eſt, vt niſi ab aliquo, qui errare non poſſit, explicetur, non poſſit intelligi, igitur ſola non ſufficit. Exempla ſunt plurima: nam aequalitas diuinarum perſonarum, proceſſio ſpiritus ſancti à Patre & Filio, vt ab vno principio, peccatum originis, deſcenſus Chriſti ad inferos, et multa ſimilio deducuntur quidem ex ſacris literis, ſed non adeo facile, vt ſiſolis pugnandum ſit Scripturae teſtimonijs, nunquam lites cum proteruis finiri poſſint. Notandum eſt enim, duo eſſe in Scriptura, voc es ſcriptas, et ſenſum in cis incluſum; voces ſunt quaſi vagina, ſenſus eſt ipſe gladius ſpiritus. Ex huduobus primum habetur ab omnibus, quicuuque enim novit literas, 
                        •
                     oteſt ligere Scripturas: at ſecundum non habent omnes, nec poſſumus in plurimis locis certi eſſe de ſecundo, niſi accedat traditio, Et hoc fortè dicere voluit Baſilius de ſpiritu ſancto, cap. 27. Cum ait, ſine traditionibus non ſcriptis Euangelium eſſe purum nomen, id eſt, eſſe tantū voces & verba ſine ſenſu. Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo Dei cap. 4. 
                  Bellarmine thus collects: It is neceſſary
not onely to bee able to read Scriptures, but to vnderstand them: but
the Scripture is often ſo ambiguous and intricate, that it cannot bee
vnderſtood, without the expoſition of ſome that cannot erre: therefore
it alone is not ſufficient. Examples there be many. For the equality
of the diuine perſons, the Holy Ghoſt proceeding from the Father
and the Sonne, as from one ioint originall Originall ſinne, Chriſtes
deſcenſion into Hell, nd many like, may indeed be deduced out of ſcriptures,
but not ſo plainely as to end controuerſies with contentious ſpirits,
if we ſhould produce onely teſtimonies of Scriptures. And wee

are to note there bee two things in Scripture, the Characters or the
written words, and the ſenſe included in them. The Character is as the
ſheath, but the ſenſe is the very ſword of the ſpirite. Of the first
of theſe two all are partakers; for whoſoeuer knowes the Character,
may reade the Scripture: but of the ſenſe all men are not capable, nor can
wee in many places bee certaine of it, vnleſſe Tradition be aſſiſtant. It
is an offer worth the taking that here he makes, That the ſenſe of
Scriptures is the ſword of the ſpirit. This is as much as wee contend
that the ſenſe of the Scripture is the Scripture. Whence the
inference is immediately neceſſary, That if the Romiſh Church
binde vs to belieue, or abſolutely practiſe, ought contrary to the
true ſenſe and meaning of Scriptures, with the like deuotion we
doe Gods expreſſe, vndoubted commandements: ſhe preferres
her owne authority aboue Gods word, and makes vs acknowledge
that allegiance vnto her which we owe vnto the ſpirit. For
ſuppoſe wee had as yet no full aſſurance of the ſpirit, for the contradictory
ſenſe to that giuen by the Church: we were in chriſtian
duty to expect Gods prouidence, and inuoke the ſpirits aſſiſtance
for manifeſtation of the truth; from all poſſibility wherof
wee deſperately exclude our ſelues, if wee belieue one mans
teſtimony of the ſpirit, as abſolutely & irreuoucably, as we would
do the manifeſt immediate teſtimony of the ſpirit: yetQuod caput religionis maius aut celebrius eſt; quam myſterium ſanctiſſ
                        •
                     mae Trinitatis; quae triū perſonarum aſtruitur diuinitas? hoc tamen tam parū clarè in ſinuatur in ſcriptura, vt contrarium è ſacris literis ita probabiliter at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vt videbatur verè docuerint Ariani; vt totos 300. annos vexarint Eccleſiam, orbiſque aliquando vniuerſus ſe fuerit (Hieronymo teſte) miratus Arianum. Immo hodie docetur in Tranſiluania, & tum ſcriptis libris, tum publicis diſputationibus, defenditur, multo acrius & melius, quam in hoc regno Parlamentarianiſmus. Atque vt liberè fatear quod res eſt, niſi me Eccleſiae authoritas commoueret, quam certiſſimè credo in vero Scripturae ſenſu aſſignando errare non poſſe, non facile ex Scriptura c
                        •
                     lligerem eum ſenſum; qui habet Deum eſſe natura vnum, & perſonis trinum, ita vt naturae vnitas, numeroſa ſit, & perſonarum diſtinctio realis: praeſertim vero cum pugnare planè cum naturae lumine videatur, vt perſonae ſint inter ſe realiter diſtincte, & ſimil realiter identiſicatae, diuinae eſſentiae, vni & ſimpliciſſime. Sacrob. Def. Decr. Trid, cap. 6. Par. 1. 
                  Sacroboſcus
acknowledgeth hee beliues the myſtery of the Trinity, as
it is taught by their Church, onely for the Churches authority;
and yet this hee beleeues as abſolutely as hee doth, yea as hee
could belieue any other diuine Reuelation, though extraordinarily
made vnto himſelfe.
               3 In both parts of beliefe aboue mentioned, the cauſall dependance
of our faith vpon the Churches propoſals, may be imagined
three wayes: eyther whileſt it is in planting; or after
it is planted: or from the firſt beginning of it to it full growth;

or from it firſt entrance into our hearts, vntill our departure out
of this world. How farre, and in what ſort the Miniſtery of men
in the Church is auaileable, for planting faith; hath been declared
heretofore. Eyther for the planting or ſupporting it, the skill or
authority of the teachers reaches no further, then to quicken or
ſtrengthen our internal taſte or apprehenſion of the diuine truth
reuealed in Scriptures; or to raiſe or tune our ſpirites, as Muſicke
did Eliſhahs, the better to perceiue the efficacy of Gods ſpirit,
imprinting the ſtampe of thoſe diuine Reuelations in our
hearts, whoſe Characters are in our braines. The preſent Churches
propoſals, in reſpect of our beliefe, is but as the Samaritan
womans report was vnto the men of Sichars: Many (ſayth
the Euangeliſt)Iohn 4. 
                  belieued in him for the ſaying of the woman which
testified he hath told mee all things that euer I did. But this beliefe
was as none, in reſpect of that which they conceiue immediately
from his owne words. For they ſaide vnto the woman, Now wee belieue
not becauſe of thy ſaying, for we haue heard him our ſelues, and
know that this is indeede the Christ.
                  Iob. 34. v. 3. 
                  The eare (ſayeth Iob) tryeth
the words, as the mouth taſteth meates. Conſonant hereto is our
Churches doctrine, that as our bodily mouthes taſte and trie
meates immediately, without interpoſition of any other mans
ſenſe or iudgement of them: ſo muſt the eares of our ſoules trie
and diſcerne diuine truthes, without relying on other mens propoſals
or reports of their relliſh. No externall meanes whatſoeuer,
can in eyther caſe haue any vſe: but onely eyther for working
a right diſpoſition in the Organ, whereby triall is made; or
by occaſioning the exerciſe of the faculty rightly diſpoſed. How
eſſentially faith by our aduerſaries doctrine dependes vpon the
churches authority, is euident out of the former diſcourſes: that
this dependance is perpetuall, is as manifeſt, in that they make
it the iudge and rule of faith, ſuch an indefectible rule, and ſo authentique
a Iudge, as in all points muſt be followed, and may
not be ſo far examined, eyther by Gods written law,The principall difficulties in the Romiſts opinion, wherto no ſufficient anſwere can be giuen. or rules of
nature, whether it contradict not it ſelfe or them.
               4 It remaines we examine the particular maner of this dependance,
or what the Churches infallibility doth or can performe,
eyther to him that belieues, or to the obiect of his beleefe; whēce
a Romane Catholikes faith ſhould become more firme or certaine

then another mans. It muſt enlighten eyther his ſoule,
that it may ſee; or diuine reuelations, that they may be ſeene more
clearely: otherwiſe he can exceed others onely in blinde beleefe▪
The cunningeſt Sophiſter in that ſchoole, ſtrictly examined vpon
theſe points, will bewray that monſtrous blaſphemy which ſome
ſhallow braines haue hitherto hoped to couer. Wee haue the
ſame Scriptures they haue; and peruſe them in all the languages
they doe. What is it then can hinder, eyther them, from manifeſting;
or vs, from diſcerning, their Truth or true meaning manifeſted?
Doe we want the Churches propoſall? we demand how
their preſent Church it ſelfe can better diſcerne them then ours
may? what teſtimonie of antiquity haue they, which we haue not?
But it may be, we want ſpectacles to read them, our Church hath
but the eyes of priuate men, which cannot ſee without a publike
light: Their Churches eyes are Cat-like, able ſo to illuſtrate the
obiects of Chriſtian faith, as to make them cleare and perſpicuous
to it ſelfe, though darke and inuiſible vnto vs. Suppoſe they
could: Yet Cats-eyes benefit not by-ſtanders a whit for ſeeing
colours in darknes, albeit able themſelues to ſee them without any
other light then their owne. The viſible Church (ſaith the Ieſuite)
is able to diſcerne all diuine truth by her infallible publique
ſpirit. How knowes he this certainly, without an infallible publique
ſpirit? perhaps as men ſee Cats-eyes ſhine in the darke, when
their owne doe not. Let him beleeue ſo. But what doth this beleefe
aduantage him, or other priuate ſpirits, for the cleare, diſtinct,
or perfect ſight of what the Church propoſeth? Doth the
propoſall make diuine Truthes more perſpicuous in themſelues?
Why then are they not alike perſpicuous to all, that heare, reade,
or know the Churches teſtimonie of them? Sacroboſcus hath ſaid
al that poſſibly can be ſaid on their behalfe in this difficultie;Aduerte Sectarios, vt ſupra inſinuaui, nullius Eccleſiae authoritate, tanquam ſufficiente proponente vti, ne quidem ſuae; Sed tanquam proponente nudè: nam ſibi aſſumunt Eccleſiae ſententiam corrigere quando libet, & tunc opponunt Chriſtum Eccleſiae, quaſi Eccleſia aliud proponeret, Chriſtus vero aliud doceret; ſi autem illam Eccleſiam pro ſufficiente haberent, oporteret in omnibus ſuam ſententiam cum illa conformare. Vnde ſi quando verae Eccleſiae authoritate 
                        •
                     tuntur: ne tunc quidem de veritate revelata fidem habent, ſicut non habet ille ſcientiam, qui medio quidem vtitur neceſſario, exiſtim
                        •
                     t tamen illud ſolum eſſe probabile. Nam ad fidem non ſolum opus eſt vt Eccleſia ſufficienter credenda proponat infallibili illa ſua authoritate, quam à Christo habet nos docendi, & qui libri doctrinam diuinam contineant, & quis ve
                        •
                     us ſit eorum locorum qui in controuerſiam vocantur ſenſus: ſed etiam neceſſe eſt vtatur homo Eccleſiae propoſitione formaliter, & ſ
                        •
                     fficiens eſt, ſcilicet in illam tendendo vt in infallibilem. Sacroboſ. Def. Decret. Trid. & Sent. Bell. Cap 6. par. 1. pag. 94. 
                  The
Sectaries, albeit they ſhould vſe the authoritie of the true Church, yet
cannot haue any true beleefe of the truth reuealed. If the vſe of it be as

free to them as to Catholikes: what debarres them from this benefit?
They doe not acknowledge the ſufficiencie of the Churches propoſall.
And as a neceſſary proofe or medium is not ſufficient to the attayning
of ſcience, vnleſſe a man vſe and acknowledge it formally as
neceſſary: ſo for eſtabliſhing true faith, it ſufficeth not that the Church
ſufficiently propoſeth the points to be beleeued, or auoweth them by that
infallible authoritie, wherewith Chriſt hath enabled her to declare both
what bookes containe Doctrines Diuine, and what is the true ſenſe of
places controuerſed in them; but it is further neceſſary that wee formally
vſe this propoſall as ſufficient, and embrace it as infallible.
               
               
                  5 The reaſon then, why a Romane Catholique rightly beleeues
the Truth or true meaning of Scriptures, when a Proteſtant
that knowes the Churches teſtimonie as well as he, in both
points vncertaine, is, becauſe the Catholique infallibly beleeues
the Churches authority to bee infallible, whereof the Proteſtant
otherwiſe perſwaded, reapes no benefit by it, but continues ſtill
in darkneſſe, labouring in vaine to ſee the truth of Diuine reuelations
without it, as much in vaine as if a man ſhould ſtriue to
ſee colours without light.
                  Ad diſcernēdam doctrinam orthodoxam praeter habitum fidei in intellectu, & ſupernaturalem ſpiritus ſancti concurſum, habenti habitum fidei debitum, quae ſe tenent ex parte ſubiecti: requiruntur praeterea alia duo ex parte obiecti, quorum ſi deſit alterutrum, facultas nunquam obibit proprium actum. Horum vnum eſt, vt propoſitio credenda, ſit reuelata à Deo; alterum, vt nobis ſufficienter proponatur, Deum illum revelaſſe: neceſſitas prioris hinc oſtenditur, quoniam illa qualitas ſiue habitus, quae dicitur fides diuina, & ſupernaturalis, & inter virtutes theologi
                        •
                     as eſt origine prima, ſuapte natura ad hoc eſt determinata, & 
                        •
                     imitata, vt inclinet tantum ad ea, quae ſunt à Deo dicta, & quidem obſcurè. Secus enim, ſi euidens nobis foret myſteria fidei à Deo eſſe reuelata, eum lumine naturae notum ſit illum non poſſe mentiri, aut falſum dicere, de ijs haberemus ſcientiam. §. Posterioris verò cauſa eſt, quòd cum non videamus fidei mysteria eſſe à Deo teſtificata, neceſſe eſt nobis proponantur tanquam à Deo revelata, idque ſuffi
                        •
                     i
                        ••
                     t
                        •
                     r. Quoniam inſufficiens propoſitio obiecti, perinde est ac nulla propoſitio, vt patet exemplo luminis, quod oculo proponit videndos colores. Quando enim lumen eſt in gradu valdè remiſſo, colores diſcernere nequimus: non quod deſit obiectum; ſed quoniam deeſt ſufficiens lumen in medio, illuſtrans obiectum. 
                  For this is Sacroboſcus inſtance. Beſides
the habite of faith ſeated in the vnderſtanding, and the ſupernaturall
concourſe of the Holy Spirit, due to all endued with the habite of faith,
but neceſſary in reſpect of the ſubiect or partie, two things more are requiſite
on the behalfe of the obiect, of which if eyther bee wanting, the
facultie can neuer performe it proper function. Of theſe two, the one
is, that the propoſition to be beleeued, be reuealed by God; the other, that
there be a ſufficient propoſall made to vs that God hath reuealed it. For
an vnſufficient propoſall of any obiect is as none, as may appeare by the

example of light, which propoſeth Colours to bee ſeene. For when the
light is weake or ſcant, we cannot diſcerne Colours, not that wee want a
viſible obiect, but becauſe we want light ſufficient to illuminate the obiect,
or the ſpace betwixt vs and it.Iā igitur qui ab authoritate Eccleſiae recedu
                        •
                     t, & contenti ſunt veritates fidei eſſe in Scripturis à Deo reuelatas, ſibi promittentes ſpiritus ſancti concurium ad actus fidei eliciendos, ſufficiente proponente carent, atque ſimiliter faciunt, ac qui ſine lumine ſibi promitteret conſpectum colorum in area, eo quod ha
                     
                        •
                     eat colores ante 
                        •
                     culos poſitos et praeditus ſit facultate videndi, cum qua Deus paratus eſt quoties volumus concurrere. Nam nunc mortui ſunt Prophetae, mortui Apoſtoli, Chriſtus in coelum receſſit, & nobis omnium loco reliqu
                        •
                     t Eccleſiam; cuius authoritatem cum ad
                        •
                     uc in terris ageret ipſe ſtabiliuit, & tum miraculis, tum alijs rationibus confirmauit, & quantum opus eſt etiam nunc confirmat. §. Haec noſtra vult magiſtra ſit, hanc audiamus, ab hac quid à Deo per Prophetas, & Apoſtolos dictum ſit, & quo ſenſu vnumquodque intelligendum ſit, accipiamus: 
                        ••
                     que expectandum eſt, vt Deus temere, & paſſim per interni luminis copiam nobis ſuppleat vt
                        ••
                     m propoſitionis externae, vt fecit primo parenti, & Paulo, qui neque ab homine, neque per hominem, ſed per reuelationem Ieſu Chriſti accepit Euangelium: haec enim priuilegia ſunt. Sacroboſcus pag 93. & 94. Def. Decret. Trid. & Sent. Bellarm. Cap. 6 part. 1. 
                  Hee addes withall, ſuch as
diſclaime the Churches authoritie, and are content with this
[That Truths of faith are reuealed by God in his Word] and hence promiſe
themſelues the ſupernaturall concourſe of the Holy Ghost for producing
acts of faith, are deſtitute of a ſufficient propoſer, and their preſumption
ſuch, as if a man ſhould perſwade himſelfe, becauſe hee hath
Colours before his eyes and God readie to affoord his ordinary concourſe
as oft as he is diſpoſed to exerciſe his viſiue facultie, hee ſhould bee able
to ſee them without light. For (ſaith this Ieſuite) the Prophets are
dead, Apoſtles dead, Chriſt go
                     •
                  e to Heauen, and in ſtead of al (Prophets,
Apoſtles, or himſelfe) hath left vs his Church. Nor is it to bee expected
that God will euery where, vpon all occaſions, ſupply the want of the
externall propoſals by the aboundance of internall illuminations, as hee
did to our firſt parent, or Saint Paul who had his Goſpell neyther from
man, nor by man, but by the reuelation of Ieſus Chriſt. For thoſe are
priuiledges.
               6 The calumnie intended in this laſt inſtance, hath often
heretofore beene preuented. Wee neuer denyed eyther the
neceſſity, or ſufficiency of the Churches propoſall, as an
externall meane: wee accompt no other of that ranke and
nature, is, or could bee, eyther more neceſſary, or more
ſufficient. Saint Paul we grant, had an extraordinary priuiledge,
and yet for his priuate information, had the Truth propoſed vnto
him byAct. 9. v. 17. 
                  Ananias, though the gifts of his publique Miniſtery were
immediately from God. Both the meaſure of his faith, and manner
of attayning it, were vnvſuall: but his faith it ſelfe, once attained,
no otherwiſe independent of any externall propoſall
then ours is and all Chriſtians muſt be. Wee ſhould haue beene
more beholden to this profeſſor, had he diſtinctly told vs, what it

is in their language, to haue a ſufficient propoſer: albeit this wee
may gather from his wordes late cited, and theſeThe latin are quoted §. 4. following;
The Sectaryes take vpon them to correct the Churches ſentence as oft
as they list, and then they oppoſe Chriſt to the Church, as if the
Church did propoſe one thing, and Chriſt teach another. If they admitted
any Church as a ſufficient propoſer, they were bound to conforme
their opinions to it, in all things. As you heard before out ofSect. 
                        •
                     . cap. 8. parag. 12.
                  Bellarmine, That the Popes decrees may not bee examined whether
conſonant or contrary to Gods word or the foundations of
faith already laid in our hearts: and out ofSect. 1. §. 11. 
                  Canus, That we muſt
beleeue the Church abſolutely without ifs or ands. Thus beleeuing
we haue Gods Word ſufficiently propoſed; without this beleefe
or acknowledgement of ſuch authoritie in the Church, we
haue no ſufficient propoſall of it, but ſtriue as fooliſhly to heare
God ſpeake, as if wee ſought to ſee Colours without the
light.
               7 It appeares, I hope, as clearely to the Reader as to mee,
that the Churches teſtimonie or authority by our aduerſaries
Doctrine, benefits none but ſuch as ſtedfaſtly and abſolutely beleeue
it in all things. But hee that ſo beleeues it, may by it eaſily
beleeue all other points, as he that can perfectly ſee the light, may
ſee Colours by it. Want of this radicall beleefe in vs, makes our
faith in their opinion, ſo vnſtable, or rather blinde and dead. Yet
can I hardly perſwade my ſelfe, all of them will grant the Church
addes any inherent or participated ſplendor to diuine reuelations,
whereby they become perſpicuous in themſelues, as Colours
are made viſible by irradiation of the Sunne. Thus much notwithſtanding
all of them, I know, willingly would ſubſcribe vnto:
A Proteſtant can neyther of himſelfe be infallibly perſwaded
of the Truth of Scriptures, or other concluſions of faith; nor
doth he aſolutely beleeue any others, that are infallible in their
determinations: but a Roman Catholike, albeit by his priuate
ſpirit he cannot infallibly beleeues them▪ yet he infallibly beleeues
the Church which cannot erre in beleefe. All then that a Papiſt
hath more then a Proteſtant is this;Vide ſect. 2. c. 2. par. 12. & 13. 
                  his beleefe of the Church: if once
he doubt of this, he is where he was: Which in plaine termes is as
much as to ſay, he beleeues the Church concerning Scriptures;
not Scriptures. That this is the true interpretation of their tenent,

may eaſily be gathered from their owne writings. For
                     Bellar. L. 3. de verbo Dei. c. 8. Sacrob. p. 132. 
                  Bellarmine
expreſſely contends, and all of them ſuppoſe that ſaying of
Saint Auſtine [Sacroboſ
                        •
                     us inſtances to elude Docto
                           •
                        
                      Whittakers argument (as he propoſed it) doe plainly confirme our inference. At vrget Whitakerus: cum Auguſtinus ita erat diſpoſitus vt non crederet, niſi ipſū Eccle. authoritas cōmoueret; authoritas Eccleſiae erat ſola cauſa fidei ipſiꝰ, ergo fides quā tūc habebat nō erat diuina: Nā hac praeter authoritatem Eccl▪ reſpicit etiā authoritatē Dei. Probat antecedens, nam particula (niſi) omnes alias cauſas remouet, praeter eā cuius fit expreſſa mentio: Huius autem rei teſtes vocat omnes Grammaticos. Verum meminiſſe debuiſſet regulae D. Dioniſij: Bonum ex integra cauſa, malum autem ex quolibet defectu. Vt ponatur effectus, neceſſe eſt omnes cauſas concurrere; At vt impediatur ſatis eſt vnam deeſſe. Ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      omnes iſtae propoſitiones ſunt verae. Niſi Auguſtinus (quem etiam ipſe fatetur ſanctum, imo ſanctiſſimum) habuiſſet intellectum, non fuiſſet beatus. [Niſi fuiſſet Deus, Auguſtinus non fuiſſet beatus] [niſi habuiſſet fidem Auguſtinus, non fuiſſet beatus.] Pag. 133. Now as the particle (niſi) in his firſt inſtance, excludes all Creatures ſaue intelligent: in the ſecond all intelligent, ſaue ſuch as ſhall enioy the ſight of God: in his third all ſaue the faithfull, from bleſſednes: So in this our inſtance, the
ſame particle excludes all credence of the Goſpell, beſide that credence wee giue vnto the Church.
                   
                  Non crederem Euangelio, niſi me commoueret
Eccleſiae authoritas; I would not beleeue the Goſpell, vnleſſe the Churches
authoritie did thereto moue me] to bee true as well after faith is
produced, whileſt it continues, as whiles it is in planting. Now if
a man ſhould ſay, Non crederem Franciſco; niſi me commoueret Petri
fidelitas; I would not truſt Frances, but for Peters word: this ſpeech reſolued into it naturall or proper ſenſe, is aequiualent vnto this; I
doe not trust Frances, but Peter that giues his word for him. And in
caſe Peter ſhould proue falſe, or bee diſtruſted by him that tooke
his word for Frances, as yet not beleeued but for Peters ſake; the
creditor could haue no hold of eyther. Thus if Bellarmine and his
fellowes bee (as they would ſeeme to make Saint Auſtine,) minded,
not to beleeue the Goſpell but for the Churches authoritie,
or propoſall of it: let them ſpeake plainly and properly, not in parables
or metaphors; and ſo we ſhall know their meaning to be,
That they indeed beleeue not the Scriptures, but the Church; or,
the Church truly and really; the Scriptures onely by extrinſecall
denomination.
               8 Nor can they reply eyther conſequently to Sacroboſ
                        •
                     us inſtance
or their generall tenents, that as he which ſees colours by
the light, truly ſees colours; not the light onely▪ ſo hee that beleeues
Scriptures by the Churches infallible propoſall, beleeues
not the Churches propoſall onely, but Scriptures as truely and
properly. The diuerſitie of reaſon in theſe two conſequences,
ariſeth from the diuerſe manner of ſeeing colours by the Sunnes
light, and beleeuing Scriptures by the Church: which wee are
now to gather from this ſhort catechiſme contayning the ſumme
of Roman faith.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               Declaring how the firſt maine ground of Romiſh faith leads directly
vnto Atheiſme: the ſecond, vnto preposterous Heatheniſme or Idolatry.
               1 IT is a prety ſophiſme (as a iudicious and learned
Diuine, in his publike exerciſe for his firſt degree
in Diuinity, late well obſerued) wherewith
the Ieſuite deludes the ſimple, making
them belieue their faith, otherwiſe weake
and vnſetled, is moſt firme and certaine, if it
haue once the viſible or repreſentatiue Churches confirmation;
when as the Church ſo taken, ſeldome or neuer inſtructs or confirms
any, at leaſt not the hundred thouſandth part of them, vnto
whoſe ſaluation ſuch confirmation is byCum dicimus propoſitionem Eccleſiae eſſe conditionem neceſſariam ad aſſenſum fidei, N
                        •
                     
                     mine Eccleſiae intelligimus eius Caput, i. Romanum Pontificem per ſe, vel vnà cum Concilio, ex praedicta authoritate propoſitiones fidei fidelibus declarantem. Valent. Tom. 3 in Aq. Diſ. 2. Q. 1. De obiecto fidei, Punct. 1. Vide Annot. ex Bell. Sect. 3. c. 15. Parag. 2. Ieſuiticall perſwaſions
moſt abſolutely neceſſary. But ſuppoſe the viſible Church
or Romiſh Conſiſtory; the Pope & his Cardinals, ſhould vouchſafe
to catechize any; the Dialogue betweene them and the catechized
would thus proceed.
               
                  Cons.
                  Doe yee beleeue theſe ſacred volumes to bee the word
of God?
               
               
                  Catech.
                  Wee doe.
               
               
                  Cons.
                  Are you certaine they are?
               
               
                  Catech.
                  So wee hope.
               
               
                  Cons.
                  How can your hope bee ſure? for
Mahomet ſaith, His Alchoran is, ſundry other heretikes ſay,
their fained reuelations or falſe traditions are Gods word? How
can you aſſure vs, yee may not bee deceiued as well as they?
Are not many of them as good Schollers as you?
               
               
                  Catech.
                  Yes
indeed, and better.
               
               
                  Cons.
                  Are not you ſubiect vnto error as well
as they?
               
               
                  Cat.
                  Would God wee were not.
               
               
                  Cons.
                  What muſt
you doe then to be aſcertained theſe are diuine Reuelations?
               
               
                  Cat.
                  Nay, wee know not▪ but this is that which wee eſpecially
deſire to know, and would binde our ſelues in any bond to ſuch,
as could teach vs.
               
               
                  Cons.
                  Well ſaid: doe yee not thinke it reaſon
then to bee ruled in this caſe, by ſuch as cannot bee deceiued?
               
               
                  Cat.
                  It is meete wee ſhould.
               
               
                  Cons.
                  Loe, wee are the men: wee
are the true viſible Church, placed in authority by Chriſt himſelfe
for this purpoſe. Theſe Scriptures tell you plainely as much

                     Ad Quintum dico, nos non gloriari in templis, & ſucceſſione Epiſcoporum, & Apoſtolica ſed e ſecundum ſe, ſed propter Christi promiſſionē, qui ait, Tu es Petrus, & ſuper hanc Petram, &c. & portae inferi non praeualebūt, &c. Qualem promiſſionē Iudaei nunquam habuerunt. Bell. lib. 3. de Eccl. militant. cap. 6 
                     Tues Petrus, & ſuper hanc Petram, &c. His Holineſſe whom here
you ſee, is Peters Succeſſor; ſole heire of that promiſe, far more
glorious then the Iewiſh Church euer had any.
                  2 ThisFides diuina (quod omnes norunt) licet obſcura ſit, certa tamen eſt & quidē magis quam ſcientia. Iſti vero deſuis dogmatibus ſint oportet incerti: nam quicquid credūt, hac ſola de cauſa ex parte obiecti credunt, quod ita putant Scripturā ſentire; in quo iudicio cum ſint obnoxij errori, nō poſſunt certò ſtatuer
                           •
                        , ſe reipſa nō errare. Confirmatur: nam ſib plus tribuere nequeunt, quam Luthero, Caluino, aut ſanctis Patribus; horum autem iudicio ſe dicunt non teneri, & hoc ideo quod homo quilibe
                           •
                        , quantum
                           •
                        is ſanct
                           •
                        s, & ſpiritu plenus, errare poſſit. Quare cum generalis ſententia ab illis data, ipſos quoque comprehe
                           •
                        dit, quippe qui 
                           〈◊〉
                         hominum numerum non ſunt, ſequi
                           •
                        ur eos adeo incertos eſſe de 
                           •
                        uis, ac de aliorum interpretationibus. Sacrob. Def. Dec. Trid. cap. 6. Pa
                              •
                           , 1. is the very quinteſſence and extraction of huge and corpulent
volumes written in this argument, which our Engliſh
Mountibankes, ſent hither from the Seminaries, venditate as a
Paracelſian medicine, able to make men immortall. The ſumme
of all others write, or they alledge, is this; Euery one may pretend,
what writings hee liſts, to bee the word of God; who ſhall
bee the infallible Iudge, eyther of written or vnwritten reuelations?
Muſt not the Church? for ſhee is Magiſtra & Iudex fidei.
Theſe are the words, and this is the very Argument, wherein
Valentians ſoule, it ſeemes, did moſt delight, hee vſeth them ſo
oft. But to proceed: the parties chatechized thus by the viſible
Church it ſelfe, ſhould any Proteſtant enter Dialogue with them
how they know thoſe receiued ſcriptures to be the word of God,
could anſwere, I trow, ſufficiently to this queſtion, thus: Mary
ſir, woe know better then you: for we heard the viſible Church
which cannot erre, ſay ſo, with our owne eares.
               
               
                  Prot.
                  You are
moſt certaine then that theſe are the Oracles of God▪ becauſe the
viſible church (Gods liuing oracle) did beare teſtimony of them?
               
               
                  Catech.
                  Yea, Sir, and their teſtimony is moſt infallible.
               
               
                  Prot
                  But,
what if you doubt againe of their infallibilities? How will you
anſwere this obiection. Mahomet ſaith his Alcoran is ſcripture;
the Turkiſh Prieſtes will tell you as much, viua voce, and ſhew
you if you bee diſpoſed to belieeue them, e
                        •
                     ident places therein,
for his infallibility? Manes could ſay that hee had diuine reuelations.
The Pope pretends hee hath this infallibility, which neither
of them had. Who ſhall iudge? the Conſiſtory? But why
ſhould you thinke they may not erre as well as others? Did they
ſhew you any euidence out of ſcriptures, or did they bring you to
ſuch entire acquaintance with their publike ſpirit, as to approue
your ſelues diuine Critickes of all queſtions concerning the Canon,
as oft as any doubt ſhould ariſe?
               
               
                  Catech.
                  Oh no, theſe audacious
Criticiſmes of priuat men they vtterly deteſt, and forewarned
vs vpon paine of damnation to beware of. For there is

no priuate perſon but may erre, and for ſuch to iudge of Scriptures
were preſumption iuſtly damnable. Rely they muſt for this
reaſon vpon the churches infallibility, and that continually. It alone
cannot; without it, all others may erre, as well as Manes,
Mahomet, Neſtorius, or Eutyches: vndoubtedly belieuing it cannot
erre, wee our ſelues are as free from error, as he that followes
ſuch good counſell giuen by others as hee cannot giue himſelfe,
is more ſecure then hee that altogether followes his owne aduiſe,
albeit better able to counſell others then the former.
               
               
                  Prot.
                  Then I perceiue your onely holde-faſt in all temptations, your
onely anchor when any blaſts of vaine doctrine ariſe, is this; The
preſent Remiſh Church cannot erre: for if you doubt of any doctrine
taught to the contrary, aske her and ſhee will reſolue you; or if
you cannot ſee the truth in it ſelfe, yet belieue without all wauering
as ſhee belieues that ſees it, and you ſhall bee as ſafe, as if you
roade in the harbour in a ſtorme.
               
               
                  Catech.
                  Ah yes, Gods holy
name bee prayſed, who hath ſo well prouided for his church: for
otherwiſe heretickes and ſchiſmatikes would ſhake and toſſe her,
euen in this maine point or ground of faith, as euill ſpirits doe
ſhips in tempeſts: wee muſt eyther holde this faſt ſure, or elſe
all is gone. God hath left off ſpeaking vnto men, and wee cannot
tell,* Vide chap. 4. Parag. 5. & Arnob. & Sacrob. whether euer hee ſpake to them or no; but as the preſent
church, which ſpeakes viua voce, tels vs.
                  3 But the Reader perhaps expects what inconuenience wil hence
follow. Firſt, hereby it is apparant, that beliefe of Scriptures, diuine
Truth, and their true ſenſe, abſolutely and immediately depends
vpon the churches propoſall, or rather vpon their beliefe
of what it propoſeth, as well after they are confirmed in that generall
point [That they are Gods word,] as in the inſtant of their confirmation
in it. The firſt neceſſary conſequence of which
opinio
                        •
                     , is; That the church muſt bee more truely and properly
beleeued, then any part of Scripture or matter contained
in it. For in this manner of dependance, that tranſcendent rule
of nature,Ariſtot. l. 1. poſt. cap. 2. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , hath it proper
force: Whether wee ſpeake of the Eſſence, Exiſtence, or quality
of things being, or exiſting: that vpon which any other thing
thus abſolutely and continually depends, doth more properly &
really exiſt, and hath much firmer intereſt in it eſſence and
exiſtence, then ought can haue which depends vpon it. One

there is, and no more, that can truely ſay, my Eſſence is mine
owne, and my exiſtence neceſſary. Whatſoeuer is beſides, is but
a ſhadow or picture borrowed from his infinite being. Amongſt
created entities, all eſſentially depending on Him, Accidents haue
a kind of exiſtence peculiar to themſelues; yet cannot ſo properly
bee ſaide to exiſt, as their ſubiects, on whom they haue ſuch
double dependance. Nor can the Moone ſo truely ſay, my beauty
is mine owne, as may the Sunne, which lends light and ſplendor
to this his ſiſter, as it were vpon condtion ſhee neuer vſe it
but in his ſight. For the ſame reaſon, that for which wee belieue
another thing, is alwayes more truely, more really, and more
properly belieued, then that which is belieued for it, if the one
beliefe neceſſarily depend vpon the other, tam in facto eſſe quam
in fieri, from the first beginning to the latter end. For of beliefes
thus mutually affected, the one is reall and radicall, the other, nominall,
or at the moſt by participation onely reall. This conſequence
is vnſound. [Intellectiue knowledge depends on ſenſitiue:
therefore ſenſitiue, is of theſe two the ſurer.] The reaſon
is, becauſe intellectiue knowledge depends on ſenſitiue, onely in
the acquiſition: not after it is acquired. But this inference is moſt
vndoubted; [Wee belieue the concluſion for the premiſſes:
therefore we belieue the premiſſes the better,] becauſe beliefe of
the Concluſion abſolutely depends vpon the premiſſes, during
the whole continuance of it. This is the great Philoſophers
rule, and a branch of the former Axiome. And ſome iuſtly queſtion,
whether in Scholaſtique propriety of ſpeech, wee can
truely ſay there is a beliefe of the concluſion, diſtinct from the
beleefe of the premiſſes; or rather, the beliefe of the premiſſes, is
by extrinſical denomination attributed vnto the concluſion. This
latter opinion, at leaſt in many Syllogiſmes, is the truer: moſt neceſſarily
true in all, wherein the concluſion is a particulall, eſſential
                        •
                     y
ſubordinate to an vniuerſall of truth vnqueſtionable. As hee
that infallibly belieues euery man is a reaſonable creature, infallibly
belieues Socrates is ſuch. Nor can wee ſay, there be two dictint
beliefes: one of the vniverſall; another of this particular: for
he that ſayeth, All, excepteth none. If Socrates then make one in the
Catalogue of men, hee that formerly knew all, knew him to bee
a reaſonable Creature: all he had to learne, was what was meant

by this name Socrates, a man or a beaſt; After he knowes him to be
a man, in knowing him to bee a reaſonable creature, hee knowes
no more then he did before, in that vniuerſall, Euery man is a reaſonable
Creature. The like conſequence holdes as firme in our preſent
argument; He that beleeues this vniuerſall, [Whatſoeuer the
Church propoſeth concerning Scriptures, is most true,] hath no more
to learne but onely what particulars the church propoſeth. Theſe
being knowne, we cannot imagine there ſhould bee two diſtinct
beleefes: one of the churches generall infallibility; another, of the
particular Truthes or points of faith (contained in the Scripture)
propoſed by it. For as in the former caſe, ſo in this, He that from
the churches propoſall beleeues or knowes this particular, The
Booke of Reuelations was from God, receiues no increaſe of former
beleefe: for before, hee beleeued all the church did propoſe; and
therefore this particular, becauſe one of all.
                  
                  4 The truth of this concluſion may againe, from a maine
pinciple of Romiſh faith be thus demonſtrated.Sacroſancta, Oecumenica, & generalis Tridentina Synodus in ſpiritu ſancto legitimè congregata, praefidentibus in ea eiſdem tribus Apoſtolicae ſedis legatis, hoc ſibi perpetuò ante oculos proponens, vt ſublatis erroribus, puritas ipſa Euangelij in Eccleſia conſeruetur: quod promiſſum ante per Prophetas in Scripturis ſanctis, Dominus noſter Ieſus Chriſtus, Dei filius, proprio ore primùm promulgauit; deinde per ſuos Apoſtolos, tanquam fontem omnis, & ſalutaris veritatis, & morum diſciplinae, omni Creaturae praedicari iuſſit: perſpicienſque hanc veritatem, & diſciplinam contineri in libris ſcriptis, & ſine ſcripto traditionibus, quae ipſius Chriſti ore ab Apoſtolis acceptae, aut ab ipſis Apoſtolis, Spiritu Sancto dictante, quaſi per manus traditae, ad nos vſque peruenerunt, orthodoxorum Patrum exempla ſecuta, omnes libros tam veteris quam noui Teſtamenti, cum vtriuſque vnus Deus ſit auctor, nec non traditiones ipſas, tùm ad fidem tùm ad mò
                           •
                        es perimentes, tanquam vel ore tenus à Chriſto, vel à Spiritu Sancto dictatas, & continua ſucceſſione in Eccleſia Catholica conſeruatas, paripietatis affectu, ac reuerentia ſuſcipit, & veneratur. Concil. Trident. Seſſ. 4. Decret. de Canonicis Scripturis. And a little after hauing reckoned vp the Apoctyphall Bookes with the Canonicall, they thus conclude. Si quis autem libros ipſos integros cum omnibus ſuis partibus, prout in Eccleſia Catholica legi conſueuerunt, & in veteri vulgata Latina editione habentur, pro Sacris & Canonicis non ſuſceperit; & traditiones praedictas ſciens & prudens contempſerit; anathema ſit. Omnes itaque intelligant, quo ordine, & via, ipſa Synodus, poſt iactum fidei confeſſionis fundamentum, ſit progreſſ
                           •
                        ra, & quibijs potiſſinum teſtimonijs, ac praeſidijs in confirmandis dogmatibus, & inſtaurandis in Eccleſia moribus, ſit vſura. The Councell was very wiſe in not expreſſing as well what vnwritten traditions, as written bookes, they meant to follow.
                      
                     Whatſoeuer vnwritten
traditions the Church ſhall propoſe, though yet vnheard of or
vnpoſſible otherwiſe to be knowne then onely by the Churches aſſeueration,
all Romaniſts are bound as certainly to beleeue, as deuoutly
to embrace, as any truths contayned in the written word, acknowledged
by vs, the Iewes, and them, for diuine. Now if eyther
from their owne experience, the ioynt conſent of ſincere antiquitie,
or teſtimonie of Gods ſpirit ſpeaking to them in priuate, or
what meanes ſoeuer elſe poſſible or imaginable, they gaue any
abſolute credence vnto the written word or matters contained in

it, beſides that they giue vnto the churches generall veracitie: the
Scriptures by addition of this credence (were it great or little)
ariſing from theſe grounds peculiar to them, muſt needs be more
firmely beleeued and embraced, then ſuch vnwritten traditions, as
are in themſelues ſuſpitious, vncapable of other credit then what
they borrow from the Church. For in reſpect of the Churches
propoſall, Which is one and the ſame, alike peremptory in both;
Scriptures, and traditions (of what kinde ſoeuer) muſt be equally
beleeued. And if ſuch traditions as can haue no aſſurance beſides
the Churches teſtimony, muſt be as well beleeued as Scriptures,
or diuine truthes contained in them: the former concluſion
is euidently neceſſary, that they neyther beleeue the Scriptures
nor the Truthes contained in them; but the Churches propoſall
of them onely. For the leaſt beleefe of any Diuine truth,
added to beleefe of the Churches propoſall, which equally concernes
written and vnwritten verities, would diſſolue the former
equalitie. But that, by the Trent Councell, may not bee diſſolued.
Therefore our aduerſaries in deede and verity, beleeue no
Scriptures, nor Diuine written Truth, but the Churches propoſall
onely concerning them. AndReſpondeo: orthodoxos omnes certos eſſe Eccleſiam circa fidem non poſſe errare, proindeque nec dubitare eius ſententiae acquieſcere. Hoc enim inter caetera reuelata tanquam à Deo dictum, ab ipſa matre Eccleſia acceperūt: quae quidem veritas, ante ſcriptam vllam noui teſtamenti partē & dicta à Deo, & ab Eccleſia propoſita, & à fidelibus credita fuit: & hodie quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         crederetur, etiamſi noui teſtamenti ne vnus quidem apex ſcriptus extaret; quemadmodium reuelatae veritates à fidelibus credebātur per annos bis mille in ſtatu legis naturae ante exaratū à Moſe Pentateuchum. Sacrob def Decr. Trid. & Sent. Bell. C. 6. Par. 1. pa. 109. 
                     Sacroboſcus bewrayes his
readineſſe to beleeue the Church as abſolutely as any Chriſtian
can doe God or Chriſt, though no title of the New-teſtament
were extant. For, that the Church cannot erre, was an Oracle reuealed by God, propoſed by the Church, and beleiued by the faithfull before any
part of the New teſtament was written. Now hee that without
the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſt, would beleeue the Doctrines of faith
as firmely as with it, beleeues not the Goſpel which now he hath,
but their authorities onely, vpon which, though wee had it not,
he would as abſolute rely, for all matters of doctrine ſuppoſed to
be contained in it.
                  5 Or further to illuſtrate the truth of our concluſion with this
Ieſuits former compariſon, which hath beſt illuſtrated the Romiſh
churches tenent That Church, in reſpect of the Canon of Scriptures
or any part thereof, is as the light is to colours. As no colour
can be ſeene of vs but by the light: ſo, by his doctrine, neyther
the Canon of Scriptures, or any part thereof, can be known
without the Churches teſtimonie. Againe, as remoueall of light
preſently makes vs looſe the ſight of colours: ſo doubt o
                        •
                      deniall

of the Churches authoritie depriues vs of all true and ſtedfaſt
beleefe concerning Gods Word or any matter contained in it,
God (as they plead) hath reuealed his will obſcurely: and vnto a
diſtinct or cleare apprehenſion of what is obſcurely reuealed, the
viſible churches declaration is no leſſe neceſſary, then light to diſcernment
of colours. The reaſon is one in both, and is this. As
the actuall viſibilitie of colours wholly depends vpon the light, as
well for exiſtence, as duration: ſo, by Ieſuiticall Doctrine, true
beleefe of Scriptures wholly depends on the viſible Churches declaration,
as well during the whole continuance, as the firſt producing
of it. By the ſame reaſon, as we gather that light in it ſelfe
is more viſible then colours, ſeeing by it alone colours become
actually viſible: ſo will it neceſſarily follow, that the churches declaration
(that is, the Popes priuiledge for not erring) is more
ſtedfaſtly to be beleeued, as more credible in it ſelfe, then eyther
the Canon of Scriptures or any thing therein contayned: becauſe
theſe become actually credible vnto vs onely by the churches
declaration, which cannot poſſibly ought auaile for their beleefe,
vnleſſe it were better beleeued.
                  6 Perhaps the Reader will here challenge mee, that this laſt
inſtance proues not al that I propoſed in the title of this chapter.
For it onely proues the Popes ſupremacie is better to bee beleeued;
then that Chriſt is come in the fleſh; that God did euer ſpeake
to men in former ages by his Prophets, and in later by his ſonne.
But this inferres no abſolute alienation of our beleefe from
Chriſt, ſeeing euen in this reſpect that wee beleeue the Church or
Pope ſo wel, we muſt needs beleeue that Chriſt is come in the fleſh
and that God hath ſpoken to vs ſundrie wayes: for thus much
the Pope auoucheth. Yea, but what if the church teach vs that
Chriſt is our Lord and Redeemer, and yet vrge vs to doe that
which is contumelious to his Maieſtie? What if it teach vs that
theſe Scriptures are Gods Word: and yet binde vs by her infallible
decrees to breake his Lawes, and giue his ſpirit the lie?
Should we make profeſſion of beleeuing as the Pope teacheth,
and yet take his meaning to be onely ſuch as Marnixius, whom
we better beleeue, would make it: His Holineſſe would quickly
pronounces vs Apoſtataes from the Catholike faith. Or if this
ſuffice not the indifferent Reader for ſatisfying my former promiſe:

let him haue patience but for a while, and I will pay him
all.
                  7 Their firſt maine poſition,The two main branches of Romiſh infidelity ſpringing from her former two poſitions. [That no priuate man can certainely
know the Canon of Scriptures to bee Gods word, but
by relying vpon the preſent Church,] inferres as much as hath
beene ſaid: much more will follow from their ſecond, [That no
man can certainely bee perſwaded of the true ſenſe and meaning
of particular propoſitions contained in the general Canon, without
the ſame Churches teſtimony, vnto whom the authentique
interpretation or dijudication of Scriptures wholly belongs] Imagine
the former parties, now fully perſwaded of the Scriptures
diuine truth in generall, ſhould by the Conſiſtory which
late catechized them, be queſtioned about the meaning of ſome
particular places.
               
               
                  Cons.
                  Wee hope you adore the conſecrated
hoſt with diuine worſhip, as oft as you meete it in proceſſion.
               
               
                  Cat.
                  Deſirous wee are to doe any thing that becomes good
Chriſtians, and obedient ſons vnto our holy mother the Church:
but wee cannot ſatiſfie out conſcionces how this may ſtand with
the principles of Chriſtianity. Your Holineſſes (for which we
reſt yours vnto death) haue aſſured vs theſe ſacred volumes are
the very words of God, and his words we know muſt bee obeyed.
Now ſince wee know theſe to be his wordes, wee haue found
it written in them: Thou ſhalt worſhippe the Lord thy God, and him
onely ſhalt thou ſerue.
                     Math. 4. v. 5. It is, wee doubt, our ſimplicity that will not
ſuffer vs to conceiue how the conſecrated Host can be adored as
God without open breach of his commandement. For, to our
ſhallow vnderſtanding, there is no neceſſity to perſwade vs
Chriſt God and man ſhould bee hid in it. Theſe words, Hoc eſt
corpus meum, mny beare many interpretations no way pregnant
to this purpoſe. And it is doubtfull, whether Chriſts body,
though really preſent in the Sacrament, ſhould retaine the ſame
preſence in proceſſion: whereas the former commandement is
plaine, Wee must worſhippe the Lord our God, and him onely muſt we
ſerue. Conſiſt. Yee thinke this Text is plaine to your late purpoſe:
wee thinke otherwiſe. Whether is more meet? yee to
ſubmit your priuate opinions to our publike ſpirits: or vs that
are Paſtors, to learne of you ſeely ſheepe?
               
               
                  Cat.
                  Therefore are
your ſeruants come vnto you, that they may learne how to obey

you in this decree without idolatry: well hoping, that as ye
enioyne vs abſolutely to obey you in it; ſo yee can giue vs full
aſſurance wee ſhall not diſobey the ſpirit of God, in the former
great commandement, whoſe expoſition we moſt deſire.
               
               8 Would theſe or like ſupplications, though conceiued in
Chriſtian modeſty, though propoſed with religious feare, and
awfull regard of their perſons, though preſented with teares and
ſighes, or other more euident ſignes of inward ſorrow, finde any
entrance into Romiſh Prelates eares, or moue the Maſters of the
Inquiſition houſe to forbeare exaction of obedience to the former,
or other decree of the Trent Councel: Were the forme
of the decree it ſelfe, vnto priuate iudgements, neuer ſo contradictory
to Gods expreſſe written lawes; or the conſequence
of practizing as it preſcribes, neuer ſo dreadfull to the doubtfull
conſcience? How much better then were it for ſuch ſilly ſoules,
had they neuer knowne the Bookes of Moſes to haue been from
God? for ſo committing idolatry with ſtocks and ſtones, or other
creatures, they had done what was diſpleaſing to their Maſter, &
iuſtly puniſhable:Luke 12. 48. yet with fewer ſtripes, becauſe his will was
not made known vnto them. But now they know it, and acknowledge
the truth of this commandement. To what end? That
they may bee left without all excuſe for not doing it. They ſee
the generall truth of Gods Oracles, that they may bee more deſperately
blinded in wilfull peruerting the particulars. For what
glory could the allurement of ſilly ignorant men to ſimple idolatry
be vnto great Antichriſt? Let them firſt ſubſcribe to the
written Lawes of the euerliuing God, and afterwardes wholly
ſubmit themſelues to his determinations for their practiſe, and
ſo the oppoſition betwixt him and the Deity, betwixt his iniunctions
and the decrees of the Almighty, may bee more poſitiue,
more directly contrary. The Heathen or others not acknowledging
Gods word at all, are rightly tearmed vnbeleeuers:
men thus beleeuing the Scriptures in generall to be Gods word,
from the teſtimony of the Church, and yet abſolutely relying vpon
her iudgement for the meaning of particular places, are
tranſported from vnbeliefe to miſbeliefe, from groſſe ignorance
to wilfull defiance of God & his lawes. Finally, they are brought
to know Gods word, that they may doubt in this and like fearefull

practiſes enioyned: that ſo firſt doubting, and afterwards deſperately
reſoluing abſolutely to follow the Churches iniunction,
againſt that ſenſe and meaning of the diuine decrees which
the holy ſpirit doth dictate to their priuate conſciences, they
may without doubt be damned, for not abiding in the truth. Like
their firſt parents they heare Gods ſentence, but preferre the interpretations
of Sathans firſt borne before their owne, becauſe
it muſt bee preſumed hee is more ſubtle then they. Or to referre
the two maine ſtreames of this iniquity to their proper heads:
The firſt, [That we cannot know the olde or new Teſtament to
be Gods word, but by relying vpon the Church] makes all ſubſcribers
to it, reall Atheiſts or Infidels, and Chriſtians onely in
conceit or vpon condition, [If the Church, whoſe authority they
ſo highly eſteeme, be as infallible as is pretended.] Heretofore I
haue much grieued at the Trent Councels impiety: but now I
wonder at theſe graue Fathers folly, that would trouble themſelues
with preſcribing ſo many Canons, or ouerſeeing ſo large
a Catechiſme, when as the beginning of Protogoras booke, one
or two words altered, might haue comprehended the entire
confeſſion of ſuch mens faith, as rely vpon their fatherhoods, The
Atheiſt thus beganne his booke; De dijs non habeo quod dicam, vtrum
ſint necne: Concerning the Gods or their being, I can ſay nothing.
A priuate Romane Catholike might render an entire account of
his faith in termes as briefe: De Chriſto & Chriſtiana fide non haebeo
quod dicam, vtrum ſint necne: Whether there bee a Chriſt, or
Chriſtian Religion bee but a politike fable, I haue nothing to ſay peremptorily,
yea, or no, the Church or Councell can determine: whom
in this, and all other points wherein God is a party, I will abſolutely
belieue, whileſt I liue: if at my death I finde they teach
amiſſe, let the diuell and they (if there be a diuell) decide the controuerſie.
Yet this conceit or conditionall beliefe of Chriſt and
chriſtianity conceiued from the former, ſerues as a ground colour
for diſpoſing mens ſoules, to take the ſable dye of Hell, wherewith
the ſecond maine ſtreame of Romiſh impiety will deepely infect
all ſuch as drinke of it. For once belieuing Gods word from
the Churches teſtimony, this abſolute ſubmiſſion of their conſciences
to embrace that ſenſe it ſhall ſuggeſt, ſublimates them
from refined Heatheniſme of Gentiliſme to diaboliſme or ſymbolizing

with infernall ſpirits, whoſe chiefeſt ſolace conſiſts in
acting greateſt villanies, or wreſting the meaning of Gods written
lawes to his diſhonour. For iuſt proofe of which imputation,
wee are to preuent what (as wee late intimated) might in
fauour of their opinion bee replyed to our former inſtance of
light and colours.An obiection which might bee made in fauour of the Romaniſts, anſwered and retorted.
               
               9 Some perhaps, well affected, would be reſolued, why, as hee
that ſees colours by the ſunne, ſees not onely the ſunne but colours
with it, ſo hee that belieues the Scriptures by relying vpon
the Church, ſhould not belieue the Church onely, but the
Scriptures too, commended by it. The doubt could hardly bee
reſolued, if according to our aduerſaries tenent, the Churches
declarations did confirme our faith by illuſtrating the Canon of
Scriptures, or making particular truthes contained in it, inherently
more perſpicuous: as if they were in themſelues but potentially
credible, and made actually ſuch by the Churches teſtimony,
which is the firſt and principall credible; in ſuch ſort as
colours become actually viſible, by illumination of the principall
and prime viſible. But herein the grounds of Romiſh doctrine,
and the inſtance brought by Sacroboſcus, to illuſtrate
it, are quite contrary. For the light of the Sunne, though moſt
neceſſary vnto ſight, is yet neceſſary onely in reſpect of the obiect,
or for making colours actually viſible; which, made ſuch, or
ſufficiently illuminated, are inſtantly perceiued without further
intermediation of any other light then the internall light of the
Organe, in diſcerning colours alwaies rather hindred then helped
by circumfuſion of light externall. For this reaſon it is, that
men in a pitte or caue may at noone day ſee the ſtarres, which
are inuiſible to ſuch as are in the open aire: not, that they are
more illuminated to the one, then the other; but becauſe plentie
of light doth hinder the organ or eye-ſight of the one Generally
all obiects, eyther actually viſible in themſelues, or ſufficiently
illuminated, are better perceiued in darkeneſſe then in the
light. But ſo our aduerſaries will not grant, that after the church
hath ſufficiently propoſed the whole Canon to be Gods word,
the diſtinct meaning of euery part is more cleare and facile to
all priuate ſpirits, by how much they leſſe participate of the viſible
Churches further illuſtration. For (quite contrary to the

former inſtance) the Churches teſtimony or declaration is onely
neceſſary, or auaileable to right beliefe, in reſpect not of the obiect
to be beleeued [Scriptures;] but of the party beleeuing. For
(as hath beene obſerued) no man in their iudgement can belieue
Gods word, or the right meaning of it, but by beleeuing the
Church:Vide Sect. 2. cap. 1. & Sect. 4. c. 4. and all beliefe is inherent in the belieuer. Yea this vndoubted
beliefe of the Churches authority, is that, which in Bellarmine
and Sacroboſcus iudgement, makes a Roman Catholicks
beleefe of Scriptures, or diuine truthes taught by them, much
better then a Proteſtants. If otherwiſe the churches declaration,
or teſtimony, could without the beliefe of it infallibility,
which is inherent in the ſubiect belieuing, make Scriptures credible,
as the light doth colours viſible in themſelues: a Proteſtant
that knew their churches meaning, might as truely belieue
them as a Romane Catholike, albeit hee did not abſolutely
belieue the church, but onely vſe her helpe, for their Orthodoxall
interpretation, as hee doth ordinary expoſitors, or as many
doe the benefite of the Sunne for ſeeing colours, which
neuer thinke whether colours may bee ſeene without it or no.
For though it bee certaine that they cannot, yet this opinion
is meerely accidentall to their ſight: and if a man ſhould be ſo
wilfull as to maintaine the contrary, it would argue onely blindneſſe
of mind, none of his bodily ſight. Nor ſhould diſtruſt of
the Romiſh churches authority, ought diminiſh our beliefe of
any diuine truth, were her declarations requiſite in reſpect of
the obiect to bee beleeued, not in reſpect of the ſubiect beleeuing.
               10 Hence ariſeth that difference which plainely reſolues
the former doubt. For ſeeing the Sunne makes colours actually
viſible, by adding vertue or luſtre to them: wee may rightly
ſay, wee ſee colours, as truely as the light, by which wee ſee
them. For though without the benefite of it, they cannot be
ſeene: yet are they not ſeene by ſeeing it, or by relying vpon
it teſtimony of them. Againe, becauſe the vſe of light is onelie
neceſſary in reſpect of the obiect, or for preſenting colours to
the eye; after once they bee ſufficiently illuminated or preſented,
euery creature endued with ſight, can immediately diſcern
each from other, without any further helpe or benefite of externall

light, than the generall, whereby they become all alike actually
viſible at the fame inſtant. The Sunnes light then is the
true cauſe, why colours are ſeene: out no cauſe of our diſtinguiſhing
one from another beeing ſeene, or made actually viſible
by it. For of all ſenſible obiects ſufficiently propoſed, the ſenſitiue
faculty, though ſeated in a priuate perſon, is the ſole immediate
ſupreme Iudge, and relies not vpon any others more
publike verdite of them. On the contrary, becauſe the Romaniſts
ſuppoſed firme beliefe of Scriptures, or their true meaning
ariſeth onely from his vndoubted beliefe of the churches veracity
which is in the belieuer as in it ſubiect, not from any increaſe
of inherent credibility, or perſpicuity thence propagated to the
Scriptures: Hence it is that conſequently to his poſitions, moſt
repugnant to all truth, hee thinkes, after the church hath ſufficiently
auouched the Scriptures diuine truth in generall, wee
cannot infallibly diſtinguiſh the true ſenſe and meaning of one
place from another, but muſt herein alſo rely vpon the churches
teſtimony; and onely belieue that ſenſe to bee repugnant,
that conſonant to the analogie of faith, which ſhee ſhall tender,
albeit our priuate conſciences bee neuer ſo well informed by
other Scriptures to the contrary. The truth then of our former
concluſion is hence eaſily manifeſted. For ſeeing they hold
both the Scriptures and their diſtinct ſenſe to bee obſcure and
vnable to aſcertaine themſelues, vnleſſe the Church adde perſpicuity
or facility of communicating their meaning to priuate
ſpirits: ſuch, after the Churches propoſall, cannot poſſibly diſcerne
them any better, or more directly in themſelues, then they
did before, but muſt wholy rely vpon their Prelates, as if theſe
were the onely watchmen in the Tower of Gods church, that
could by vertue of their place diſcerne all diuine truth. Others
muſt belieue there is an omnipotent God, which hath giuen
his law; a Mediator of the new Teſtament: but what the meaning
either of Law or Goſpell is, they may not preſume otherwiſe
to determine, then weake ſights do of things they ſee confuſedly
a farre off, whoſe particular diſtance or difference they
muſt take onely vpon other mens report, that haue ſeene them
diſtinctly, and at hand.
               11 To illuſtrate theſe deductions with the former ſimilitude

of the prime and ſecondary viſibles. Let vs ſuppoſe for diſputations
ſake, that the Sunne which illuminates colours by its
light, were further indued (as wee are) with ſenſe and reaſon,
able to iudge of all the differences betweene them, which it can
manifeſt to vs, and hence challenge to bee a Pope or infallible
propoſer of colours. This ſuppoſition the Canoniſt hath made
leſſe improbable. For Deus fecit duo luminaria, God made two
lights, that is, by his interpretation, the Pope and the Emperour.
Or, if you pleaſe to mitigate the harſhneſſe of it, let the Man in
the Moone, whom we may not imagine ſpeechleſſe, bee ſuppoſed
the ſunne or Pope of colours, Mercurie or Nuncio. As the
Papiſts ſay, wee cannot know Scriptures to be Scriptures, but
by the infallible propoſall of the Church: ſo it is euident wee
cannot ſee any colour at all, vnleſſe illuminated or propoſed by
the Sunnes light. But after by it wee ſee them, ſuppoſe wee
ſhould take vpon vs to diſcourſe of their nature, or determine of
their diſtinct properties as now wee doe, and the ſunne or Pope
of colours, by himſelfe or his Nuncio ſhould take vs vp, as Duke
Humphrey did the blinde man reſtored to ſight, which hee neuer
had loſt; Yea? who taught you to diſtinguiſh colours? were you
not quite blinde but now? as yet you cannot diſcerne any colours
without my publike light, and yet will you preſume to deſine
their properties, and diſtinguiſh their natures againſt my
definitiue ſentence knowne? Muſt not hee that enables you to
ſee them, enable you to diſtinguiſh them ſeene? Muſt you not
wholly rely vpon my authority; whether this bee white, or that
blacke? If a man vpon theſe Motiues ſhould abſolutely belieue
the ſunnes determinations, renouncing the iudgement of his priuate
ſenſes: could hee truely ſay, that hee eyther knew this colour
to be white or that blacke, or another greene? Rather were
he not bound to ſay, I neither know white from black, nor blacke
from blew, nor blew from greene: but I know that to be white
which the Sunne, the onely infallible Iudge of colours, ſaith is
white; that onely to bee blacke, that blew, and that greene which
he ſhall determine ſo to be. I may thinke indeed that the ſnow
is white, or coales blacke: but with ſubmiſſion to the Sunnes
determination.
               12 And yet, as you haue heard at large out of the Trent

Councell, and beſt Apologies can bee made for it, the Church
muſt bee the infallible Iudge of all Scripture ſenſe, and muſt abſolutely
be belieued without all appeale to ſcriptures, not conditionally
as ſhee ſhall accord with them. The concluſion hence
iſſuing, is moſt infallible, and on their parts moſt ineuitable:
[Whoſoeuer abſolutely acknowledgeth this authority in the Church or
Conſistory, & yelds ſuch obedience vnto it in all determinations, concerning
the Canon of Scriptures, doth not belieue eyther this or that determinate
propoſition of faith, or any definite meaning of Gods word. The
beſt reſolution hee can make of his faith is this; [I belieue that to
bee the meaning of euery place, which the Church ſhall define to bee the
meaning:] which is all one, as if hee had ſaid, I doe not belieue
the Scriptures or their meaning, but I belieue the Churches deciſion
and ſentence concerning them. Hee that belieues not the
Church (ſaithNihil igitur efferunt, qui Eccleſiae authoritatem non abſolute, ſed ex conditione ponūt. Si nam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad cum mod
                        •
                      res habet, & mihi quoque fides habenda eſt, quando pronunciauero ſecundum Scripturas rectè intellectas. Id enim eſt nō mihi, ſed Scripturae credere. Canus lib. 4. cap. 4. Vide lib. 4. ſec. 2. chap. 5. 
                  Canus) but with this limitation, [if it giue ſentence
according vnto Scriptures;] doth not belieue the Church but the
ſcriptures. By the ſame reaſon it followes moſt directly; he that
belieues not the true ſenſe and meaning of ſcriptures, but with
this reſeruation, (If the Church ſo thinke or determine:) doth
not belieue them, but the Church onely. For, as the Schoolemen
ſay, Vbi vnum propter aliud, ibi vnum tantum. He that ſerues
God, onely becauſe hee would bee rich, doth not ſerue God but
his riches, albeit he performe the outward acts of obedience. Or
if, wee loue a man onely for his affinity with another whom wee
dearely loue: wee truely and properly loue but the one, the other
onely by way of reflexion or denomination, in ſuch a ſenſe
as wee ſay, a man appeares by his proxie, that is, his proxie appeares,
not he. In like ſort, beleeuing the ſenſe of Scriptures
onely from the ſuppoſed authentique declaration of the church,
or becauſe wee belieue it: wee infallibly belieue the Church
alone, not the Scriptures, but onely by an extrinſecall denomination.
               13 Yet as a man may from ſome reaſons leſſe probable,The greater morall or hiſtoricall beliefe the Romaniſt hath of the truth or true meaning of Scriptures, the greater his condemnation by ſubſcription to this doctrine of the Churches abſolute infallibilitie. haue
an opinion of what hee certainely knowes, by motiues more ſound;
or as we may loue one in ſome competent meaſure for his own
ſake, and yet affect him more entirely for anothers, whome wee
moſt dearely loue: ſo may an abſolute Papiſt, in ſome morall

ſort belieue the Scriptures for themſelues, or holde their orthodoxall
ſenſe as probable to his priuate iudgement; albeit hee
belieue them moſt for the Churches ſake, and that ſenſe beſt
which it commends. But this his beliefe of the Church, being
by their doctrine more then morall or conditionall, doth quite
ouerthrow all morall or probable beliefe, hee can poſſibly haue
from what ground ſoeuer, of ſcriptures themſelues. For as I
ſaid before, when theThis argument holds (as we ſay) à fortiori of faith infuſed: for no man can be ſo fully perſuaded, that he hath diuine faith infuſed of any point, but muſt renounce his perſwaſion, whē the church defines the cōtrary: whoſe definition or aſseueration, be it a cauſe or condition of beleeuing, wil fully perſwade the Romaniſt, that hee nowe hath diuine infuſed ſaith of the contrari
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      that hee beleeued before. For his divine infuſed ſaith & his habit of Theologie may not diſagree, and yet in this caſe his habit of Theologie may not yeeld vnto the other, becauſe it hath the Churches teſtimonie, which (it is ſuppoſed) the other wanteth, Sect. 2. Chap. 2
                           •
                         Porag. 9. Annot.
                   Church ſhall determine ought contrary
to his preconceiued opinion, the more probable or ſtrong it
was, the more it encreaſeth his doubt, and makes his contrary
reſolution more deſperate, yea more damnable if habituall, becauſe,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  extremely contrary to the doctrine of faith.
Bellarmines preſcription in this caſe, is iuſt as if a Phiſitian or Surgeon
ſhould ſeeke to eaſe the paine by ending of the Patients
dayes. Leſt a man ſhould ſinne againſt his conſcience, this a Doctor
aduiſeth him to belieue the Church cannot teach amiſſe.
               14 To conclude then: Hee that abſolutely belieues the Pope,
as Chriſts Vicar generall in all things, without examination of
his decrees by Euangelicall precepts, neither belieues Chriſt nor
his Goſpell; no not when this pretended Vicar teacheth no
otherwiſe then his Maſters lawes preſcribe For thus belieuing a
diuine truth onely from this mans authority, hee commits ſuch
Idolatry with him (for the kind or eſſence) as the Heathen did
with Mercury, their falſe Gods ſuppoſed meſſenger, though ſo
much more hainous in degree, as his generall notion of the true
God is better, whoſe infinite goodneſſe, cannot entertaine an
interpreter no better qualified then moſt Popes are, did his wiſdome
ſtand in need of any. But if when the Pope ſhall teach
the doctrine of Diuels, men abſolutely belieue it to be Chriſts,
becauſe his pretended Vicar commends it to them: in thus beleeuing,
they commit ſuch prepoſterous Idolatry, as thoſe of
Calecut, which adore the Deuill, vpon conceit, doubtleſſe, of
ſome celeſtiall or diuine power in him; as the abſolute Papiſt
doth not adore the Pope, but vpon perſwaſion he is Chriſts Vicar,
and teaches as Chriſt would doe, viua voce, were hee again on
earth. And leſſe it were to bee lamented, did theſe Pſeudo Catholiques
profeſſe their allegiance to Sathans incarnate Agent,
as to their ſupreme Lord, by ſuch ſolemne ſacrifices onely as the

inhabitants of Calicute performe to wicked ſpirits.That this doctrine emboldens ſuch as embrace it, to glory in villany But this their
blinde beliefe of whatſoeuer hee ſhall determine vpon a proude
and fooliſh imagination he is Chriſts Vicar, emboldens them to
inuert the whole law of God and nature, to glory in villany, and
triumph in miſchiefe, euen to ſeeke prayſe and honour eternall;
from acts ſo foule and hideous, as the light of nature would make
the Calicutians or other Idolaters bluſh at thier very mention. It
is a ſure token hee hath not yet learned the Alphabet of their religion,
that doubts whether Ieſuiticall doctrine concerning this
abſolute beliefe, extend not to all matters of fact. And if out of
ſimplicity, rather then policy, ſo they ſpeake: I cannot but much
pitty their folly, that would perſwade vs it were not the fault of
Romiſh Religion, but of the men that profeſſe it, which hath inticed
ſo many vnto ſuch diueliſh practiſes of late. I would the Ieſuite
were but put to inſtance what kind of villany eyther hath
beene already acted on earth, or can yet poſſibly bee hatched in
the region vnder the earth, ſo hideous and vgly, as would ſeeme
deformed or odious to ſuch as are wholly led by this blind faith,
if it ſhould but pleaſe the Romiſh Clergy, to giue a milde or fauourable
cenſure of it. No brat of hell, but would ſeeme as beautifull
to their eyes, as young todes are to their dammes, if their
mother once commend the feature of it, or acknowledge▪ it for
her darling. Did not ſome of the Powder-plotte, after Gods
powerfull hand had ouertaken them, and ſentence of death had
paſſed vpon them, euen when the Executioner was ready to do
his laſt office to them, make a queſtion whether their plot were
ſinnefull or no? So modeſt were ſome of them, and ſo obedient
ſonnes to the Church of Rome, that they would not take vpon
them to ſay eyther the one or other, but referred the matter
to their mothers determinations; hereby teſtifying vnto the
world, that if the Church would ſay, they would beleeue ſo great
an offence againſt their Country were none againſt God. One of
them was ſo obſtinate, as to ſollicite his fellow, whileſt both were
drawne vpon one hurdle to the gallowes, not to acknowledge it
for any ſinne. Or if theſe muſt bee reputed but priuate men, not
well acquainted with their Churches tenents, and therefore no
fitte inſtances to diſapproue her doctrine: let the ingenuous
Reader but peruſe their beſt Writers anſweres to the obiections

vſually made againſt the Popes tranſcendent authority, and hee
ſhall eaſily perceiue how matters of fact are included in the beliefe
of it; how by it all power is giuen him in heauen and earth,
to peruert the vſe and end of all lawes humane or diuine. I will
content my ſelfe for this preſent with ſome few inſtance out of
Valentian.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               Prouing the last aſſertion, or generally the imputations hitherto laide
vpon the Papacy, by that authority the Ieſuites expreſly giue vnto
the Pope in matters of particular fact; as in the canonizing of
Saints.
               1 HOw oft ſoeuer the Pope,Quotieſcunque Romanus Pontifex in ſidei quaeſtionibus definiendis, illa qua eſt praeditus authoritate vtitur, ab omnibus fidelibus tanquam doctrina fidei recipi diuino pr
                        •
                     cepto debet eu ſententia, quam ille decern
                        •
                     t eſſe ſententiam fidei. Toti
                        •
                     s autem eum ipſa authoritate vti credendum eſt, quoties in controuerſia fidei ſic alterutram ſententiam determinat, vt ad eam recipiendam obligare velit vniuerſam Eccleſiam. Valent. tom. 3. in Aquinat. Diſp. 1. Quaeſt. 1. De obiect. fidei. Punct. 7. §. 39. in defining queſtions of
faith, ſhall vſe his authority: that opinion which
hee ſhall determine to bee a point of faith, muſt bee
receiued as a point of faith by all Christian people. If
you further demand, howſhall wee know when
the Pope vſeth this his abſolute authority. this Doctor in the
ſame place thus reſolues you.
               
               
                  It muſt bee belieued, that he vſeth this his authority, as often as in
controuerſies of faith, hee ſo determines for the one part, that he will
binde the whole Church to receiue his deciſion. Leſt ſtubborne ſpirits
might take occaſion to calumniate the Pope for taking, or the
Ieſuites for attributing tyrannicall authority vnto him: thisDiſtinguendi ſunt modi, quibus poteſt contingere Pontificem aliquid aſſerere. Primo enim poteſt ſibi perſuadere aut aſrere aliquid, vt priuata perſona quaedam, vel doctor alius, quiſpiam, vt ſi nollet Ecclèſiam vniuerſam ad recipiendam ſuam aſſertionem obligare, ſed tantum ſententiam ipſe ſuam reputaret veram. Hoc modo Innocentius 3. & nonnulli alij Pontifices opuſcula varia ediderunt. Ac illa quidem, quae ſic Pontifex aſſeuerat, communis ſententia omnium Theologorum eſt, non oportere eſſe omnia vera & infallibilia, quaſi à Pontificia authoritàte profecta. Quin imo à pleriſque authoribus conceditur, ſieri poſſe; vt Pontifex tanquam quaedam priuata perſona in haereſim labatur Ibidem.
                   Ieſuite would haue you to vnderſtand that the Pope may auouch
ſome things which all men are not bound to hold as Goſpell; nay
hee may erre, though not when hee ſpeakes ex Cathedra, as head
of the Church, yet when hee ſpeakes or writes as a priuate Doctor
or expoſitor, and onely ſets down his owne opinion without
binding others to thinke as hee doth. Thus did Innocent the
third, and other Popes, write diuers books, which are not in euery

part true and infallible, as if they had proceeded from their
Pontificiall authority. Yea but what if this preſent Pope, or any
of his ſucceſſors, ſhould binde all Chriſtians to belieue, that
Pope Innocents bookes, were in euery part infallibly true; whether
muſt wee in this caſe belieue Valentian, or the Pope thus
determining, better? If Valentian in the wordes immediately following
deſerue any credite, wee muſt belieue the Pope better
then himſelfe: yea, hee himſelfe muſt recant his cenſure of Pope
Innocents works. For ſo in the other part of his diſtinction hee
addes;Secundo modo poteſt Pontifex aliquid aſſerere obligando vniuerſam Eccleſià vt illud recipiat, nec quiſquam audeat ſibi perſuadere contrarium. Et quaecunque Pontifex aliqua de religione controuerſia ſic aſſerit, certa ſide credendum eſt, illum infailibil ter, ac preinde ex authoritate Pontificia, hoc eſt, ex diuina aſſiſſētia, id aſſerere. Ibidem.
                   
                  Secundo, poteſt Pontifex aſſerere, The Pope againe may auouch
ſomething, ſo as to bind the whole Church to receiue his opinion,
and that no man ſhall dare to perſwade himſelfe to the contrary:
And whatſoeuer hee ſhall thus auouch in any controuerſie of Religion,
wee muſt aſsuredly belieue hee did auouch it without poſſibility of
error, and therefore by his Pontificiall authority. His proofe is moſt
conſonant to his aſſertion. I will not recite it in Engliſh, leſt the
meere Engliſh Reader ſhould ſuſpect any, able to vnderſtand Latine,
could be poſſibly ſo ridiculous.
               2 Theſe lauiſh prerogatiues of the Popes authority, the Ieſuites
ſee wel to be obnoxious to this exception. When the Pope
doth canonize a Saint, hee binds all men to take him for a Saint.
Can hee not herein erre? As for canonizing of Saints (ſaithItaque quod ad Canonizati: onem Sanctorum attinet, ami
                        •
                     ino, nego id, quod communiter doctores Catholici iure optimo negant, vide
                        •••
                     et poſſe Pontificem hac in parte errare. Quamuis enim teſtimonia, quae pro ali
                        •
                     uius hominis ſanctitate eſſeruntur, ſiut humana, id
                        •
                     oque natura ſua faltibilia: tamen poſito quod Pontifex illis inducati
                        •
                      tendem ad pronunciandum, quempiam ſanctum at que beatum iam eſſè, certa fide credendùm eſt, teſtimoni
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     lla (quatenus in genere ſaltem probant piè at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſanctè quenquā ex hac v
                        •
                     ta exceſſeſſe) vera eſſe, et hommē ei
                        •
                     ſmodi ex eorum eſſe numcro, quos per revelationes Scripturae generales in communi conſtat, diuinae gratiae beneficio conſeq
                        ••
                      aeternae vitae beatitudinem. Quae ſa
                        ••
                      certitūdo iſſdem illis Dei promiſſionibus nititur, ex quibus compertum habemus, nunquam eſſe futurum, vt vniuerſa Eccleſia in rebus religionis fallatur. 
                        •••
                     loretur autem 
                        〈…〉
                     , ſi ſen ſum reputaret, ac pro tali veneraetur eum, qui ſanctus non eſt. Hic autem illud, quūd 
                        〈…〉
                      ab orthodoxis probatum atque defenſum eſt, tanquam ex fide certum pono, nemperem eſſe amnino, quae ad Eccleſie aedificationem, adenque ad off tium Pontificis pertineat, vt Sancti quidam aliquando canoni
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     ntur: ac 
                        〈…〉
                      Eccleſiam debere vt ſanctum venerari illum, quem ſam
                        •
                     us Pontifex num no ſanctorum adſeribit ſicut etiam vſus ipſe perpetuus, atque traditio Eccleſiae confirmat. Valent. ibidem. § 40. 
                  Valentian)
I abſolutely deny, (as the Catholique Doctors vpon good reaſons
generally doe) that the Pope can erre in ſuch a buſineſſe. The
certainety of this his beliefe hee would ground vpon thoſe promiſes,
by which wee are aſſured it ſhall neuer come to paſſe that the
vniuerſall Church can bee deceiued in points of Religion. But the
whole church ſhould erre very groſely in ſuch matters, ſhould, it repute
and worſhippe him for a Saint which is none. Here it would bee obſerued,
how Sathan inſtigates theſe men vnto ſuch tenents, as
may occaſion God and his Goſpell to be blaſphemed. Firſt, they

would make it an Article of faith, that all muſt belieue as the
Pope teacheth▪ Whence it followes, that eyther hee cannot
teach amiſſe, or elſe faith may periſh from off the earth. Which
if it could, God were not true in his promiſes. The ſureſt pledge
the Chriſtian world can haue of his fidelity in them, muſt be the
Popes infallibility, ſo as from the firſt vnto the laſt, hee muſt be
held as true in his dealings, as God in his ſayings. If hee faile in
canonizing a Saint, whom he cannot poſſibly know to be ſuch,
vnleſſe hee knew his heart, which belongs wholly vnto his maker:
God muſt be a lyar, and there is no truth in him. The finall
iſſue intended by Sathan in theſe reſolutions is this; When men
haue beene a long time ledde on with faire hopes of gaining
heauen by following the Popes direction, and yet in the end ſee
(as who not blinde ſees not) his groſſe errors and deteſtable villanies,
they may bee hence tempted to blaſpheme God as if hee
had beene his copartner in this conſenage. From this root (I take
it) hath Atheiſme ſprung ſo faſt in Italy. For whileſt faith is in
the blade, and their hopes flouriſhing, they imagine God and
the Pope to be ſuch friends as their blinde guides make them:
But afterwards comming to deteſtation of this man of ſinne, &
his treachery, holding his ſpirituall power as ridiculous, they
thinke eyther as deſpitefully, or contemptuouſly of the Deity;
or ſay with the
                  Pſal. 14. v. 1. 
                  foole in their hearts, there is no God.
               
               3 Thus Antichriſts followers ſtill runne a courſe quite contrary
to Chriſtian Religion.The fearefull manner of Ieſuites tempting God in maintaining this argument. For if it bee true (as it is moſt true)
that faith cannot vtterly periſh from off the earth; what damnable
abuſe of Gods mercy and fauour toward mankind is this, in
ſeeking, as the Ieſuites doe, to make all abſolutely rely vpon one
in matters of faith? For ſo if hee faile, all others muſt of neceſſity
faile with him. That is, the whole world muſt be as kind ſupernaturall
fooles to him, as that naturall idiot was to his Maſter,
who being demanded, whether hee would goe to heauen
with him or no, replyed hee would goe to Hell with ſo good a
Maſter, ſeeing any man would be willing to goe to heauen with
an ordinary friend, yea with his enemy. Though we ſhould vſe
no other argument but that, Auoide yee ſonnes of Sathan; for it
is written, yee ſhall not tempt the Lord your God: It ſhould, mee
thinkes, bee enough to put all the Ieſuites in the world vnto ſilence

in this point, did they not as farre exceede their father in
impudency, as they come ſhort of him in wit. For this manner
of tempting God is more ſhameleſſe then the Diuels ſuggeſtion
vnto our Sauiour, when hee was inſtantly ſilenced with this
reproofe. A preſumption it is more damnable to expect the protection
or guidance of Gods ſpirit, in ſuch deſperate reſolutions
as Valentian here brings, then it were for a man to throw himſelfe
headlong from an high Tower, vpon hope of Angelicall ſupportance.
For ſeeing (as I ſaide) God hath promiſed, that true
faith ſhall not periſh from off the earth; for all men to aduenture
their faith vpon one mans infallibility, who may haue leſſe ſauing
faith in him then Turke or Infidell, is but a prouoking or daring
of God to recall his promiſe. Or what more damnable doctrine
can bee imagined, then that all men ſhould worſhippe him for
a Saint, whom the wickeddeſt man on earth doth commend vnto
him for ſuch?
               4 But to proceede. As the doctrine is moſt impious, ſo are
the grounds of it moſt improbable. For how can the Pope or
Papiſts infallibly know this or that man to bee a Saint; Seeing
there is no particular reuelation made of it, eyther to the Pope
or others? I anſwere (ſaith Valentian) that the generall reuelation,
whereby it is euident, that whatſoeuer the Pope ſhall decree, as pertaining
to the whole Church, is most true, may ſuffice in this caſe. Moreouer
(ſaith he) vnto the canonizing of Saints appertaine theſe reuelations
of Scripture, in which heanenly ioyes are generally propoſed to
all ſuch as leade a godly life. For by the Popes determination, we know
the Saint which hee hath canonized, to bee contained in the foreſaid
vniuerſall propoſition. Whence it is eaſie to frame an aſſent of faith;
by which wee may perſwade our ſelues, that ſuch a Saint hath obtained
eternall bliſſe.
               5 I would requeſt the Reader by the way to note the Ieſuites
iniurious partiality, in ſcoffing at ſuch of our Writers, as
without expreſſe warrant of particular reuelation, holde a certainety
of their owne ſaluation: when as they, onely by Gods
generall promiſes to ſuch as leade a godly life, and the Popes infallibility,
in declaring who haue ſo liued, can bee certaine (de
fide) others are ſaued. But the former doubt is rather remoued
then quite taken away by this his anſwere, if it ſtand alone. As

yet it may bee queſtioned, how any can infallibly know the truth
of what hee cannot poſſibly know at all, but only by other mens
teſtimonies, in their nature (the Ieſuite being iudge) not infallible,
and in whoſe examination it is not impoſſible his Holineſſe
may bee negligent? For how men liue or die in England, Spaine,
or the Indies, no Pope can tell but by the information of others
no Popes. The Reader perhaps will prognoſticate Valentians
anſwere, as in truth I did. For when I firſt framed the doubt
before I read it in him, mee thought it ſtood in need of ſuch a
reply, asLib. 2. Sect. 4. chap. 6, Parag. 6. 
                  Bellarmine brought for defence of the vulgar interpreter.
Altogether as fooliſh it were to thinke any priuate mans
information of anothers vprightneſſe in the ſight of God, as to
hold Theodotion the heretike could not erre in tranſlating of the
Bible. But though they may bee deceiued in teſtification of anothers
ſanctity; yetHis words be cited, Parag. 2. 
                  Valentian tels you, ſuppoſing the Pope is
once induced by their testimonies, though in nature fallible, to pronounce
him a bleſsed Saint, all muſt infallibly belieue their teſtimonies
(at leaſt ſo farre as they proue in generall, that hee died a godly and
religious death) are true, and that the party commended by them is of
that number, which as wee may gather from the generall reuelations
of Scriptures, ſhall bee made partakers of euerlaſting life.
                  Obij
                        •
                     i poteſt, quod vt poſtea dicturi ſumus, vt Pontifex in definiendo authoritate ſua rectè vtatur, ſtudio & diligentia in inquirenda veritate opus habet. Nihil autem obſtare videtur, quo minus poſſit interdum ille ciuſmodi diligentia praetermiſſa, controuerſiam definire. Poterit igitur tunc ſattem err
                        •
                     re. Reſpondeo, ſiue Pontifex in definiendo ſtudium adhibeat, ſiue non adhibeat: modo tamen controuerſiam definiat, infallibiliter certè defi
                        •
                     iet, atque adeo reipſa vtetur authoritate ſibi à Chriſto con
                        •
                     eſſa. Quod in promiſſionibus diuinis de veritate per magiſterium vn
                        •
                     us Paſtoris Eccleſiae factis certiſsime colligimus; vt ſaepius argumentati ſumus. Itaque ſtudium ac diligentia Pontif
                        •
                     i neceſſaria eſt, non vt omnino definiat, atque infallibili ſua authoritate v
                        •
                     atur, ſed vt conuenienter ac recte (hoc eſt, ſine peccato) cavtatur: ſicut pa
                        •
                     ebit etiam ex ijs, quae poſt dicemus. Huc accedit, quod ſi maximè diligentia Pontifici neceſſaria eſſet, vt emnino definiat; tamen eadem fide credere deberemus, illum quando rem controuerſam definit, 
                        ••
                     ſſicientem adh
                        ••
                     uiſſe diligentiam; qua ſupra demonſtratū eſt, debere nos credere, quod tunc ille infallibiliter ac verè definiat. Cae
                        •
                     cr
                        •
                     m non eſt ratio vlla firma, quam obrem exiſtimare debeamus, ſtudy diligentia
                        •
                      Pontifici neceſſariem eſſe non modo vt 
                        〈◊〉
                      ac ſine culpa, 
                        〈…〉
                      ſua in 
                        〈…〉
                      vtatur, verum etiàm vt 
                        〈◊〉
                      illa vtatur. Quare quod à nobis ante reſponſum eſt 
                        〈…〉
                      quod 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Valent. t
                           •
                         n: 3. in Aquinat. Quaeſt. 1. de obiecto fidei. Punct 7 § 40. Again, whether
the Pope in defining a controuerſie vſe diligence or no, yet without
all question hee ſhall define infallibly, and conſequently vſe the authority
Chriſt hath giuen him. Wherefore in his iudgement care and diligence
are neceſſary to the Pope, not ſo as if hee could not define aright,
or rightly vſe his authority without them: but that hee doe not ſinne
himſelfe, whileſt hee defines an infallible truth for others to belieue.
Hereto may bee added, that albeit a diligent care were neceſſarily required
for the infallibility of the Popes deciſions; yet the ſame faith,
which binds vs to belieue he decides the controuerſie infallibly, binds vs

alſo to belieue that hee vſed as much diligence as was requiſite. As for
example, in like caſe, If God ſhould promiſe that the next yeere ſhould be
a plentifull yeare of corne, we would conceiue he promiſed withall good
and ſeaſonable wether, & whatſoeuer elſe were neceſsary for effecting of
his promiſe, as Canus well notes. But Valentiaus laſt concluſion is,
that no ſure arguments can be brought, why wee ſhould thinke ſtudy or
diligence are neceſſary for the right vſe of the Popes authority; ſo farre
as it concernes other mens faith that muſt rely vpon it. Rely vpon it
they muſt, whether he determine ex tempore, or vpon deliberation,
and (for ought I can ſee) whether hee giue his ſentence
drunke or ſober, rauing or in his right mind, ſo he haue the wit
to charge all vpon paine of damnation to belieue it. But what if
ſome forreiner ſhould of ſet purpoſe ſend a dead-mans water to
trie this grand-Phiſitions skill: could hee without either care or
diligence, in examining their teſtimonies, or ſpeciall reuelation
from aboue (which in ſuch buſineſſes Valentian diſclaimes) diſcouer
their knauery? Or would his prognoſtication of life & health▪
redeeme the party deceaſed from the land of death, as ſome ſay
Pope Gregory by his prayers did Traian? Theſe and many like queſtions
might here bee made, which fall not within the reach
of Valentians anſweres hitherto recited: and yet theſe muſt abundantly
ſuffice for reſolution of all doubts concerning the canonizing
of Saintes, or approbation of religious orders;And yet ſome religious orders authorized by Popes haue proued naught, but we muſt beleeue their rules were good whilſt one Pope approues them, but grew out of date and vnfitting thoſe times wherein ſucceeding Popes did diſanull them. See Valentian in the place aboue cited. in
which buſineſſes likewiſe wee muſt belieue the Pope cannot
erre. Let the Reader pauſea while, looke on their madneſſe,
and laugh his fill at their apiſh drunkenneſſe in this argument,
that vvhen his mirth hath found a vent, and his heart is well
ſetled, hee may with a ſober, vnpartiall, ſtedfaſt eye behold the
myſtery of this iniquity.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII.
               What danger by this blaſphemous doctrine may accrew to Chriſtian
States: that of all hereſies, blaſphemies, or idolatries, which haue
beene ſince the world began, or can bee imagined till Chriſt come to
iudgement: this Apoſtaſie of the Ieſuites, is the moſt abominable and
contumelious againſt the bleſſed Trinity.
               1 WHat the conſequences of theſe poſitions may be,
none can doubt. No leſſe they are then I haue
ſaid; a reſigning vp of mens ſoules and conſciences
into the Popes hands, a conſecration of
hearts, minds and bodies, to worke any miſchiefe
imaginable at his appointment. For what if the Pope vpon
the relation of Rauilliackes ſtubborneſſe (they would ſay conſtancie)
in his torture, or Catesbyes praying to the virgine Mary at
his death, ſhould canonize both for Saints, and enioyne the
Chriſtian world ſo to honour them: Euery bloudy Aſſaſinate
would pray vnto the one for good ſucceſſe in acting his bloudthirſty
deſignes on Princes bodies.Tibi nos Rulle, & iſtis tuis, 
                        〈◊〉
                      omnium rerum machinatoribus, totam Italiam inermem tradituros exiſtimasti, quam praefidijs confirmaret
                        •
                     ? colonijs occuparetis? omnibus vinclis deuinctā & obſtrictam teneretis? vbi enim cauetur, ne in Ianiculo coloniam conſtituatis? ne vrbem hanc vrbe alia premere, atque vrgere poſſitis? non faciemus, inquit. Primum neſcio, &c. De leg. Agrar. Orat. 15. And if it ſhould pleaſe the
Pope ſo to determine, all men ſhould ſtand bound to giue ſuch
ſolemne worſhippe, as by their doctrine is due to ſacred reliques,
vnto that bloudy knife which hath beene ſheathed in Rauilliackes
Soueraignes breaſt: Euery deepe diſſembling Polititian, or ambitious
cholericke diſcontented ſpirit, would burne incenſe, ſaltpeter,
ſulphure & brimſtone to the others image, in hope of better
ſpeed in vndermining ſtates.
               2 If any Ieſuite or other brazen faced fauourer of their order,
or this doctrine, ſhould here reply: This dreamer caſts doubts
beyond the Moone; for is there any likelyhood his Holineſſe will
euer canonize ſuch wicked Imps for Saints? I muſt anſwere him
as Tully did Rullus, vtterly diſclaiming all purpoſe of doing ſuch
wrong vnto the Romane ſtate, as his petition vnto it once granted
might enable him to effect, and from my ſoule I wiſh euery
Chriſtian Prince, euery Princes counſellor would take that graue
Senators words for his motto, Primum neſcio, deinde timeo, poſtremo
non committam vt veſtro beneficio potius quam nostro conſilio ſalui

eſſe poſsimus. Firſt, whether the Pope would canonize ſuch miſcreants
for Saints or no, is more then we know. Secondly, his
former practizes miniſter ſo iuſt cauſe of feare to Chriſtian ſtates,
that it ſtands them vpon rather in wiſdome to preuent his power
of doing, then relie vpon his fidelitie for not doing them ſome ineſtimable
miſchiefe, by putting this practize in execution, if opportunitie
ſerue, and abilitie be leſt him thereby to ſtrengthen his
faction. Did not hisDum haec in Belgio agerētur, Fabius Vrſinus Cardinalis à Pō
                     tifice, poſt acceptum de Pariſienſi tumultu nunciū, Legatus in Galliā venit. 
                        •
                     gitur ille vbi Lugdunum venit, more ſolemni acceptus, multis laudibus ciniū fidem extulit, & Boidono illo lanienae immanis anteſignano palam laudato, etiam ei poteſtatis plenitudine gratie beneficium impertiuit; & quanquam à Regijs miniſtris ex Iohannis Moruillerij Cōſilio monitus, vt ſobriè & parcè de eare loqueretur, non potuit ſibi temperare, quin Regis in eo negotio prudentiam, patientiam, animi magnitudinem, publice & in priuatis colloquijs vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      apud omnes etiam cum delectu verborum commendaret. Thuan. l. 54. Anno 72. Legate into France, vpon notice of the Pariſian
maſſacre, beſtow his Holineſſes beſt bleſſing, cum plentitudine
potestatis; With abſolute and plenarie power deriued from himſelfe,
vpon the notorious aſſaſinate Boydon, chiefe Ring-leader of
that immane and woluiſh maſſacre committed at Lyons; begun
without any warrant of publique authoritie, only at this helliſh
miſcreants inſtigation, deſirous to follow, or rather out-goe his
Superiours in crueltie? Was not that villanie it ſelfe authorized
from Rome, where it found ſuch extraordinarie approbation?
Neuer did that City reioyce ſo much in memory of Chriſts birth
or Saint Peters, as at the hearing of this more then Herodian but-cherie
of ſo many thouſands noble-minded Gentlemen, with other
Innocents and Saints of God. So full was this Legates heart
of ioy hence conceiued, that after he came into France, out of the
aboundance of it his mouth did ſound the praiſes of the bloudie
actors and contriuers of this ſhamefull Tragedie, etiam cum delectu
verborum; With ſuch choice and affected words, as cauſed them bluſh
to heare him, that had not beene aſhamed to act the villanie. And
as if this excellent exploit had been effected by vertue of the holy
Catholike Church; thePoſtea cum Rege collaquutus inter alia multis & enixis precibus ac rationibus ab eo contendit, vt Concilium Tridentinū, cuius publicationem, totum iam novennium in Gallia magna cum vniuerfi Chriſtiani Orbis offenſione ſuſpenſam ag
                        •
                     bat, in regni curijs promulgaretur, & recentis facti omnibus ſaeculis depraedicandi, quod ad Dei gloriam, & S. R. E. dignitatem pertineret, memoria Sacro ſanctae Synodi approbatione veluti obſignaretur. Sic enim apud omnes tam qui ſunt, qaam qui poſtea erunt, conſtituetur, non odio, aut vltione, aut priuatae iniuriae ſenſu Regem in tot capitum perniciem conſenſiſſe, ſed ardenti Dei gloriae propagandae ſtudio à Chriſtianiſſimo Principe datum, vt quod ſtante Proteſtantium factione ſperari non poterat, ijs ſublatis, majorum religio, hoc eſt, Catholica Apoſtolica Romana, quae per Synodum Tridentinam à ſectario veneno aſſeritur, citra controuerſiam ac ſine exceptione per vniu
                        •
                     ſas Franciae ditionis prouincias conſtitueretur. Ibid. Vnleſſe the French King had beene inforced to make a contrarie Apologie before this Legate came into France, this bloudie maſſacre had beene authorized by the Sea Apoſtolical; as appeares from the ſame Authors words immediately following. His & alijs rationibus ſaepius apud Regem repetitis, quae magni in Aula Romana ponderis, pleriſ
                        •
                      etiam apud nos ſpecioſae videbantur, quo minus Rex ac Regina acquieſcerent, obſtabantiam ſumpta ad excuſandum factum conſi
                        ••
                     a. Nam diplomatis poſtea promulgatis Rex contra conteſtabatur, non odio religionis, ſed ad reuin
                        ••
                     ndam Colinij ac ſequacium 
                        〈…〉
                     , que iuſſu ſuo Lutetiae acta eſſent, accidiſſe, exemplum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad 
                        〈…〉
                      ſuo cum dolore graſſatū eſſè: id
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      literis, orationibus ac libellis illis, de quibus diximus, vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      inculcabatur. Popes petition to the French King was,

that the Trent Councel might, vpon that good ſucceſſe, beginne
to be of force in France, and bee thus ſealed with bloud. Yet can
any man doubt, whether this Church would authorize murther,
or canonize Aſſaſinates, for her owne aduantage? Publikely ſuppoſe
ſhee would not; yet if the Popes decrees, when they expreſly
binde all, muſt, as Valentian contends, bee beleeued by all vpon
ſuch termes, as he annexeth: no queſtion but if he giue any ſpeciall
eniunction to the order of Ieſuites, or ſuch as they ſhall adiudge
ſit Aſſociates to whom theſe ſecrets may bee imparted; it
ſhall be as deuoutly entertayned by them whom it concernes, as if
it were vniuerſall. If charged they be, vnder paine of damnation,
ſecretly to worſhip this or that damned villaine; it will be held a
formall deniall of faith, either not to performe what is enioyned,
or to bewray what they performe. We may well ſuppoſe the Ieſuites,
and others of their inſtruction, haue more Saints in their
priuate Kalenders then all the world knowes of.Notādum eſt, duobus 
                        •
                     od
                        •
                     s poſſe aliquem canonizari, vno modo particulariter, ita vt ſolum in vna Prouincia, aut Dioeceſi habeatur Sanctus, & colatur pro Sancto. Alio modo gèneraliter, ita vt in tota Eccleſia habeatur pro Sancto, nec vlli liceat de eius ſanctitate dubitare. Primo modo canonizare poterat quilibet Epiſcopus, vt docet Thomas Waldenſ. lib. de Sacramental. tit: 14. c. 122. & paret ex Cypriano l. 3. Epiſt 6. Tamen hoc, quod olim licuit, modo non licet. Siquidem Alexāder 3. & poſtea Innocentius 3. videntes abuſus, qui oriebantur circa Sanctorum cultum, prohibuerunt, ne deinceps aliquis pro Sancto coli inciperet, ſine Romani Pontificij approbatione, vt patet cap. 1. & 2. de Reliquijs & Sanctorum veneratione. Secundo modo canonizare; id eſt, ita vt in tota Eccleſia Sancti habeantur, communis ſententia eſt, pertinere ad ſummum Pontificem: nam id habetur c. Audiuimus, &c. Cum ex eo de Reliquijs, & veneratione Sanctorum, & venerabile, de teſtibus & atteſtationibus, & patet etiam ratione; nam ad eum ſpectat proponere toti Eccleſiae quid ſit credendum, & quid agendum in ijs, quae ſunt religionis, qui Eccleſiae praeeſt. Dices, plurimi Sancti ſunt, qui in tota Eccleſia coluntur, quos non canonizanit ſummus Pontifex: Prinius enim Pontifex (ni ſorte ſallor) qui Sanctos legatur canonizaſſe, videtur fuiſſe Leo Papa 3. Reſpondeo, Sanctos veteres caepiſſe coli in Eccleſia vniuerſali, non tam lege aliqua, quam conſuetudine. Sed ſicut conſue
                        •
                     udines aliae vim habent legis ex tacito conſenſu Principis, & ſine eo nullam habent, vt patet ex B. Thoma, 1. 2. quaeſt 97. art. 3. Ita Sancti alicuius cultus, ex conſuetudine Eccleſiarum generaliter introductus, vim habet ex approbatione tacita vel expreſſa ſummi Pontificis. Bellarm. cap. 7. de Sanct. Beat lib. 1. Vide eundem cap. 7. ſcilicet, San
                        •
                     tos non canonizatos priuatim poſſe coli & coram alijs, ſed non inomni totius Eccleſiae. 
                  Bellarmine
grants the Pope may commend ſome vnder the title of Saints vnto a
ſet Prouince or Dioceſſe, though he enioyne not the whole Church ſo to eſteeme,
or at leaſt not ſo to entertayne them: That Saints reputed, not
canonized, may be priuately adored; That in this caſe a generall cuſtome
may preſcribe, and breede iust preſumption of the Popes tacit approbation,
though he giue no direct iniunction for the practize, nor poſitiue
ſignification of his conſent. For many were adored as Saints before
the ſolemnitie of canonizing was in vſe, firſt practized (as
farre as this great Clerkes reading ſerues him) by Pope Leo the
third.
               
               3 Now as their proiects are of another mold, and their meanes

to effect them more deſperate then heretofore: ſo theſe intimations
make it more then ſuſpitious, leaſt ſecretly they crowne ſuch
of euery ſort, as haue beene beſt qualified for their purpoſes, or
haue aduentured fartheſt for the Churches dignitie, with the titles
of Saints, to encourage others to like attempts. And if turbulent
or ambitious ſpirits, greedie of ſame, may bee fed with hopes of
being eternized in Ieſuiticall Kalendars; if men male-contented
with this preſent, may haue ſweet promiſes of euerlaſting happineſſe
in the life to come; vpon what miſchiefes will they not aduenture?
when as the one ſort is wearie of life, the other curbed
only with feare of preſent ſhame or diſgrace after death, otherwiſe
readie to ruſh into any danger, or auow moſt deſperate outrages
Albeit the parties propoſed to be worſhipped had been in
their life times no ſo bad, but rather incited to bold enterpriſes
by their ardent zeale: yet who would not deſire to imitate the aduenturous
actions of them whoſe memorie he adores? And yet
this longing deſire of imitating ſuch extraordinarie enterpriſes,
as others of noble ſpirits haue been thruſt vpon by ſecret inſtinct,
is alwaies dangerous, and in men not ſo well qualified as their Authors
were, prepoſterous. For it will finde occaſions of like practize
when 
                     •
                  one is giuen; vertue ſhall be the obiect of deſpite, becauſe
in factious oppoſitions, contempt of it may affoord matter
of glorie; Hatred and malice to Princes perſons ſhall be accounted
zeale and deuotion to the Church. But if powder-plotters,
or publique Aſſaſinats may be dignified with titles of Saints, or
propoſed for imitation: the Chriſtian world may perceiue the
height whereto this miſchiefe may grow, when it will be too late
to controuſe it. It is an excellent caueat which old
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Caeterum de locis ab exemplo & ſimili, tot ſunt experimenta fallaciarum, quet hominum capita, dum quilibet aſſequi vult quem
                        •
                     ibet, dum exemplo dicit ſe viuere talium & ta
                        •
                     um quos approbat aut canonizat Eccleſia, vel qui ſuperiores eorum ſunt. Qui Rectores, qui Doctores, qui Laudati. Quid facit ſilius, aiunt niſi quod viderit patrem ſacientem? Patres tamen optimos ipſi nolunt ſed peſsimos hoc exemplo ſequi. Vox aliorum, eſt Paulus ſe laudauit. Paulus viſiones in raptu ſuſcepit, cur non poteſt modo Dominus in talibus & talibus ſimilia operari▪ Hinc conſictio p
                        ••
                     phetiarum, hinc miraculorum admonitio Hinc etiam adoratio damnatorum heminum in populis, Teſtis eſt mihi legenda imo de aderatione Canij mortui v
                        •
                     ſum eſt in Vierna. Caneat igitur ſancta ſedes Romana, caueat in ea ſedens Papa, quibus argumentis & 
                        •
                     anſis & medijs canoviz
                        •
                      tio alicuius ſit facienda, Gerſon. Tractat. 8. De cuſtodia Angelorum partitio 3. ſuper Magnificat.
                   
                  Gerſon hath,
not impertinent to this purpoſe, though intended by him eſpecially
for priuate vſe. Amongſt other ſophiſmes vſed by Satan to
enſnare mens foules, That Topicke of examples, or ſimilies, affoords
as many experiments of fallacies as there bee men; whileſt euery one
ſeekes to imitate any one, and profeſſeth to frame his life by the example
of ſuch, as either the Church doth Canonize, or their Superiors, Gouernors,
Doctors, or men of ſame approue. What doth the ſonne (ſay
they) but what he ſees the father doe: and yet theſe mates follow not the

beſt, but the worſt Fathers; (at leaſt that in them which is worſt for
them to follow) by this example: ſome of them ſtick not to ſay, Paul
commended himſelfe, Paul had viſions in a trance, and why may not
God in theſe dayes worke the like effects in others? Hence are prophecies
faigned, hence are admonitions by miracles, hence are damned perſons
adored by the multitude; witneſſe the Legend, yea and Vienna can beare
witneſſe of a dead dogs adoration. Let the ſacred Roman See therefore
beware, Let the Pope that ſits therein beware, vpon what grounds or
motiues they canonize any.
               
               4 Rather let all Chriſtian States beware, leaſt they giue ſuch
authoritie to either. For if the danger were not alwayes imminent
from their trayterous and bloud-thirſtie mindes, that profeſſe
this doctrine in any Kingdome: yet from diuine Iuſtice the
plagues vpon Prince and People, that authorize or permit the
profeſſion of it, will be one day publique and grieuous. For better
might they nurſe all other kindes of inchantments, or magicall
practizes;That Ieſuiticall doctrine in this argument is truely and properly wicthcraft or ſorcerie. better might they giue harbour to all other hereſies
broched ſince the world beganne; then ſuffer this Ocean of all
miſchiefes, whether flowing from errours in manners, or matters
of doctrine, to encroach vpon their coaſts. And here let not the
Reader deceiue himſelfe by imagining the holy Ghoſt had vſed a
Metaphore, rather then ſtrict proprietie of ſpeech, when he called
the whoore of Babylon a Witch or Inchantreſſe. For the faith
wherby the Romaniſt boaſts he beleeues the Scriptures, (as elſewhere
God willing ſhall be ſhewed) is meerly magicall: this doctrine
we now diſpute againſt, the very Idea of infernall ſuperſtition,
or, as they terme it, vana obſeruantia, in reſpect of the eſſence
and qualitie, and for the extent of miſchiefe whereto it leades, as
the maine Sea of ſorcerie, and all other kindes of magicall ſuperſtition,
as ſo many Brookes or Riuers. For whence ſprings Sorcerie
properly ſo called? Either from expreſſe compact with euill
ſpirits, or from the ſolemne performance of certayne blinde ceremonies,
which are but ſacrifices vnto infernall Powers; whereby
they gaine intereſt in the ſacrificers ſoules, in witneſſe whereof
they ſometimes beare their markes in their bodies. But if we looke
into the myſterie of this iniquitie, the Ieſuites by ſubſcribing vnto
this doctrine of the Churches tranſcendent authoritie, and taking
the ſolemne oath of their order; enter a couenant, though

not ſo expreſſe or immediate, yet more firme and deſperate then
other Magicians vſually doe. For they ſweare, and teach others
to ſweare abſolute obedience to the Pope: they thinke themſelues
bound, and would binde others not to examine his decrees: to
eſteeme of his pardons, though deſtitute of al warrant from Gods
word, as highly as the Magicians doe of Charmes, for which they
can giue no reaſon either in arte or nature: to offer vp their prayers
and other religious worſhip vnto ſuch as hee ſhall appoint
them, albeit, for ought they know, or as they iuſtly may ſuſpect,
damned miſcreants; which is a more helliſh ſacrifice then any other
Magicians vſe. And though Witches doe, yet all ſorts of
Sorcerers enter not expreſſe couenant with the Prince of darkeneſſe.
And it is all one, whether like Witches they giue their
ſoules to him immediately; or thus abſolutely betroath them to
his Proxy or principall Agent here on earth. For as the Apoſtle
inſtruct vs, by thus worſhipping the Beaſt they worſhip the Dragon
his Maſter.
               5 Laſtly, in reſpect of this mouth of blaſphemie, Mahumetiſme
and Gentiliſme are as a toy. The ancient Heathen, out of
their inbred ignorance, and want of externall meanes for right
information of their vnderſtanding, changed the glorie of the incorruptible
God into the ſimilitude of corruptible things; often
taxed by meere Philoſophers for their groſſeneſſe. Theſe blaſphemers,
though profeſſing the worſhip of the euer-liuing, true, and
only God, though partakers of his written word, and all the helps
his gracious prouidence from time to time hath affoorded for
manifeſtation of it right ſenſe and meaning, abuſe philoſophie
(wherein they excell) with all other gifts of arte and nature,
to transforme the moſt eſſentiall attributes of the diuine nature;
to turne his truth into lyes, his goodneſſe into all abomination.
For hauing this naturall notion in their braine, [Whatſoeuer
God ſaith is true, whatſoeuer he approues moſt iuſt and good,] their
next preſumptuous aſſumption is, [But God ſaith whatſoeuer the
Romiſh Church or Pope ſaith ex Cathedra, whatſoeuer hee allo
                        •
                     es God
allowes the ſame.]
                  That this doctrine inuerts the whole foame of Chriſtian Religion, And this aſſertion, which thus confounds the
limits of Gods truth and the Popes, that the Chriſtian world cannot
diſcerne one from another, once wrought in mens hearts,
what vntruth or falſhood, what hereſie can be hatched ſo dangerous?

what villanie conceiued ſo abominable; but may be preſently
fathered vpon that holy One, from whom proceedes nothing
but good? Thus may bloudy and prodigious maſſacres be
inuested with the moſt glorious titles the beſt of Chriſts Saints euer
enioyed for their beſt deedes. Iuſt reward for matchleſſe impieties
that benefit them, may bee ſet forth to the world as the
crowne of Martyrdome. Finally, their gaine is hereby made the
meaſure of goodneſſe, their pompe and glory the rule of piety,
and end of euery Chriſtians faith, vnto which he muſt not ſtick to
ſacrifice his ſoule, as an Holocauſlum euer burning, neuer conſuming
in that brimſtone lake. If it ſhall pleaſe the Pope to authorize
murther, though of the Lords annointed; God the Sonne
muſt be the chiefe Aſſaſinate to giue power and ſtrength, and
heauen for the reward vnto the Actor. If pleaſed hee bee to giue
way to inceſt, as for the Vnckle to marrie the Niece, a fornication
not named but with diſtaſte amongſt the ancient Heathens, (I
would abhorre to ſpeake it, would they bee aſhamed to giue iuſt
occaſion:) the holy Ghoſt muſt not diſdaine to be his Bawd or
Pander. If diſpoſed to diſpenſe with periurie; God the Father
muſt be as his Vaſſall, to ſuffer diſgrace at his appointment, to recall
the ſentence of vengeance, which the partie ſwearing by his
name did imprecate vpon his owne head, if he relented. Though
this be the greateſt iniurie that can be offered to ſo great a Maieſtie
(vnto whom execution of iuſt vengeance properly belongs)
yet muſt the Almightie, at the Popes appointment, bee content
to put it vp.
               6 It is a qualitie in Kings very commendable, ſaith Paulus
Quartus,
                  Sed multos, vt auctio, qui apud te plurimum poſſunt, fidei datae ac iuſiurandi pactis interpoſiti religio monet, qua vt nihil Principi antiquius eſſe debere minimè inficias ierim ita eos, qui pietatem ſuae opinioni praetexūt videre etiā at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      etiam oportet, ne dum rigidi religionis auctores haberi volunt, religionem ipſam in diſcrimen ad ducant, quod procul dubio accidet, ſi Pontificem tam neceſſario tempore deſeras, ad cuius defenſionem & maiorum exemplum, & Fides nuper data, & tua deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      te pietas obligat; quae omnia prius violes, & diuina at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      humana iura confundas neceſſe eſt, ſi induciarum pactis ſtare velis. Thuan
                           •
                        s Hiſt. l. 17. anno 1556 Legate and Nephew vnto Henrie of France, Religiouſly
to obſerue their oathes: but, when the Popes dignitie comes into danger,
religion it ſelfe is in hazard, and a prepoſterous courſe it were religiouſly
to obſerue an oath, vnto the ouerthrow of Religion. With theſe
and the like ſuggeſtions, impiouſly acute, did this ſweet Cardinal,
by commiſſion from theTandem bellum pro Pontiſicis deſenſione decretum; poſtquam Carafa Regem iuſiurandi induciarum pactis interpoſitirel gione, poteſtate ſibi à Pontifice tradita, ſoluit, libertatem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ei fecit, in Caeſarem & eius F. etiam ſine praecedenti belli denunciatione impetum facere. Ibidem paulo poſt.
                   Pope his Maſter, authorize, and animate
this French King to violate the league lately confirmed by
ſolemne oath, betwixt him and Philip of Spaine. Might hee not

as iuſtly, though not ſo politikely, in plaine termes haue told
him, either you muſt diſhonour God, or ſuffer the Pope to be diſgraced:
chooſe which you liſt. Doubtleſſe in the language of
Gods ſpirit, which ſearcheth the heart, hee that diſpenſeth with
an oath (of this nature eſpecially) ſolemnely taken, is greater then
he by whom men ſweare; and is in heart and deede ſo eſteemed,
by ſuch as acknowledge his authoritie in thus diſpenſing, or ſue
vnto him for like diſpenſations: But as if wilfull and open periurie,
without deepe and helliſh hypocriſie, were a ſinne too plaine
and ſimple for the Man of ſinne to countenance: theHac 
                        •
                     iducia 
                        •
                     retus Caraſa Regem aggr
                        •
                     ditur, & gladio ſacrato Pontificis nomine ei vt Eccleſiae R. De
                        •
                     enſort magna pompa ac 
                        •••
                     monia porrecto ad pri
                     
                        •
                     atū colloquium admiſſ
                        •
                     s, quo in ſtatures Romana ac familiae ſuae, fortuna ſit, demonſtrat, Ibidem paulo ante Iocum primo citatum.
                   Legate
firſt inueſts this beſotted Prince with the glorious title of Defenſor
Eccleſiae Romanae; and in witneſſe hereof deliuers him a
ſword, conſecrated by his Holineſſe owne hand, ere he make him
forſweare himſelfe, and forſake his God, who hath now forſaken
him, and for his ſinne (ſcarce expiated vnto this day) plagued the
Realme of France. For as the iudicious Hiſtorian (who hath the
Articles of this perfidious confederacie yet in his cuſtodie) well
obſerues,Nunc ingredimur 
                        〈◊〉
                      57. ſupra quingenteſſimū & milleſſimum, iuxta Caroli ſapientiſſimi Principis auguriū Galliae 
                        •
                     uneſt
                        •
                     ſſ
                        •
                     num: quo res noſtrae per inducias in tuto collo
                        •
                     atae, improb
                        •
                      Caraſarum ſuggeſ
                        ••
                     one, & amb
                        •
                     tioſa quorundam leui▪ tate in manifoſtū exitium praecipitatae ſunt, & regnum hoc hactenus ſlorentiſſimum ab eo tempore bellis ciuilibus diu iactatum, tandem per illos ipſos belli auctores Hiſpanorum praedae, & ludibrio patuit. Thuanus lib. Hiſt: 18. in initio anno 1557. this was the roote of all the miſeries haue ſince befalne
that flouriſhing Kingdome, and by Gods iuſt iudgements expoſed
it to the inſolencies of the Spaniard, through their meanes eſpecially,
that wrought the King to breach of his oath with Spaine
for entring this new confederacie with the Pope.
               7 Whileſt reading this ſtorie I called to minde the perfidious,
and cruell vſage of that renownedRex à Carafis ſollicitatus negotium dederat Coſinio maris praefecto & Picardie Praeſidi, vt in huſ
                        •
                     ico ex improuiſo aliquid conaretur. Is quanquam inuitus faceret, vt 
                        •
                     nducias, quas ſolemni iureiurando ipſe firma
                        •
                     crat, violaret, tamen cum res eo deductas videret, vt bello inter Hiſpanos & Pontiſicem exardeſcente Reges neceſſario ad arma deſcenſuri eſſent, antevertendum duxit, & inſigni aliquo facinore hoſtem praeueniendum. Ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      noctū cum prope oppidum 8. Eid. Ianu. Marcentibus viuo oppidanis inſidias ſtruxiſſet, à vetula tamen inſomm proditus eſt, quae vix tandem improbo clamore excitatis vigilijs contum noſtrorum irritum reddidit, inde Colinius Lentium, cum medium inter Inſulam & Regiacum Atrebatum municipium, quod Nimeta-cum olim ſuiſſe antumant, vi capit, diripit, & licentioſe habitum poſtremo incendit, ingenti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      praeda abacta cum pluſculos dies in limite exe
                        ••
                     
                     riſſet, ad ſuos reuertitur, hoc ruptarum induciarum initium fuit. &c. Ibidem.
                   Admirall in the Pariſian maſſacre:
the treacherous impietie of his politique enemies ſeemed
highly to extoll the wiſdome and iuſtice of his God calling him to
ſuffer his chaſticement in this life, that hee might not periſh with
the wicked, or ſuch as were impenitent for their former grieuous
ſinne; wherein this worthy Counſellor had in ſome ſort (though
with griefe, yet for the good of others I muſt vtter it) communicated

with the Pope, and his periured Soueraigne. For knowing
the breach of peace was fully reſolued vpon by the State of
France, he thought it a point of warlike wiſedome to begin with
the enemie in his owne Land, rather then expect his onſet vpon
notice of warre proclaimed: and faire opportunity (as he apprehends
it) being offered from an inſinuating Heremites diſcouering
of the ſituation, and readieſt way of expugning Doway, he attempts
the ſurpriſall of it; but preuented of his purpoſe by an old
woman that awaked the Garriſon, he deemed it a ſhame to return
home with emptie hands; though fill them he could not, but with
iuſt imputation of being the firſt that had actually broken the
league, as afterwards his venerable perſon was the firſt, vpon
whom thoſe perfidious Aſſaſinates, and Actors in the Pariſian
maſſacre did practice their intended butcherie, contrary to the
oath and faith which they had giuen him. God grant ſuch, as in
reformed Churches doe moſt deteſt, be neuer tempted by like opportunities
to imitate the wordly policies of the Papacie; that all
our conſultations to preuent their malice, may alwayes relliſh
more of the Doues innocencie and integritie, then of the Serpents
ſubtlety.
               8 He that would accurately obſerue the weake ſupportance of
the Roman See at that time, when the French could not relieue
it; how ſince that time the Popes haue ſhuffled themſelues into
the Spaniards fauour, to the great preiudice of France, who in
loue to them had brought it ſelfe ſo low; may by theſe moderne
ſtories eaſily diſcerne, the Papacies aduancement in times paſt to
haue beene wrought by ſuch meanes, as our Writers out of ancient
records haue deciphered. Eſpecially by ſowing enmitie betwixt
Chriſtian Princes, by ſeeking ſupportance now from one
then from another, as ſeuerall Popes, for the moſt part by-ſtanders
in ſuch broiles, yet skilfull to bet alwayes on the faireſt ſide,
ſaw fitteſt occaſions; vntill at length they got both feet on Princes
ſhoulders, and being once mounted, learned cunning to ſit faſt,
and ride them ſafely. For moſt of that ſucceſsion being ſtill of
ſeuerall lines, and different parentages, none of them were diſpoſed
to continue any ancient, or hereditarie fohood with the poſteritie
of their predeceſſors greateſt enemies, as lineall deſcents of
royall Families, out of their perſonall loue vnto their Anceſtors,

vſually doe, vnto the great damage of their ſtate and Countrie.
It is ſignificantly ſpoken by the Euangeliſt, That the ten Kings
ſhould giue their authoritie vnto the beaſt;
                  Reuel. 17. 12. 1
                        •
                     
                   thereby inſtructing vs,
that Antichriſt ſhould grow great by Princes fauours, and gracious
priuiledges beſtowed vpon him, not as the Ieſuite abſurdly
imagines, by taking authoritie vnto himſelfe by ſtrong hand before
it was giuen, as the Turkes, or Saracens, or other Barbarians
haue done.
               But to proceede; not the Infidelitie of Turke, of Iew, or Saracen,
not malignant Apoſtaſie is to be compared with this kinde of
Idolatrie, and blaſphemie we now diſpute againſt. The Turke calumniates
the Croſſe, the Iew accuſeth Chriſt himſelfe as an impoſtor:
but neither make him Author, or approuer of ſuch impieties
as they commit. The Ieſuite Fathers ſuch prodigious villanies,
as his ſoule from Satans ſuggeſtion hath conceiued, vpon
his Sauiour: all other Heretikes, or Idolaters, Turkes, Infidels, or
Apoſtataes doe then only, or principally offer contumelies vnto
Chriſt and Chriſtianitie, when they open their mouthes, and vent
their bitterneſſe againſt him. But of this Whoore and her attendants,
that prouerbe is moſt truely verified, Siue ſcortum bened
                        •
                     cat
ſiue maledi
                        ••
                     t perinde est. The contumelies offered by them to
Chriſt are all one, (alwaies moſt grieuous) whether they bleſſe or
curſe; whether they magnifie or blaſpheme his holy Name.
Whileſt they profeſſe ſuch abſolute allegeance to the Pope, the
Sonne of perdition, Chriſts greateſt enemie; in taking our Redeemers
praiſes in their mouthes: they doe but adde prophane
ſcurrilitie vnto blaſphemie, vſing him herein more contemptuouſly
then the Souldiers, which bowed their knees vnto him, but
buffet his face; ſalute him as king, and yet wound his head by
putting a crowne of thornes vpon it.
               9 But ſome out of charitie, not to bee blamed, will here demand:
Doe all the Maintayners of this ſtrange doctrine expreſly
and wittingly conceiue as meanely, or deſpitefully of Chriſt, as
theſe diſſolute Roman Souldiers did, though willingly (for their
owne aduantage) to cloake their ſecret ſcoffes, and mockerie of
his ſpirituall Kingdome with outward demeanure, more decent
and reuerent then the others vſed? Doe all the learned of that Religion
in heart approue that commonly reported ſaying of Leo the

tenth, Quantum profuit nobis fabula Chriſti; and yet reſolue, as
CardinallInde Caraſa Lu
                        •
                     ctiam regni Metropolum tanquam Pontificis 
                        •
                     egatus ſo
                        •
                     ita pompa ingreditur, vbi cum ſignum crucis, vt fit, ederet, verborum, quae proferri mos eſt, loco, ſerunt eam, vt era
                        •
                      ſe
                        •
                     uro de numine animo & ſummus relig
                        ••
                     nis deriſor, occuſate paſsim populo & in genua ad ipſi
                        •
                     s conſpectum procumbente, ſaepius. ſe
                        •
                     reta murmuratione haec verba ingeminaſſe. Quādoquidem populus iſte vult decipi, decipiatur. Thuanus lib. Hiſt. 17. Anno 1556. 
                  Carafa did, quoniam populus iſte vult decipi decipiatur,
to nuſſle the people in their credulitie? For mine owne part, as
yet I cannot thinke ſo, though I haue beene friendly cenſured for
ſaying the contrarie. Many of them, I am perſwaded, thinke they
honour Chriſt as much, as the beſt in reformed Churches doe.
But doth this their conceipt, or imaginarie loue to him, leſſen
their wrong, in reſpect of thoſe contumelies offered him by the
Heathen? Rather (in the learned) it is a ſymptome of that grieuous
plague, inflicted vpon the Iewes, That ſeeing, they ſhould not
ſee, that hearing, they ſhould not heare, nor vnderſtand: no ſigne at
all of better reall affection towards Chriſt, but rather a token of
greater ſeruilitie vnto Satan, or of that ſtrange ſpirituall drunkenneſſe
ſpoken of by the Euangeliſt. Their hearts and heads are
not acquainted; the one endites what Satan ſuggeſts, and moues
their outward members to act what he commands; the other interprets
all done in honour of Chriſt, as if a man ſhould bee ſo
deeply intoxicated with ſome pleaſant poyſon, as to enforce it
vpon his deareſt friend, for an extraordinarie daintie. Finally, that
theſe great Clearkes ſhould thus acknowledge Chriſt for the Redeemer
of the world, and yet admit euery Pope for his Compeere,
and thus deuoutly embrace the doctrine of Deuils, is an vndoubted
document, they are the ſworne followers of Him, whoſe comming
is by the working of Satan, with all power and ſignes, and lying
wonders, and in all deceiueableneſſe of vnrighteouſneſſe amongſt them
that periſh. That which eſpecially cauſeth many of vs to doubt,
whether the Ieſuites doe not equiuocate, when they ſpeake well
of Chriſt, is, becauſe their learning and iudgement are, on the
one ſide ſo great, and this imagination on the other ſo prodigiouſly
abſurd and ſottiſh, as one cannot poſſibly better brooke the
others companie in the ſame heart or braine, then the moſt flouriſhing
Prince, or Potentate in the world could the beaſtlieſt ſluttiſh
ſhee-foole liuing for the only conſort of his bed; howſoeuer
theſe cunning Panders in pride of their nimble wits may hope to
betroth more ſimple ſoules into this out-caſt of hell. And though
experience in ſome ſort hath proued it true, that no opinion was
euer propoſed ſo abſurd, but found ſome Philoſopher for it Patron:
yet this imagination of the Popes tranſcendent authoritie,

farre exceeds the limits of any experiments or obſeruation made
in Philoſophers, anſwerable to the former axiome. Notwithſtanding
the more their infatuation, of whom we ſpeake, exceeds the
bounds of all folly or vanitie meerely naturall, the more it aſcertaines
to vs the truth of the Apoſtles prediction in the place late
cited.2. Theſ. 2. 10. 11. Doubtleſſe becauſe they receiued not the loue of the truth, therefore
hath God ſent them ſtrong deluſions, that they ſhould beleeue lyes.
The fulfilling of which prophecie is moſt conſpicuous in the moderne
Ieſuites, the principall maintayners of this doctrine. For
were they not men of rare wit and exquiſite learning, were not
this opinion withall of all that are or can bee imagined the moſt
ſottiſhly improbable, and prepoſterouſly impious; the print of
Gods finger, thus confounding their braine, could not be ſo eminent
or diſcernable. The firſt bait, caſt out by Satan, was but to
draw the Romiſh Cleargie vnto practices, ſo ſuſpicious amongſt
the people that they could not be iuſtified, but by a conceipt of
infallibilitie: and not checking their pride, being challenged of error
in doctrine, and impietie in their dealings; the Lord gaue
them ouer to beleeue this monſter of falſhood and vntruth, a
bottomleſſe pit of hypocriticall prepoſterous blaſphemies.
               10 Would to God the daily ambitious practices of many,
that are or would be in great place amongſt vs, the proneneſſe of
moſt to tranſgreſſe the bounds of lawfull authoritie, and their vnreadineſſe
to recall their errors though neuer ſo groſſe, their extreme
impatience of all impeachment by men, as farre their Superiours
in ſpirituall graces, as their inferiours in ſecular dignitie;
did not plainely ſhew the paſſage from that point, where theſe
mens reſolutions anchor, vnto this new Tyre, the Rock of honor,
and ſeate of pride, to be but ſhort, and the tranſportation eaſie, if
opportunities of Time and Tide did ſerue them. But of the particular
temptations, and opportunities that did firſt driue the Romaniſts
into this harbour, as alſo of inueterate errors in other
points, and reliques of Heatheniſh diſpoſitions, whereby they
two others after them, elſewhere (according to my promiſe) if
God permit. At this time it ſhall ſuffice to haue waded thus farre
in theſe vnpleaſant paſſages, for diſcouering the enemies weakeneſſe
in his new Fortifications, or Repalliations rather of ſuch
breaches, as our ancient Worthies haue made in their imaginarie

Rock of ſtrength. Now as my ſoule and conſcience in the ſight
of God, and his holy Angels can aſſure me, theſe imputations of
blaſphemie, ſorcerie, and prepoſterous Idolatrie, I haue laid vpon
this fundamentall point of Romiſh faith, are moſt true, though
much leſſe exaggerated then it deſerues: ſo againe, I muſt confeſſe,
it hath in ſome ſort euer gone againſt my conſcience, publikely
to diſcipher or diſplay her abominations. For my little experience
of this preſent ages temper too well inſtructs me, what
great offence is oftimes hereby giuen to men, as weake in faith as
ſtrong in their perſwaſions of it, to ſlatter themſelues in their hypocriſie,
or make them ſeeme vnto themſelues, men rightly religious
or throughly ſanctified, whileſt they meaſure their loue to
true religion by their hatred vnto this doctrine of Deuils, or compare
themſelues with Prieſts and Ieſuites, as they are painted out
in their natiue colours by eloquent and learned Paſtors. But his
iniquitie be vpon his owne head, that thus peruerts my labours,
vndertaken for his good, vnto his harme. For vnto a quite contrarie
purpoſe haue I ſet forth this ſurvey of Romiſh blaſphemie,
in a larger volume then firſt I meant it, euen to ſtirre vp my ſelfe,
and euery Profeſſor of true religion, vnto ſerious amendment of
our liues, to hold faſt our faith, by holding vp hands pure from
briberie and corruption, by lifting vp hearts and mindes void of
all guile and hypocriſie, ardently zealous of euery good worke,
vnto the Lord our God continually; leaſt ſuch ſwarmes of Caterpillers
and Locuſts, as haue choſen Beelzebub for their God, deuour
this land, Mortis modus morte peior. To thinke ſuch ſhould
be the inſtruments of our woe, will vnto moſt of vs, I know farre
ſurpaſſe all conceipt of any other woe it ſelfe, or miſerie that in
this life can befall vs. And yet whileſt I conſider what God hath
done of old to Iſraell his firſt borne, and Iudah his owne inheritance:
the ouerplus of our ingratitude towards him for all his
goodneſſe, eſpecially our wilfull continuall abuſing theſe dayes
of peace, more and more ſweet and gracious then Ieruſalem it
ſelfe, the viſion of peace, did euer ſee ſo long together without interruption;
I am, and haue beene, as my publique meditations
can teſtifie, for theſe few yeares of my miniſterie, poſſeſſed with
continuall dread, leaſt the Lord in iuſtice enlarge his threatnings
denounced againſt Iudah vpon this Land. Fearefull was that meſſage

vnto Hieruſalem, I will bring the moſt wicked of the Heathen,
and they ſhall poſſeſſe their houſes: but more terrible is our doome,
if this ſentence be gone out againſt vs, I will plague you by the wickedſt
amongst the Christians, by men more cruell, proud, and inſolent,
then Babylonian, Turke or Inſidell, or any other enemie of
Chriſts Church hath beene, or could be, vnleſſe Chriſtians or Ieſuites
in name or ſhew, they were meere Antichriſtians, or Barieſus
heart and affection. Such titles we readily giue, and willingly
heare giuen vnto Loyolacs infamous broode. But if our wayes
ſhall continually proue as odious vnto our God, as theſe termes
import that Societie is vnto vs: what haue we done? Surely tyed
our bodies to the ſtake of iuſtice, by the wickedneſſe of our hands,
and proud imaginations of our polluted hearts; whiles our tongues,
in the meane while, haue ſet our cruell executioners hearts
on fire, more grieuouſly to torment, to conſume and deuour vs.
               11 But though likelihood of their preuailing againſt vs bee,
without our repentance, great, and their crueltie, if they ſhould
preuaile, more then likely to be moſt violent: yet this their hope it
cannot be long.
               
                  Tu quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      crudelis Babylon dabis impia paenas,
                  Et rerum inſtabiles experiere vices.
               
               The Lord in due time will turne againe the captiuitie of his people,
and the now liuing may liue to ſee theſe ſonnes of Babel rewarded,
as they haue long ſought to ſerue vs. Their ſhameleſſe
Apologies for equiuocation, and this old charme of Templum Domini,
which like vnluckie birds alwaies flocking, or frogs croaking
againſt ill weather, they haue reſumed of late with ioynt importunate
cryes (albeit with theſe they bewitch the ſimple, & choake
the worldling or careleſſe liuer, that accompts all ſerious thought
of Religion his greateſt trouble) ſound vnto harts ſetled in grace,
or minds illuminated with the ſpirit of truth, but as the laſt cracklings
of Lucifers candle, ſometimes ſhining in the Roman Lantherne
as the morning ſtarre, or an Angell of light, but now ſo
farre ſpent and ſunke within the ſocket, that it recouers it wonted
brightneſſe but by flaſhes; nor can his noſtrils, that is able with
the leaſt breath of his diſpleaſure from heauen in a moment to
blow it out, any long time endure the ſmell. Euen ſo, O Father,
for thy ſonne Christ Ieſus ſake; euen ſo, O Chriſt, for thine Elect

and choſens ſake, impoſe a period to our grieuous ſinnes againſt
thee, and our enemies malice againſt vs: infatuate their policies,
enfeeble their ſtrength, and preuent them in their
Deuilliſh purpoſes, that ſeeke to preuent
thee in thy iudgements, by ſetting
the world in combuſtion before
thy comming.
Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
            The continuation of matters proſecuted
in the firſt BOOKE.
            THe ingenious Reader, I truſt, reſts fully ſatisfied, that for planting
true and liuely faith in euery priuate Chriſtians hart, experiments
anſwerable to the rules of Scripture, without abſolute dependance vpon
any externall rule thereto equiualent, are ſufficient; the aſsiſtance of the
holy ſpirit (whoſe neceſsity, for the right apprehenſion of diuine truthes
reuealed, the Romaniſt nor doth nor dare denie) being ſuppoſed. That
Valentians heart did tell him thus much, and ſecretly check him for his
ridiculous curioſitie to make way vnto his circular reſolution of faith
Lib. 2. Sect. 4. Chap. 5. §. 16 & ſequent. Si autem quis demū rogetur, cum & reuelatio & propoſitio infallibilis obſcurae & ineuidentes ſint, quid ipſum impulerit, vt hūc quaſi labyrinthum rerum obſcuriſſimarū ingreſſus ſit ad fidem modo dicto acceptā
                  dam hoc eſt, ad credendum reuelationē propter Eccleſiae propoſitione, tanquam propter condicionem requiſitā, & hanc viciſſim propter reuelationem tanquam propter cauſam credendi: veniat tum ad illū alterum ſecundum proceſſum & rationes, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   motiua clariora exponat, quibus & ipſe inductus fuit, & quiuis prudens indu
                     ••
                   poſſit, ad acceptandam ciuſmod
                     •
                   fidem, quantumuis ſecundum ſe inevidentem & obſcuram. Id quod luculenter diſſerere licebit, co
                     •
                  nitis cōmunibꝰ motiuis noſtrae ſidei. Valent. Tom 3. in Aquinatem diſput 1. qu. eſt. 1. de obiect 
                        〈◊〉
                      punct. 1. §. vlt.
                before refuted, his diffident ſpeeches immediately thereto annexed,
(vpon conſciouſneſſe no doubt of it inſufficiencie) will giue the Reader,
though parciall, iust cauſe of ſuſpicion. If a man (ſaith hee) bee yet
further queſtioned, ſeeing aſwell the diuine reuelations, as the
Churches infallible propoſall; are obſcure and ineuident; what
ſhould impell him to enter into ſuch a labarynth of obſcurities, as
to imbrace the doctrine of faith by the former methode, [to wit
beleeuing the reuelation for the Churches propoſall, as for a condition
vnto beliefe requiſite; and the Churches propoſall againe
for the reuelation, being the cauſe of his beliefe] then let him come
vnto the ſecond proceſſe (or methode) and expound the reaſons
and clearer motiues, whereby hee was, and euery diſcreet man
may be, induced to imbrace faith, though of it ſelfe ineuident and
obſcure. Thus doe they traduce the grace of God, as if there were no
difference betwixt mid-day-light and mid-night-darkeneſſe; as if the
dawning of that day ſtarre in our hearts, or light of Prophets our2. Pet. 1. 19. Apostle
ſpeakes of, were not a meane betwixt that more then demonſtratiue
euidence of diuine Truthes which glorified Saints enioy, and obſcuritie
or Iewiſh blindneſſe. The particular manner how Gods ſpirit
workes liuely faith, by ſuch experiments as partly I did and hereafter
must acquaint him withall, the Reader I hope will gather, of his owne
accord, out of the diſcourſes following, concerning the nature of Chriſtian
faith, and the principall obiects thereof, whereunto my meditations
are now addreſſed, my long durance in this vnpleaſant ſubiect hauing
bred in my ſoule a more eager thirſt after theſe well ſprings of life.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Errata.
            In the Preface page 3, line 3, for Author of, read Author. pag. 7, lin. 2, for Damnable
Idolaters, reade damnably Idalatrous.
            
            Page 13, line 31, ther, reade their. p. 14, l. 30, ſhould, if any ſhould. p. 24, l 27, goe,
ergo. p. 28, l. 17, ort, ſort. p. 48, l 17, leſt, left, ibid. l. 31, ſuch, 0. p. 50, l. 9, fuutre, future.
p. 52, l. 13, our confeſſion, 0. ibid. l. 16, exceptions, exception? p. 53, l. 5, of, or of. ibid l.
18, cauſe, can. p. 54, l. 11, no, 0. p. 56, l. 8, his and, and his. p. 57, l 6, ſame, omit. p. 60, l. 11
or ſuper, & ſuper. p. 62, l. 12, therto, though. p. 63, l. 32, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , p. 70, l. 14, offence,
of offence. p. 73, l. 22, ſo, doe. p 75, l. 21, it is, it is euident. p. 77, l. 19, leaſt left.
p. 79, l. 17, diſabundantly, this abundantly. p. 80, l. 20, be, can be. p. 83, l 34, repreſentiue,
repreſentatiue. p. 84, l. 11, interrupted, vninterrupted. ibid. 25, his, this. p. 85, l. 29
that, they. p. 86, l. 6, continue, all things continue. ibid. l. 14, approued, an approued.
ibid. l. 23, they, omit, ibid. l. 33, with them, within them. p 90, l 25, cords, records. p 93
l. 14, thy, they. p. 109, l. 10, vntruthes, truthes. p. 110, l. 18, skill, ſtill. ibid. l. 24, only, om.
p. 112, l. 27, ſinnes, ſuch. p. 113. l. 22, of, or. p. 116, l. 13, Miniſter, Maſter. p. 117, l. 21, former,
forme. p. 122, l. 3, would haue, had. p. 127, l. 7, mes, mens. ibid. l. 11, death, to death.
p. 133, l. 28, conſeruancie, conſonancie. p. 140, l. 32, tropickes, topickes, p. 141, l. 22, the,
om. p. 144, l. 15, reuiue, reuiew. p. 151, l. 18, of, om. ibid l. 19, the, of the. p. 153, l 11,
this, they. p. 155, l. 37, matters, meates. p 156, l. 13, thy, they. ibid. l. 19, mine, wine.
p. 168, l. 26, remembrance, Remembrancer. p. 173, l. 34, vniformally, vniformely. pag.
183, l. 15, miſt King, miſtaking. p. 192, l. 26, in, om. p. 204, l 4, irriation, irritation. ibid.
l. 7. former, formall. p. 205, l. 2, dele hebraica aut ſuppone vera ex Deut. &c. p. 207. l. 22, ruled,
could. p. 251, l. 33, roote, note. p. 258, l. 3, beſt, laſt. p. 279, l. 20, faſt, feſt.
            
         
      
   