
      
         
            
            
               
                  The Myrrour
or Glaſſe of
Chriſtes
Paſſion,
                  
                     ❧ 
                     ❧
                  
                  
                     ❧
                  
                  
                     HH
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            The Preface.
            ¶To the honorable lorde Huſey.
            
               My lorde / accordyngly vnto your deſyre:
I haue trāſlated your boke & put it into our natyue
& mother tongue as my ſimple wit and power
lernyng wold ſuffer me, And though it be
nat ſo well done as (I ſurely knowe) many other
myght & can haue done it, if it wolde haue
pleaſed your lordſhip to haue de
                  •
               yred thē, and
if alſo it wold haue lyked them to haue taken that labour: yet I
truſt I haue ſo done, that it may be comforth to the readers & hearers / 
or at the leſte: I haue gyuen occaſion to ordre to amend and
performe that I rudely and barbarouſly, ſet forward. Surely (my
lorde) the chyefe cauſe of this my labour was: for that I thought
this boke ſhulde be moche profytable to the readers and edefyeng
to all that wolde diligently hear it, And to ſay the treuth: I know
no thynge more comfortable to man, For amonges all the exercyſes
that helpe the ſpirite to obteyne the loue of god / and ſpecially
to hym yt wolde begyn & vſe a ſpiritual lyfe: no thynge is thought
always more frutful, thā the continnal meditacion of the paſſion
of our lorde god Ieſus Chriſt, for the exercyſes of all other ſpirituall
meditacions may be reduced and brought vnto this. As by
an example, If a man deſyre to bewayll and weape for his vices
and ſynnes for his vnkyndnes and vilenes / if he couit to purge &
amend his negligence & defautes: he ſhall fynde none more vehement
and redy meane to pricke hym forwarde to his intent: than
to remembre the moſt innocēt death and paſſion of his redeamer:
that is to conſyder what bitter paynes he ſuffred for man: to ſpare
and kepe man from payne eternall wherafter Iuſtice he ſhulde
haue rather dampned man for his ſynnes, And here man may ſee
both the Iuſtice and alſo the mercy of god. Man may cōſyder in
hym ſelfe the great mercy of god: in that god wold forgyue and ꝑdon
hym of his ſynnes. He may alſo perceiue the iuſtice of god: in
his owne ſynnes, whiche god dyd correcte & punyſſhe accordyng
to iuſtice in hym ſelfe, bycauſe he wold nat ſuffre thē vnpuniſhed,
And thus in this meditacion man may fynde how to weape and
mourne for his ſynnes: for the which the ſon of god was bet / woū
               dyd
and crucified, and all that god ſuffred: to cure man of his ſynnes
& kepe hym from eternall payne. Here may alſo man bewayle

his owne vnkyndnes, conſyderyng how vnkyndly he rendreth to
ſo faythfull a louer: ſo many yuell dedes contrary to goddes pleaſure,
and alſo dayly contemptes and deſpyſynges: for his tendre
loue and kyndnes and for his manyfolde gyftes which man dayly
receyueth of hym. Morouer this cōtemplacion of the death of
Chriſt indureth man both to hope and to fear, wherby he may be
releaued of two temptacyons, 
                  •
               or if the enormitie of his ſynnes
moue any man to diſpaire: he hathe here in this exerciſe wherby
to put away his ſynnes, and to make ſatisfactiō for them, he hath
here wherof to redeme hīſelfe yt is ye blode & deth of his lorde god,
& therfore he nede nat to feare his ſynnes, if he ſo ordre hym ſelfe yt
he dye with Chriſt, dye (I ſay) from ſynne and ryſe in a new lyfe.
And on the other parte, it man be vexed by preſumpcion or vayne
lyghtnes and myrth without the fear of god: he hath here how to
abate his vayne myrth, cōſyderyng how that heuē was ſhyt from
the moſte holy frendes of god by many yeres ye aboue .iiii. thouſand
yeres, and how that the glory of god was denyed to mā or at
the leaſt differred, by ſo many yeres vnto the tyme that our lorde
and ſauiour Ieſus whiche neuer dyd ſynne: ſuffred death for our
ſynne, ſo that no mā may come to that glory but by payne, & thus
ſhall mannes vayne myrth be put downe. If peraduenture man
be dull and ſlouthfull to all goodnes: where ſhall he haue a more
ſpedy remedy to pricke forwarde his dulnes: than to cōſydre how
his lorde god moſte pure & innocent man, ſuffred ſo greuouſe paynes
for hym. Some man wold peraduenture exerciſe him ſelfe in
his owne knowlege and ſo to come to meknes. But I pray you
where ſhall he haue a better occaſion therunto, thā to ponder and
way the difformite and great difference of his owne ſtudy and labour
and ſhortly the ordre of his hole lyfe: and of the labour & lyfe
of Ieſus Chriſt, that is, remembre man howe cōtrarie thy lyfe is
to his wyl & p̄ceptes / how vnlike to his vertues / how farre frō his
enſāples, remēbre mā how frayle thou art & redy to fal, how vnſtable
in all thy good purpoſes, how vnredy or rather loth to folowe
thy lorde, howe vnapte to all goodnes, As euery man may dayly
ſe in hym ſelfe. Forthermore, if mā wold be enflamed to loue god
where may he haue better help than by this exerciſe, for if it be natural
to rendre loue for loue, and the loue of god was neuer more
openly ſhewed to man than in his redemption, that is in the paſſion
and death of our redeamer Chriſt Ieſus: it is than manifeſt

that by this remembraunce of his paſſion: a man is moſte ſtrongly
excited and moued to loue god. And if man deſyre to be pricked
forward in that loue: let hym remembre the benefites of god
which be as ſignes & tokens of his loue, And theſe benefites moſt
euidently appere in his paſſion, as ye ſhall more clerely ſe in this
boke. At laſt, if man deſyre that all his lyfe be continuall and perpetuall
prayer / and that he wold haue his herte euer lyfted vp to
god, and his deuotion or feruour euer renewed: he ſhal neuer get
it more eaſly than by the remembraunce of the lyfe and paſſion of
his lorde god, for there he may haue in euery worde / acte / behauiour
and paine that Chriſt ſpake / dyd / vſed / and ſuffred: how to be
compuncte and ſory in hert / & how to be conforted in ſpirite. For
in the conſyderation of them, now he may wepe by compaſſion,
Now by gyuyng thankes: he may haue ſwete affections, Nowe
he may deſyre to be confourmed vnto hym, and to his wyl, Now
he may labour and wyſſhe to be holly transfourmed into hym.
Thus may man go from one exerciſe vnto an other to auoyde tediouſnes / 
and ſo euer to be ī prayer. And ſhortly to cōclude, there
is no kynde of ſpirituall exerciſe: but that it may be founde in the
lyfe & paſſion of Chriſt, or els by moſte pleantuouſe fruyte it may
be reduced and applied to it. And this ſhall better appere in the
fyrſt parte of this boke the thyrde ꝑtycle. Nowe my lorde I haue
ſhewed what was the pryncypall cauſe mouyng me to accōplyſh
your deſyre / and if I may perceyue that ye or ony other take profyt
therby: I ſhall gyue prayſes to god from whom all goodnes
commeth / and I beſeache iour lorſhip to pray with me that moch
profyt and comforth myght come to them that ſhal rede this
boke and folowe the exercices therof. And thus I cō
               mende
you and all youres to the paſſion of our
lorde.
            
               From Syon the .vi. day of
Decembre. 1533.
               
               ¶your dayly oratour
Iohan Fewterer.
               ✚
               
               ❧  
               ❧
               
               ❧
            
         
         
            
            The Prologue.
            
               ☞ Inſpice et fac ſecundum exemplar quod tibi monſtratum
eſt in monte.
               Exodi. 25. D.
            
            
               BEholde and worke accordyngly to the
examplar that is ſhewed vnto the ī the moun
                  •
               ,
Chriſt althoughe oftymes in ſcripture be compared
to a mount or ſo called for the excellency
of his moſte hyghe perfection: yet moſte ſpecially
in that he was exalted on the croſſe in the
mount of Caluary, he may be called a mount,
or the excellēt merit of his moſte bitter and ſacrate
paſſion. In this mount (that is in Chriſt crucified) is this
day (that is by all the tyme of our lyfe) ſhewed vnto vs a glaſſe or
an examplar, whome we ſhuld nat onely beholde: but alſo with
moſte deligence folowe his ſteppes / for it is nat ſufficient to a chriſtian
to beholde Chriſt crucified. For ſo dyd the Iues and alſo the
gentyls his crucifiers, But it is required of a Chriſtian yt he lyue
and worke accordyngly to the exāplar ſhewed to hym in ye mount
that is Chriſte crucified. And that is the intent of our fyrſt wordes
ſpoken to euery faythful perſon. Beholde and worke accordyngly
to the example of Chriſte crucified. Beho
                  •
               de (I ſay) hym
incorporatyng or depely knittyng his paynfull paſſion vnto thy
hert by inward compaſſion, And worke accordyngly vnto his example,
vnfaynedly folowyng hym. For ſo ſaynt Petre teachethe
vs ſayng,1. Pe. 2. D. 
               Chriſtus paſſus eſt pro nobis. Chriſt ſuffred for vs. This
is the fyrſt thyng, that we ſhulde diligently beholde with the inwarde
ey of our ſoule: Chriſt crucified. And it foloweth. Nobis relinquens
exemplum vt ſequamur veſtigia eius, Leuyng to vs an example
that we myght folowe his ſteppes, In ordryng our lyfe accordyngly
to his wyll and example, And this is the ſecond thyng
belongyng to a chriſtian, vnfaynedly and truely to folowe his ſauiours
example. And in theſe two thynges ſhall ſtande the hole
ſūme of our purpoſe and of this treatiſe, which be neceſſary to be
ofte remembred vnto the Chriſtian. For if the lyues paſſions
of holy ſayntes and martyrs be recounted to man, to induce hym
into deuotion of herte, to contricion for his ſynnes, to the loue
of god / deſpiſyng of the world and patient ſufferance or bearyng
of tribulations and paynes: how moche more than ſhuld the paſſion
of Chriſt be remembred and preached / whiche is moſte holy
of al ſayntes ye the ſanctifier, of al ſayntes, lorde and god ouer al,

the iudge of quicke, & the reſurrection or reaſex of the deed? This
paſſion (I ſay) ſhuld be remembred, that men hearyng it myght
knowe how moche god the father hated ſynne, for the deſtruction
wherof: he wold haue the preciouſe blode of his moſte deare beloued
onely ſon ſhed vpon the erthe with moſte greuouſe tormentes
and woundes, and alſo that man myght knowe, how moche he loued
mankynde, for whoſe ſaluacion he wold gyue his only ſonne
to ſo cruell tormentes & paynfull death. Thyrdly that we ſhould
knowe how preciouſe and deare a thyng is the kyngdom of heuen
which he wold nat open and gyue vnto mankynd but by the preciouſe
blode and deth of his naturall ſonne Ieſu Chriſte. And
fourthly to declare vnto vs howe moche he ſoueth and reioyceth
in the penaunce of man for the declaration and example wherof,
he wold his deare byloued ſonne to be nayled faſt vnto the croſſe
and ſpred abrode on ye ſame as a boke open wherin we myght rede
and lerne howe to do penaunce. What other thyng do ſignifie vnto
vs, his teares or wepyng / his ſorow / his woundes / his armes
ſpred abrode / and his moſte ſwete and godly wordes: but mociōs
and callynges vnto penaunce
                  •
                He hath called vs vnto penaūce by
his worde / by his Euangely / and moſte of all by his holy lyfe and
example. Therfore behold and loke vpon this examplar & glaſſe
loke vpon the face of thy ſauiour Chriſt / and worke accordyngly
to the exemplar that is ſhewed / to the in the mount of Caluarye.Pſal. 83.
And if this ſpectacle or glaſſe ought to be beholden at all tymes:
moche more than it ſhuld be cōſydered this tyme whā the churche
remembreth the paſſion of our ſauiour Chriſte that by the conſyderyng
therof: our ſoule myght be excited & moued to gyue thankes
to god for it / and alſo to haue cōpaſſion in our ſoule of Chriſt
crucified. For as almyghty god ſayth by his prophet Moiſes.
Anima que non fuerit afflicta die hac:
               Leui. 23. E. 
               peribit de populo ſuo. That
ſoule or ꝑſon which wyl nat take vpō hym ſome payne / affliction
or compaſſion this day or tyme of the paſſion of our lorde: ſhal peryſhe
from his people / that is, ſhall nat be accompted or taken for
a chriſtian. Therfore let vs ſay in ſigne and token of compaſſion
that whiche ſaynt Bernard ſayd in his mournyng. Quis dabit capiti
meo aquam.
               In lib. de la mentatione virginis. 
               &c. Who ſhall graūt or gyue water vnto me heade
or the fountayne and well of teares vnto myne yen that I myght
wepe both day and nyght vnto the tyme my lord appere vnto his
ſeruaūt and comfort hym eyther ſlepyng or wakyng. O ye ſwete
teares / by whom commeth the plentuouſe ryuers of graces. O ye
deuote teares the aboundaunt fountayne of my helth / come into

my hert / flowe out of myne yen / fall vpon my chekes / & make my
mournyng bitter. Alſo in an other place ſaynt Bernard mouethe
vs to the beholdyng of this exāplar / our ſauiour cruſified: ſaynge
in the perſon of Chriſt. O thou mā beholde what I ſuffred for the
Se the croſſe on the whiche for thy loue I dyed, Beholde the nayles wherwith my handes and my fete ware perſed and faſ
                  •
               ened to
the croſſe for thy ſynne, Is this no ſorowe and payne that I ſuffered
for the? And thoughe this outward ſorowe & payne be moche
greuouſe: yet moche more paynfull it is to me inwardly / to ſe the
ſo vnkynde, for whom I ſuffred all theſe greuouſe tormentes and
paynes. Wherfore o thou chriſtiā behold Chriſt crucified & gyue
hym thankes for his kyndnes, leſſe ꝑaduenture thou mayſte hear
the rebuke that was ſpoken vnto .ix. leproſe cured by our ſauiour
Ieſu,Luc. 17. D. to whoſe rebuke he ſayd. Nonne decem mundati ſunt et nouē
vbi ſunt, Was there nat .x. perſons cured, and but one (that was a
ſtraūger) yt gyueth thākes for his benefyt receyued, wher be ye other
.ix. Behold I ſay Chriſte crucified & remēbre his kindnes accordyng
to ye coūcell of ye wyſe mā ſayng.Eccl. 29. C. 
               Gratiam fide iuſſoris tui
ne obliuiſcaris dedit enim pro te animam ſuam. Forget nat ye kyndnes
of thy ſuerte or frende for he hathe gyuen his lyfe for the / this
ſhulde be diligently remembred.
            ¶Here endeth the prologue.
         
         
            ¶The diuiſion of this treatiſſe or mirrour.
            
               THis boke or treatiſe of the paſſiō is diuided into the .iii.
partes, that is into a prohem begynnyng or preface / the
execution or declaraciō of the ſayd paſſion, and into ye cō
               cluſion.
In the fyrſt parte is declared the fruteful meditacion
of Chriſtes paſſion. In the ſeconde parte be declared the actes
& articles of the ſayd paſſion, And in the cōcluſion be declared
certein miracles wrought at the ſame paſſion / with certein chapitres
of the Reſurrection / appeyryng / Aſcenſion / of our lorde / ſendyng
of the holy ghoſt. &c.
            
               ¶The prohem / preface or begynnyng cōteyneth .x. particles / of
the which ſūme of them be diuided into dyuers chapitres.
               
                   THe fyrſt particle: is an exhortacion to moue men vnto the
meditation of Chriſtes paſſion. Ca. primo. Fo. primo.
               ¶An example of the ſame exhortation. Ca. ſecundo. Fo. iii.
               
                  
THe ſeconde particle is of the mean and maner of the remebrance 
of Chriſtes paſſion. Fo. iiii.
            
            
               ¶THe thyrde ꝑtycle is, howe we ſhulde feale in our ſelfes Chriſtes
paſſion. And this particle is diuided into .v.
Chapitres.
               HOwe we ſhulde feale in our vnderſtandyng Chriſtes paſſion.
The firſt Chapitre. Fo. v.
               ¶Howe we ſhulde feale and perceyue the ſame in our wyl / loue &
affection. Ca. ii. Fo. vi.
               ¶Howe we ſhulde fele the ſame in our actes and operations or
dedes. Ca. iii
                     •
                  . Fo. vii.
               ¶Howe we ſhulde fele the ſame in our pouertie and neceſſities.
Capitulo .iiii. Fo. viii.
               ¶Howe we ſhulde fele Chriſtes paſſion in our rebukes and deſpiſynges.
Ca. v. Fo. viii.
            
            
               ¶The .iiii. particle is of diuers maners and wayes to remembre
Chriſtes paſſion. And this particle is diuided
into .vi. Chapitres.
               HOwe we may conſydre Chriſtes paſſion with a mynde to 
folowe it. Ca. primo. Fo. ix.
               ¶Howe we may conſydre the ſame with a mynde to haue compaſſion
therof. Ca. ii. Fo. x.
               ¶Howe we may cōſydre Chriſtes paſſion with a mynde to maruayll
therof. Ca. iii. Fo. xi.
               ¶Howe we may conſydre the ſame / to reioyſe or ioy therof.
Capitulo .iiii. Fo. xii.
               ¶Howe we may conſydre Chriſtes paſſion to reſolue or relent
out hertes into it. Ca. v. Fo. xiii.
               ¶How we ſhuld conſydre Chriſtes paſſion: to reaſt ſwetely ther
in. Ca. vi. Fo. xiiii.
               THe .v. ꝑticle is diuided into .xix. Chapitres, of the whiche 
the fyrſt cōteyneth .xx. ꝓfites that cōmeth to man by the remembraun be
of Chriſtes paſſion. Ca. primo. Fo. xiiii.
               ¶Howe in the paſſion of Chriſt is conteyned all perfection of al
the ordres of aungels. Ca. ii. Fo. xxii.
               ¶Howe in the paſſion of Chriſte is conteyned all the beatitude
or blyſſe of men. Ca iii. Fo. xxiii.
               ¶Howe in Chriſtes pa
                     •
                  ſion do ſhyne ye vertues theologicall / the
gyftes of the holy ghoſt / the beatitudes of the goſpell / and alſo the
fruytes of the ſpirite. Ca. iiii. Fo. xxiiii.
               
                  
¶Howe by the paſſion of Chriſt: we haue the efficacite and vertue
of all ſpirituall goodnes. Ca. v. Fo. xxv.
               ¶How the .vii. gyftes of the holy ghoſt ar cōteyned in Chriſtes
paſſion, and howe through the feruent remembrance therof: they
may be optayned, And fyrſt of the gyft of fear. Ca. vi. Fo. xxvi.
               ¶An example of this gyft of the feare of god. Ca. vii. Fo. xxviii.
               ¶Howe the gyft of pyte is opteyned by the feruēt remembraūce
of Chriſtes paſſion. Ca. viii. Fo. xxix.
               ¶An example of the gyft of the ſpirite of pitie. Ca. ix. Fo. xxxi.
               ¶Howe the gyfte of ſcience is optayned by Chriſtes paſſion.
Capitulo. x. Fo. xxxii.
               ¶An exāple of this gyfte of ſciēce or knowlege. Ca. xi. Fo. xxxv.
               ¶Howe the gyfte of ſtrenght is optayned by Chriſtes paſſion.
Capitulo. xii. Fo. xxxvi.
               ¶An exāple of this gyfte of goſtly ſtrenght. Ca. xiii. Fo. xxxviii.
               ¶Howe the gyfte of councell is gyuen to man by Chriſtes paſſion.
Capitulo. xiiii. Fo. xxxix.
               ¶An example of the ſame gyfte of godly councel. Ca. xv. Fo. xli.
               ¶Howe the gyft of vnderſtandyng is goten by Chriſtes paſſion
Capitulo. xvi. Fo. xli.
               ¶An exāple of ye gyfte of goſtly vndſtādyng. Ca. xvii. fo. xliiii.
               ¶Howe the gyfte of wyſdome is goten by Chriſtes paſſion.
Capitulo. xviii. Fo. xlv.
               ¶An example of the ſame gyfte of godly wyſdom. Capitu. xix.
Folio. xlviii.
               
                   THe .vi. particle is of our lorde ſittyng vpon the aſſe and vpon
her fole or colte. Fo. xlix.
               THe .vii. particle is of the eiection or caſtyng out of the byers &
 ſellers in the temple. Fo. li.
               THe .viii. particle is of the ſorowfull deꝑtyng of our lorde from
 his mother Mary. Fo. lii.
               
                   THe .ix. particle is of Chriſtes laſt ſupper or maundy. Fo. liiii.
               THe .x. and laſt particle is of the waſhyng of his diſciples fete.
Folio. lv.
               
                   THe ſeconde parte of this treatiſe is diuided into .lxv. articles
of Chriſtes paſſion. Fo. lvii.
            
            
               ¶The thyrde parte, that is the concluſion: is diuided
into .xi.
Chapitres.
               THe fyrſt is of .x. myracles done byfore / at the death, and after
Chriſtes death. Ca. primo. C. xlii.
               
                  
¶Why Chriſte wold ſuffre ſo many and ſuche greuouſe paynes
for vs. Ca. ii. Fo. Cxlvi.
               ¶Howe Chriſte deſcended vnto the helles. Ca. iii. Fo. C.xlvii.
               ¶Of Chriſtes Reſurrection. Ca. iiii. Fo. C.xlix.
               ¶Howe Chriſte appered to his mother Mary. Ca. v. Fo. C.l.
               ¶Howe Chriſt appered to Mary Magdalen. Ca. vi. Fo. C.li.
               ¶Howe Chriſte appered to his Apoſtles, Thomas beynge preſent.
Capitulo. vii. Fo. C.liii.
               ¶Of Chriſtes Aſcenſion. Ca. viii. Fo. C.liiii.
               ¶Of the ſendyng of the holy ghoſt. Ca. ix. Fo. C.lvi.
               ¶Of the Aſſumption and prayſe of our glorious lady. Capi. x.
Folio. C.lvii.
               ¶Of the laſt iudgement and commyng of the iudge to the ſame.
Capitulo. xi. Fo. C.lviii.
            
            FINIS.
TABVLE.
            
               
                  woodcut of Crucifixion
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
            
            
            The Myrrour of Chriſtes paſſion.
            
               ¶Of the firſt perticle that is an exortation / mouyng
men vnto the meditation of the paſſion of Chriſte.
               
                  The Fyrſt Chapitre.
                  
                     OYe people that walke and wander in vanitees,Bon
                           •
                        ue
                           •
                        
                        tura in S
                           ••
                        
                        mulo amoris in principio.
come hether and beholde in this Glaſſe / 
Chriſt crucified / & inwardly conſider the greate
charite of god to you. And on the other parte behold
your owne blyndnes and malyce towardes
hym. Sith it hath pleaſed the ſonne of god to be
ioyned vnto the nature of man / and neuer to be
departed frome it: howe moche more gladly ſhuld ye deſyre that
your ſoule ſhulde be vnite & ioyned vnto hym vnſeperably. And
ſith the ſonne of god wold through the great feruoure of his charite / 
ioyne to his godheed in one perſone / ſo vyle aſſhes and duſt
as the nature of man is. Howe moche more deſirous ſhulde eche
one of you be / to open your hert and dilate it or ſprede it abrode to
receyue hym in to it? What folyſſhenes or rather madnes is it / 
that ye diſpiſynge or lytell regardynge this ineſtimable charite / 
wyl rather open your herte vnto the filthy pleaſures of the body / 
or vanytes of the worlde / and to be ioyned vnto them by loue / rather
than to god. The ſonne of god toke nat a mortal body to the
intent yt man ſhulde loue bodily or carnall pleaſures: but that as
Chriſt hauyng a mortall body / dyd by cōtinual penaunce ſubdue
his body / cōtempne all carnall worldly pleaſures: and was euer
ioyned to god by loue: ſo in lyke maner ſhuld mortal man mortifye
his body by continuall penaunce diſpiſe all vayne pleaſures / 
and euer erecte or lyfte vp his ſoule to god and heuenly thynges.
O the meruaylous blyndnes of man made of two ſubſtaunces / 
that is the ſoule and the body / and all thoughe the ſoule without
compariſon be moche more noble than the body: yet he wyl ſpend
and occupy all his tyme in a maner aboute the prouiſyon of his
body / or in ſuche thynges as the fleſſhe deſireth / and in nothynge
regarde his ſoule / as yf he had none / or that it were of no value.
For he wyll neyther fede nor noryſſhe it / nor yet laboure to quiete
or reſt it in the loue of god / thoughe he myght ſo do with moche
more eaſe / ſwetnes and alſo pleaſure without compariſon / than
to content and ſaciat the body. For god is preſt and redy to euery
man: ye he offereth hym ſelfe to man / yf man he wyl receyue hym.
Ecce ſto ad oſtium et pulſo. &c.
                     Apo
                           •
                        . 3. D. Behold (he ſayth) I ſtande at thy
dore (that is thy herte or ſoule) and knocke yf any perſon wyl here

my voyce / and open the dore of his ſoule vnto me: I ſhall entre
therin and ſuppe with hym / and he with me. Se thou vnkynde
man / howe our lorde offereth hymſelfe vnto the / and requyreth
none other pryce of the / but the deth of his ſonne with thyne obedient
herte: therfore gladly receyue hym to thy ſpirituall cōforte.
All corporall and temporall thynges fle frome man / and forſake
hym / and thoughe with great ſtudy / anguyſſhe / and payne / he labour
to get and kepe them: yet he ſhal neuer haue ye ful poſſeſſion
of them to his quietnes / excepte he wolde ſay / that he hath the ful
poſſeſſion of them: the whiche holly and fully contempneth and
diſpiſeth them all: for that perſon is ſaciate and contente with the
wante of them. But wyll ye ſe a more meruaylous blyndnes of
this wretched man. The ſoule of man which is made to thymage
of god / and the whiche ſhall neuer be ſaciate and content but only
with god: that ſame ſoule / nat conſtrayned (though partely enclyned
and moued by the fleſſhe) wylfully ſubdeweth her ſelfe vnto
the fleſſhe redy to fulfyl the vayne pleaſures and deſyres of the
fleſſhe. But ſhe cōtempneth or diſpiſeth to ſubdue her ſelf to god / 
though ſhe be continually moued therunto by dayly exhortatyon
or preachynge / continuall receyuynge of his benefytes and graces
and alſo by inwarde inſpirations. Ye more ouer ſhe wyll nat
do the wyl of god in his owne gyftes that he gyueth to her. Truely
yf the ſoule were nat worſe or more beſtial than any brut beſte / 
ſhe wolde loue god aboue all thynges / vnto whoſe ymage ſhe is
made. And ſo: lytell or nothynge regarde all creatures in compariſon
of god. Wherfore thou ſoule / yf thou wylt loue the fleſſhe or
the body / loue none other but the fleſſhe and the body of Chriſte / 
whiche was offered for the and for the helth of mankynde / on the
auter of the croſſe. Therfore dayly remembre in thy herte his paſſion.
For it ſo remembred in the ſoule of man: is continually offered
and preſented to the ſyght of the father omnipotent for our
conſolation and comforte.A naturall example. It is comenly ſayd that if any man kyl
or ſlee another man: yf that manſleer come afterwarde in the preſence
of that deed corps or body ſo that he ſe it: it wyl incontinent
blede / or voyde at the wounde freſſhe blode. So yf we wolde beholde
with the deuoute eyen of our ſoule the blode and paſſion of
Chriſte / whom we haue ſlayne or were the occaſyon of his deth / 
nat onely by our original ſynne / but alſo by our manyfolde actuall
ſynnes: we ſhuld fele or perceyue by ſpiritual grace of deuotion
in our ſoules / howe that by our compaſſion of his paſſion / his
blode flowethe plentuouſly out of his body / and is offered and

preſented vnto his father for our ſaluacion and ſanctification.
For yf the nayles that perſed his handes and feet were ſanctified
and called holy by the tochyng of his bleſſed mēbres / how moche
more then ſhulde our reaſonable thoughtes whiche cleue faſt to
Chriſte crucifyed by continual or ofte remembraunce of his paſſion
be called holy. O moſt delectable paſſion. O moſt meruaylous
deth. Meruaylous? Ye what may be more meruaylous / 
for this deth doth gyue life / it cureth our woundꝭ / it maketh blode
whyte / that is / it purifieth and clenſeth our ſoule from the blode
of ſynne. Great bitternes and ſorowe / is ofte times tourned to
moche ſwetenes & pleaſure. The openyng of the ſyde of Chriſt / 
ioyneth his herte to our herte. The ſonne hyd frome vs by the
clowdes / whan the clowdes be gone and paſte: it ſhineth more
clerely. The fyre quenched: is ſhortlyer or ſoner kyndeled & maketh
the greater flame. The ignominious and ſhamfull deth of
Chriſte: glorifieth both hym and vs. Chriſte thriſtyng vpon the
croſſe doth inebriate and ſaciate vs with the drynke and liquore
of grace. Chriſte hangyng naked on the croſſe: clotheth ye ryghtuous
perſones with the garmentes of vertue. His handes nayled
to the croſſe: dothe vnknytte or looſe oure handes / his feete
nayled dothe make vs ronne to vertue. Chriſte yeldynge his
ſpyryte in to the handes of his father: dothe inſpyre and gyue
lyfe of grace. And he alſo ſpred abrode vpon the croſſe: doth call
vs to heuenly thinges. O the wonderfull paſſyon of Chriſte / 
the whiche doth alyenate and chaunge the herte and mynde of
hym that hath remembraunce and compaſſion of it. For it nat only
maketh hym angelical: but alſo diuine and godly. For he that
cōtinueth by meditation in the tormentes and paſſion of Chriſt:
ſeeth nat hym ſelfe / bycauſe he alwayes and onely beholdeth his
ſauiour Chriſte crucified. This perſon wolde bere the croſſe of
Chriſte with hym / and he alſo bereth in his herte hym: which ſuſteynethe
both heuen and erthe / with whome he may eaſely ſuſteyne
and beare all heuy burdens and paynes. This perſone alſo
that thus continueth in the mediation of Chriſte crucifyed / 
wolde be crowned with thornes with Chriſte and for Chriſte / 
and he is crowned with the ſure hope and truſte of the crowne of
glory. He wolde hynge naked on the croſſe with Chriſte / and
ſo ſhake for colde / and he is heated in his ſoule with the feruent
fyre of loue. He wolde taſte of the bitter and ſharpe vynacre and
gall with Chriſte / and he drynkethe the wyne of vnſpeakable
ſwetenes. He wolde be mocked and ſcorned withe Chriſte on

the croſſe / and he is honoured of aungelles. He wolde be diſpyſed
and forſaken with Chriſte / and our lady hath choſen hym to
her ſonne. He wolde be heuy with Chriſte / and he is conforted.
He wolde be tormented and ſcourged with Chriſte / and he is relyued
with great ioy & gladnes. He wold hynge with Chriſte on
the croſſe / and Chriſte moſt ſwetely doth embrace and halſe hym.
He wolde be pale in face and inclyne his heed downe for feblenes
with Chriſte / and Chriſte cōfortably lyftynge vp his heed / doth
moſt ſwetly kyſſe hym. And therfore ſaynt Barnarde ſayth: O
good Ieſu we beleue / and ſo it is / that who ſo bereth thy croſſe / 
he bereth thy glory. And he that bereth thy glory / he bereth the.
And hym yt bereth the / thou bereth vpon thy ſholdre. Thy ſholdre
is ſtronge and very hygh / for it recheth vnto the fete of the father
in heuen aboue all the orders of aungels / aboue all principates / 
poteſtates / & vertues. Thither thou reduceſt or bryngeſt agayne
the wanderynge ſhepe that dyd erre from the flocke / that is mankynde / 
the whiche by his ſynne was put out of Paradyſe. Good
lorde, I may compaſſe, go about, and ſerche both heauen and erth / 
the ſee, and the lande / & no where ſhal I fynde the but in the croſſe.
There thou ſlepeſt / there thou fedeſt / there thou reſteſt in the hete
of the day. In this croſſe my ſoule is lyfted vp from the erth / and
there it gathereth the ſwete apples vpon the tree of lyfe. In this
croſſe the ſoule cleuynge faſt to her lorde god / doth ſwetely ſynge
and ſay:Pſal. 3. 
                     Suſceptor meus es tu, gloria mea, et exaltans caput meum.
Thou arte my defēdour my glory / and thou exalteth vp my heed:
that is my ſoule from the conſideration of all vayne & tranſitory
thynges / vnto the meditacion of thyn vnſpeakable goodnes ſhewed
vnto man vpon the croſſe. O moſt amyable deth. O moſte
delectable deth of the moſt noble body of our lorde Ieſu Chriſte / 
from whome I wolde neuer be ſeperate / but in hym to make thre
tabernacles / one in his handes / another in his fete / and the thirde
in the woūde of his ſyde. There I wyll reſt and ſlepe / eate and
drynke / rede and pray / and there I wyll perfourme all my beſynes
that I haue to do. There I ſhall ſpeake vnto his herte / and
optayne of hym what ſo euer is nedeful for me. Thus doynge)
I may folow ye ſteppes of his moſt ſwete mother Marie / whoſe
ſoule: ye ſwerde of ſorowe dyd thyrle & perſe at the deth of her ſone.
If I be thus woūded with Chriſte / I may from henſforth ſuerly
ſpeke to her & moue her in al my neceſſites / and ſhe wyl nat denye
me / bycauſe ſhe ſeeth me crucified with her ſonne Chriſte.
                  
                     ¶Here foloweth an example of this exhortation.
                     
                        
                        WE may take an example of this exhortation to remēbre
the paſſion of Chriſt (in the boke called:Libro. xxxi. 
                        Speculum
hyſtoriale Vincentij) of certayne ſinguler perſones
whiche had this ſpecial grace.Capi. x. et xiiii. We rede there
that in the partes of the Dioces called Leodin̄: a noble
& deuout preeſt called: Iacobus de Vitriaco / the whiche afterwarde
was the byſſhop of Tuſculane and cardinall / and this holy
man ſe there diuerſe women of ſo meruaylous affection and ſo
feruent in the loue of god / through the continuall remēbraunce of
the paſſion of Chriſte / that by that feruent loue and deſyre / they
were ſo ſeke that by many yeres they coulde nat ryſe out of theyr
beddes but very ſeldome / hauynge none other cauſe of ſekenes or
diſeaſe but onely the ſaid feruent loue. For their hertes (by ye continuall
remembraunce of the infinite charite of god ſhewed in the
paſſion of Chriſte) were ſo relented by that meditation / that the
more that they were cōforted in ſoule / the more ſeke & weyke they
were in theyr bodyes: ſaynge & cryeng in herte / though for ſhame
they durſt nat ſpeke in wordes / the ſayng of the ſpouſe in the canticles:Canti. 1. A.
                        Fulcite me floribus, ſtipate me malis, quia amore langueo.
Comforte me with flowres / ſtrength me with apples or other frutes / 
for I am ſeke or languyſſhe for loue. And in ſome of theſe women
(a meruaylous thyng) it myght be perceyued ſenſibly / howe
that whan theyr ſoule in a maner melted throughe the vehemence
of loue / theyr chekes and the coloure of them ſenſibly fayded and
fel away. In other of them throughe the ſwete conſolations that
they receyued in theyr ſoules / there redoūded in to their mouthes
a pleaſaunt taſte / as if it had ben of hony or other ſwete meat / and
that they felte ſenſibly. And ſo it retreſſhed them both corporally
and ſpiritually / and this taſte alſo moued them to ſwete teares / 
and preſerued or kepte theyr hertes in deuotion. Some of them
alſo receyued ſo great grace of wepynge in deuotion / that as ofte
as god was in theyr herte by remembraunce of his goodnes / ſo
ofte the ryuers of teares flowed from theyr eyen by inward deuotion / 
ſo that the ſteppes or pryntes of the teares / dyd afterwarde
appere in theyr chekes thorough the cuſtome of wepynge. And
here note a meruaylous thyng / that the wepyng or teares dyd nat
hurt their brayne or heed / as it doth comenly in al other perſones / 
but rather in them it comforted theyr myndes / with a full & plentuous
deuotion. It made ſwete or pleaſaūt theyr ſpirites with a
ſwete vnction of grace. It meruaylouſly refreſſhed their bodyes / 
and it gladded al ye hole cōgregation of ye ſeruaūtes of god there.

¶More ouer we rede in the ſame boke of an holy and deuoute
woman called Maria de Ogines / of whome the forſayde mayſter
Iacobus de Vitriaco / beynge in great feruoure of deuotion cryed
with a lowde voyce vnto almyghty god ſayng:Vbi ſupra. O lord god thou
arte very good to them that truſteth in the / thou arte faythfull to
thy ſeruauntes that truſte and abyde thy promiſſes.Capi. xviii. Thy hand
mayde good lord hath diſpiſed and forſaken for thy loue / thonour
of the worlde with all the pleaſures of the ſame / and thou accordyngly
vnto thy promiſſe in ſcripture hath rendred and gyuen to
her an hundreth tymes more in this worlde / and alſo euerlaſtyng
lyfe in the kyngdome of glorye.Mt. 19. D. The fyrſt fruites or begynnynge
of her loue to the / was the remembraunce of thy croſſe / paſſion / 
and deth. For on a certayne day when ſhe (preuented with thy
grace and mercyfully viſited by the) conſidered the great benefites / 
whiche thou of thyn vnſpeakable goodnes ſhewed vnto man
kynde in workynge our redemption / ſhe founde or opteyned ſo
great grace of compunction / and ſuche abundaunce or copye of
teares in thy croſſe and paſſion / that we myght haue traced or folowed
her thorowe the churche by her teares that fel on ye groūde
from her. And of a longe tyme after that ſhe had this ſwete viſitation
and grace of teares / ſhe myght neyther ſee nor beholde the
ymage of the crucifix / nor yet ſpeke or here other ſpeke of the paſſion
of Chriſte / but forthwith ſhe fel in ſwowne. Wherfore that ſhe
might ſomwhat tempre and abate that great paſſion and ſorowe / 
and reſtrayne thaboundaunce of her wepynge, ſhe lefte the conſideration
of thumanite or manheed of Chriſte, and tourned her
mynde holly to the meditation of the maieſtye) and godheed of
Chriſte / that in his eternitye and inpaſſibilytye ſhe myght fynde
ſome conſolation and comforth. But where ſhe thought and laboured
to haue ſtopped and reſtrayned the floode of her teares / 
there roſe and ſprang maruailouſly greater abundaūce of teares.
For when ſhe conſidered of what glorie and dignitie he was that
wolde ſuffer ſo vyle and ſhamfull deth for our redemption / 
then her ſorowe was renewed in her / and her ſoule
ſo relented for deuout compūction / that moche
more plentye of teares departed from
her / and moche more ye may ſee
in the ſayde boke / if
it pleaſe you.
                        ✚
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶A prayer.
                     
                        
                        O Lorde Ieſu Chriſt the ſonne of the liuynge god, for
thyn vnſpeakable pitye / and the moſte excellent lyfe
of the moſte holy mother Marie / and for the merites
of ſaynt Franciſce / and of al thy ſayntes / graunt (we
beſeche the) vnto vs moſt wretched ſynners vnworthy
any of thy benefites / that we myght loue the alone / and euer
be burnynge or feruente in thy loue / and that we might continually
magnifie the werke of our redemption / that we myght euer
deſyre thy honour / and dayly bere and remembre in our herte the
benefyte of thy paſſion / that we myght knowe and conſydre our
miſerye / and continually deſire to be diſpiſed aud rebuked for thy
loue / ſo that nothynge ſhulde comforth vs and abide in our hertꝭ / 
but thy deth and paſſion / and nothynge diſpleaſe or trouble vs / 
but our owne ſynne and wretchednes Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶Of the meane and maner of the remembraunce of the
paſſion of Chriſte. The ſecond particle.
               
                  HOwe I ſhall ſhewe vnto yowe howe we ſhulde vſe and
exerciſe our ſelf in the paſſion of Chriſte. In the whiche
vii. tymes in the day at the leeſte: euery chriſtiane ſhuld
exerciſe hym ſelfe accordyngly to the ſentence or mynde
of ſaynt Barnard ſayng: The cōtinual or dayly leſſon of a chriſti
ane / ſhulde be the remembraunce of the paſſion of Chriſte. For
there is nothynge that ſo moche kyndeleth the hert of man / as the
manheed of Chriſt / and the ofte and deuout remembraunce of his
paſſion. Howe this may be / we ſhall perceyue it in this maner,
That is this / who ſo euer wyll ꝓfite in the meditation of Chriſtꝭ
paſſion / let hym ordre hym ſelfe / as if Chriſte were put to all the
paynes of his deth and paſſion in his preſence / and ſo let hym conſidre
depely / diligētly and with deliberation al the poyntes of his
paſſion / therunto fixe his hole mynde perſeuerantly leuynge and
ſettynge a parte all other cures and buſines / with drawinge hym
ſelfe with as great diligēce as he can from all ſuperfluouſe meatꝭ
and drynkes / and from all dilycates / from al fyne garmentes and
ſofte beddes / from all vayne ſportes & lyghtnes / from vayne ioy / 
and from all vayne and ydle ſpeche. For all theſe and ſuche other
lyke ben clene contrarie to the frutefull remēbraunce of Chriſtes
paſſion / as we ſhall ſhe we more clerly herafter. And therfore it
is neceſſarie that if a man wyll profyt herein / that he thynke hym
ſelfe as yf he were preſente at the paſſyon of Chriſte / and ſo ordre
and behaue hym ſelf in his ſpeche / in his ſight / in his ſorowyng / 
and in al his other outwarde actes / as if he ſawe before his face / 

Chriſte hyngynge on the croſſe. If a man thus order hym ſelfe
Chriſte crucifyed ſhalbe ſpiritually with hym and in his preſence
as he thynketh in his owne mynde / and ſo ſhall gladly behold his
dedes and thoughtes / and alſo gratiouſly accepte his vowes and
promyſſes. But take hede that this remembraunce be nat ſoone
loſt and ſhortly put away / ſpecially whan deuotion and tyme wyl
ſerue with conuenient oportunitye / and ſe that this remēbraunce
be with a faythful and herty maner and with a mournyng cōpaſſion.
For ſuerly yf this moſt ſwete and pleaſaunt tree of the croſſe
be nat affectuouſly & louyngly chewed with the teethe of feruent
deuotion: the ſauour therof (though in it ſelfe it be very delicious)
ſhal neuer moue the. And if thou can nat wepe with Chryſt
that wepte for the / and ſorowe with hym / that ſorowed for the / at
the leeſt thou ought to ioy in hym and to render thankes to hym
with a deuout herte for his manifold benefytes gyuen to the without
any thyng deſeruynge. And if thou feleſt thy ſelfe noder moued
vnto compaſſion / nor yet to gyue thankes with a feruent deſyre
vnto god for his benefites / but rather depreſſed with an hard
herte in the ſayd remēbraunce / neuer the leſſe with that ſame hard
herte ronne vnto the holſome remembraunce of Chriſtes paſſion
and gyue ſuche thankes to god as thou may for that tyme. And
that which thou can nat haue nor felyſt nat in thy ſelfe / committe
in to the handes of his moſt mercifull goodnes. And if yet thou
continue in thy ſtubbernes and harde herte / for perauenture thy
herte is tourned in to the hardnes of a Dyamant / whiche can neuer
be broken but with the hote blode of a gote / as Plinius ſayth
in his naturall hiſtorie:Lib. xxxvii. Cap. iiii. here I offer & ſhewe vnto the the greate
copie and plentie of blode of the gote and alſo of a lambe incontaminate / 
vnſpotted or vndefyled Ieſu Chriſte / which is very hote
and burnynge with an incomparable feruent loue and charitye / 
whiche thorough the ſtrength of his heet / hath broken and diſſolued
that harde and Dyamant wall of enmitie / which the ſynne of
our fyrſt parentes and alſo our actuall ſynnes hath made and put
bytwyxte god and man. Waſſhe or drowne thy ſelfe in the copiouſe
blode of this gote and lambe / O thou Adamant herte / and
lye in it that thou may be made warme / & thou ſo heated or made
warme / may be molifyed or made ſofte / and ſo molified: may ſhed
plentiouſly ryuers of teares.Num̄. xx. B Moyſes ſmote twyſe on the ſtone
and brought ſuche plentye of water / ſo ſmyte thy harde ſtony hert
twyſe that is with the inwarde hertye remembraunce of Chriſte
paſſyon / and withe the outwarde laboure of thy bodye / as exexercyſynge

thy ſelfe in lyftynge vp thy handes or thy ſyght / vnto
the crucifixe in ofte knockynge on thy breſte / in deuoute genuflexions / 
knelynges / or peyne takynges / or in exercyſyng thy
ſelf in takyng diſciplines or ſcurgyngꝭ / or in other lyke outwarde
exerciſe / and ſo cōtinue vnto thou haue goten the grace of teares.
Wherby thy reaſonable ſoule ſhal drynke the waters of deuotion.
And thy ſenſual or beſtly bodye by thexperiēce therof ſhalbe humbled
and ſubdued vnto the reaſonable ſoule.
            
            
               ¶The thirde particle, howe we ſhulde fele in our ſelfe the
paſſion of Chriſt / and this ꝑticle is deuided in to .v. chapitres / 
firſte is howe we ſhulde fele the paſſion of
Chriſte in our vnderſtandynge and reaſon.
               
                  SAynt Poule ſayth:Phili. 2. A. 
                  Hoc ſentite invobis quod et in Chriſto
Ieſu. Fele and perceiue in your ſelfe that Chriſt Ieſu 
                     •
                  elt / 
that ye myght ſucke & drawe watres frome the fountayns
of our ſauiour. For who ſo euer exerciſe them ſelfe faythfully
in this paſſion / they ſhal ſucke & drawe from thens al maner
of graces / as we ſaid afore.In the fyrſt particle. For ſuerly this exerciſe hath his diuers
degrees / wherby we may come to the perfeccion of all ſanctitye
or holynes. Wherfore we ought (accordyngly to thadmonicion
of ſaint Poule) fele in our ſelfe ye paſſion of Chriſt. And that
v. maner of wiſe. Firſt in our vnderſtandyng / ſecōdly in our wyl / 
loue and affection / thirdly in our actes and operation / fourtly
in our pouerty and neceſſityes / fyftly in our reprouynges or diſpiſinges.
Firſt I ſay we ſhuld fele the paſſion of Chriſte in our
vnderſtandyng or reaſon / ſo that we dilygenly and with attencion
fourme our thoughtes accordyngly vnto the paynes & paſſion
of Chriſte. Hereunto we be moued by the wordes of the prophet
ſayng in the perſon of Chriſte crucified:Tren̄. 1. D. 
                  O vos omnes qui tranſitis
per viam attendite et videte ſi eſt dolor ſicut dolor meus. O all
ye that paſſe thorough the way of this worlde: take hede (that is:
thynke with a diligēt & attent mynde) and depely cōſider if there
be any ſorowe lyke vnto my ſorowe. And this is done truely and
faythfully / when the paſſion of Chriſt is remēbred rather with an
attent mynde & cogitation / than with deuotion. For cogitation
hath his ſignification & name of abidyng / tarieng / or ellꝭ cōſtraynynge
after ſome doctours. For aſmoche as in ſuch cogitatyons
whan reaſon & vnderſtādyng hath nat that gyft & grace of knowlege
that it wolde haue / it is cōſtrayned to abyde / tary & reuolue it
in his cogitation / vnto the tyme yt he hath gotē ſome perceyuyng
therof. And of this cōſtraynyng ſpeketh ſaynt Barnarde ſaynge:

let the outwarde ſenſes be gathered to gether in one / and cōſtrayned
or ſubdewed vnder the diſcipline and rule of the good wyll.
And ſo kepte vnder with the burden of good werkes / and made
obedient to the ſeruice of the ſpirite / that in no meanes they be
ſuffered to come at large at theyr ſenſuall pleaſure. Of this diligent
kepynge of our thoughtes / ſpeketh alſo our lord in his lawe
ſaynge:
                     Deuter. vi. C. 
                  Caue ne vn
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      obliuiſcaris domini dei tui qui eduxit te de terra
Egipti. Beware that thou neuer forget thy lorde god / whiche
hath delyuered the from the thraldome that thou had in the lande
of Egipte (that is from the thraldome of the deule) by the merites
of his glorious paſſion. We may alwayes thynke of this benefite / 
though we can nat at al tymes deuoutly remembre it. And
therfore to remembre or thynke euer of god / we be conſtrayned
by his cōmaundement. But to remembre hym with deuotion we
be nat bounde / for deuotion is onely of the ſpeciall grace of god
which is nat in our power. And therfore we be exhorted & taught
to continue the remembraūce of god and of his cōmaundmentes
ſaynge:
                     Deutet. 6. B. 
                  Meditaberis ea ſedens in domo tua, et ambulans in itinere,
dormiens, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      conſurgens, er ligabis ea quaſi ſignum in manu tua,
et mouebunt ante oculos tuos, ſcribes
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ea in limine et in oſtijs domus
tue. Thou ſhalt (ſayth Moyſes in the name of our lorde) remembre
them (that is the cōmaundmentes and benefytes of god)
ſittynge in thy houſe and walkynge in thy iourney / ſlepynge and
ryſyng / or at thy downe lyenge and vp riſynge / and thou ſhal tye
and faſten them vnto the as a ſigne or a marke in thy hand / and
they ſhalbe euer before thyn eyne or ſyght / and thou ſhalt wrytte
them in the poſtes & doores of thy houſe. And though theſe wordes
in the litterall ſenſe ben ſpoken of the .x. cōmaundmentes of
god / yet we may ſo moche the more conueniently applye them to
the remēbraunce of the paſſion of our lord / for aſmoche as it was
more to our profite and comforth that our lord god wolde ſuffre
deth and paſſion for our redēpcion / than yt he gaue to vs his commaūdmētes.
And alſo that is the law & ordre of ye benefites of god
that more that they be ꝓfitable to vs: the more we ſhulde remēbre
them. Therfore al the articles or particular paines of the paſſion
of our lord ſhuld be diligētly gadred to geder & cōmend to memory / 
accordyng to the wordes of our ſauiour ſayng:Iohīs. 6. B 
                  Colligite fragmenta
ne pereant. Gather vp to gether the fragmētes) that is the
ꝑticular paynes of his paſſion) and put thē to gider as it were in
a litel fagot / & ſo cōmēde them to memory leſſe they periſſhe from
your herttꝭ by forgetfulnes / ī this maner dyd ye ſpouſe as we rede

in the canticles / where as ſhe ſayd.Cāti
                        •
                     . 1. D. 
                  Faſciculus mi
                        •
                     re dilectus meus
michi inter vbera mea commorabitur. My dere beloued ſpouſe is
to me as a lytell fagot of myrre / he ſhall abyde in my herte & memory.Super cantica ſermone. 43.
Saynt Barnarde declarynge this ſame text ſayth in this
maner / Brethern this hath ben myne accuſtomable maner fro my
firſte conuerſion. I haue ben diligent to gather a lytell fagot of
myrre / the which I put in to my boſome as a treſure to recōpence
for the great hepe of merites that I ſhulde haue had / but my vnkyndnes
to god is ſuche that I want ſuche merites / and therfore
I ſay I was dilygent to gather to me a lytell fagot of mirre of al
the paynes and affliccions of my lord and ſauiour Ieſu / fyrſte of
his great pouertye / neceſſitye and affliccion or paynes that he ſuffred
in his yong and tender age: after that of his great labours
that he had in preachynge his fatigation and werynes in goyng
about frome cyte to cyte / frome towne to towne / frome cuntrye to
cuntrye / his continuall watche in prayer / his temptacions in his
faſtyng his wepynges and teares in compaſſion of the miſerable
people / the diſceites and craftes of the ſcribes and phariſeys that
lye in a wayt of hym to take hym in a trype with ſome defaute in
his cōmunicacyon or ſpeche / and laſte of the parylles and daungers
that he was in amonges his awne nacion & frendes / of his
rebukes / mockes / ſcornes / diſpiſes / ſpittynges / buffetynges / betinges / 
ſcurgyngꝭ / with al other that he ſuffred for our ſaluacion.
Of al the whiche is there / plentuouſly made mencion in the foure
euangelyſtes / theſe thinges to remēbre ſayth ſaint Barnarde) I
recounted for wiſdome,Vbi ſupra. In theſe thynges I ſet the perfeccion of
my iuſtyce / in theſe ſtode all my cunnynge & knowlege / in theſe I
put the ryches of my helth and thaboundaunce of my merites / of
theſe ſomtyme I dranke a draught of holſome bytternes or peynaunce / 
in theſe agayne I receyued the ſwete vnction of conſolacyon.
Theſe thynges done ſtrength me & alſo erecte me in aduerſityes / 
they repreſſe me and kepe me meke in proſperityes / & they
gyde me and lede me by a ſure way in this lyfe / where as is nowe
ſorowe / nowe ioye / nowe pleaſure / nowe payne / ſo that Ider nat
go out of the ryght way aſlonge as I folowe them.
               
                  ¶Howe we ſhulde fele Chriſtes paſſyon in our loue / 
wyll and affeccion. The ſeconde Chapitre.
                  SEcondly we ſhuld fele (I ſayd) the paſſion of Chriſt in our 
wyl / deſire / loue & affeccion. For this paſſion which hither
to hath ben onely remēbred in our thoughtes & vnderſtandynge
if we wyl ꝓfit it muſt procede in to our affeccion / ſo that it be nat

onely remembred in our thoughtes / but that alſo the deuotion of
the remēberer be enflamed by loue in his wyl. And ſuerly yf our
vnderſtandynge do his diligence in the remembraunce of the ſaid
paſſion / it ſhall ſhortly moue our affection. And ſo the paſſion of
our lord ſhall nat onely in our cogitacions be remēbred / but alſo
it ſhal inflame your wyl by compaſſion & pitye. Wherunto we be
admonyſſhed by our lord ſaynge.Cāti
                           •
                        . viii. S. 
                     Pone me vt ſignaculum ſuper cor
tuum. Put me (ſayth our lord) as a ſeale vpon thy herte. A ſeale
(as ye knowe) if it be īprynted in to wax / it leaueth in it his image.
So our lord wolde that his paſſion ſhuld be ſo imprinted in our
hertes / nat onely be ofte remembraunce / but alſo by deuoute compaſſion / 
that the prynt and image therof abyde in our affection
and feruent deſyre: ſo that as Ieſus Chriſte was made reed and
blody on the croſſe / ſo our deuocion in vs may be made reed and
feruent by the vertue of compaſſion. And hereunto we be counſelled
by the wordes of Moyſes ſaing.Leuiti
                           •
                        . xxix. B. 
                     Sumes de ſanguine vituli et
pones ſuper co
                           •
                        nua altaris. That thou ſhal take of the blode of the
calf ſignifieng the blode of Chriſte / and thou ſhal put it vpon the
corners of the aulter that is vpon thy thoughtꝭ & affections / with
feruent remembraūce of the blode of Chriſte. And ſo we ſhal fulfyll
the admonition of ſaynt Paule: ſaynge as I ſayde before.
Hoc ſentite in vobis quod et in Chriſto Ieſu.
                     Philip. ii. A Feale in your ſelf that
Chriſte Ieſu felt. And thus we may feele hym in our ſoule .ii. maner
of wayes. Firſt by the bitter affection of compaſſion / and that
is when we remembre the paſſion of Chriſte with ſo great compaſſion:
that it bringeth forth of vs moſt bytter teares / ſo yt ſuche
a deuoute ſoule may ſay with the wiſe man.
                        Eccli. 41. A 
                     O mors 
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         amara eſt me
moria tua. O deth howe bitter and ſorowfull is thy remēbraunce
and ſpecially the remembraūce of the deth of Chriſte. Secondly
we may feele hym in our hertes or ſoules by the moſte ſwete and
pleaſaunt affection of deuotion / and that is when we remembre
moſt inwardly & depely the great loue and charite of Chriſt that
wolde ſuffer ſo greuous paynes and ſhamefull dethe for ſo vyle
wretches and vnkynde as we be. And ſo this deuout remēbraūce
bringeth forth of vs moſt ſwete teares of deuotion: So that we
may ſay that is writen in the boke of Iudith.Iudith .v. B. 
                     Fontes aquarum ob
dulcorati ſunt. That is the bitter fountayns ben made ſwete and
delectable. A figure herof we rede in ſcripture where as our lord
commaunded to Moyſes to put a tree (that was both longe and
bitter) in to the water that was ſo bitter that no man culde drynk
therof / and ſo therby the waters were made ſwet and delectable.
                        Exod. xv. D.
                     
What is ſignified by this water but the paſſion of our lord which
is ſo bitter and paynful that no man may taſte therof. And by this
long and bitter tree / is ſignified the longe and continual remembraunce.
Whiche if it be ioyned and put to the paſſion of our lord / 
it ſhal make it ſwete and pleaſaunt / ſo that the more we taſte of it
by deuout remēbraunce / the more delectable it ſhalbe to vs. And
therfore our holy mother the churche ſayth in a certen hympne:
Dulce lignum,
                     Cru
                           •
                         
                        fide
                              •
                           .
                      
                     dulces clauos, dulce pondus ſuſtinet. That is: The
ſwete tree of the croſſe ſuſteyneth and bereth a ſwete burden / nayled
faſt with ſwete nayles. For that whiche was moſt bitter and
paynfull to our ſauiour Ieſu in his paſſion / ſomtyme is moſte
delectable and comfortable to vs in our deuoute meditations.
Theſe two maners of teares that is bitter and ſwete / ſprynge out
of this deuout affection of the paſſion of our lorde.Suꝑ canti
                           •
                         ſermon̄. 43 And hereunto
ſpeaketh ſaynt Barnarde as we ſayd a fore. In the remēbraunce
of the paynes that my ſauiour Ieſu ſufferd for me / I drynke ſomtyme
a draught of holſome bitternes. And ſomtyme agayne I receyue
the pleaſaunt vnction or oyntment of deuoute conſolation.
               
               
                  ¶Howe we ſhuld fele Chriſtes paſſion in our actes
and dedes. The thyrde Chapitre.
                  
                     THyrdly we ſhulde fele the paynes of Chriſte in our effectes 
and outward operations. That lyke as the deuout
remembraunce of Chriſtes paſſion enflameth our affection
and loue inwardly / ſo it myght appere & be ſhewed
outwardly in our warkes and lyuing. Hereunto we be coūſeled
by the wyſe men ſayng:Prouer. 24. D. 
                     Prepara foris opus tuum. That is to ſay:
Suche deuotion as thou haſte inwardly conceyued by affection
and loue / let it be ſhewed outwardly in thy dedes. For as ſaynt
Gregore ſayth:
                        Omel. 30. the dede outwardly done / is a ſufficient argumēt
or proue of the inwarde loue. So by the inwarde loue of man
is ſhewed or knowen his inwarde compaſſion. Alſo it is writen
in the ſeconde boke of the kynges:Cap. vii. A. 
                     Omnia que habes in corde tuo,
fac quoniam dominus tecum eſt. As if he ſhulde ſay: what ſo euer
good thynge thou haſt conceyued in thy hert / ſhewe it outwarde
in thy dedes.Cap. 25. D. Alſo it is writen in Exodo. Fac ſecundum exemplar
quod tibi monſtratum eſt in monte. Performe in thy lyuynge that
goodnes / whiche thou receyued of god in thy ſoule. And therfore
our lorde ſayth to vs in his goſpel:Luce. 9. C. 
                     Si quis vult venire poſt me, abneget
ſemetipſum et tollat crucem ſuam quotidie. If any man wyll
be my diſciple and cum after me / let hym denye hym ſelfe / that is

forſake his owne wyl and pleaſure / and take his own croſſe / that
is: put his owne body to payne and that dayly. For we muſt cōtinue
in penaunce / and ſo folowe Chriſte in our lyuyng outwardly
and nat onely inwardly / and hereto ſaith ſaint Paule:2. Corin. 8. D. 
                     Oſtentionem caritatis veſtre oſtendite in faciem eccleſie. That is / ſhewe
your good wyl and charitie openly in the face of the churche / that
is in our werkes & in our dedes.Pri. Pet. 2. D. And ſaynt Peter ſayth: Chriſtus
paſſus eſt pro nobis relinquens exemplum vt ſequamini eum. Chriſt
hath ſuffered paynes and deth for vs / gyuynge vs example to folowe
hym / he doth nat ſay that we ſhulde haue a wyll & deſyre only
to folowe hym / but he ſayth playnly that Chriſte hath left vnto
vs an example that we ſhulde folowe hym in our dedes in ſufferynge
paynes as he dyd. And then it myght be truely ſayd of vs / 
that we fele in our ſelfe that Chriſte felte / whan he ſuffere lyke
paynes as Chriſte ſuffred / ſo that by ſuche ſharpe penaunce and
harde laboures our bodyes be ſubdued and our blode minyſſhed.
And ſo the ſayng of ſcripture may be verifyed in vs:3. reg. 2. A. 
                     Effudit ſanguinem
belli in pace. He hath ſhed the blode of battell in the tyme
of peace. They do ſhed the blode of battell in the tyme of peace / 
which by ſharp penaunce & great bodyly labours ſo ſubdue theyr
bodyes / that theyr blode is moche miniſſhed / and theyr face made
pale. Suche maner of exerciſes of the body done for god / is reputed
as a martirdome / and therby ſomwhat we reanſwere vnto
the paſſion of our lord.Ser. xxx. ſuper Cantic. Herunto ſpeaketh ſaynt Barnard ſayng:
this dayly penaūce and affliction of the body / is a certayne kynde
of very martirdome and effuſion of blode / it is a litel more gentyl
and nat ſo hugſome as is tormētes and deth by the ſwerd or other
lyke / but it is more paynfull for the cōtinuance therof / the other is
ſone done / but this laſteth long. This is neceſſarie & profitable
for vnperfite perſons that be weyke in ſpirite and nat ſtronge in
fayth / and therfore dare nat auenture to ſuffer martyrdome and
deth for Chriſte / but they be content to ſupply it by this martyrdome / 
that is dayly and continuall penaunce / whiche by the continuaunce
is more paynfull. And thus the deuoute perſones do
fele in them ſelfe by theyr outwarde penaunce the paſſyon of our
lord / As whan by ſharp penaunce they ſubdue theyr bodies ouer
come vyce and all ſenſuall paſſions / and ſo continue in this croſſe
of penaunce with Chriſte.
               
               
                  ¶How we ſhulde fele Chriſtes paſſion in our pouertie
and other neceſſites. The fourth Chapitre.
                  
                     
                     FOurthly we ſhulde fele the paynes of Chriſte in our
penury / pouertie and other neceſſities / ſo that remē
                     brynge
the paſſion of Chriſte / we ſhulde gladly ſuffer
all pouertie and penurie / and neuer to deſyre that
thynge that is pleaſaunt to the bodye / for the pleaſure
therof or takyng any thinge more then very neceſſitie requyreth / 
ſaynge with holy Iob: Donec deficiam non recedam ab innocentia
mea.
                     Iob .xxvii. A. As longe as I lyue I ſhall nat forſake myn innocencie.
And though we be in a maner conſumed and loſt thoroughe hunger
and penurye / ſo that we may ſay with the prophet Dauid:
Defecit in dolore vita mea. My lyfe is conſumed thorough ſorowe / 
my bodye and my herte alſo.Pſal. xxx. And ſurely this maner of penurie
and neceſſitie / nat onely of meate and drynke / but alſo of all
thynges that may be delectable to man / is accōpted to good men
in this lyfe / as a kynde of martyrdome. By whiche neceſſityes
if we ſtrongly and gladly bere them for god / we ſatiſfye partly
to our lord for his paſſion. And herunto ſpeketh ſaynt Barnard
ſaynge: Wylfull pouertie is a certen kynde of martyrdome. Almyghty
god deſcendyng from thineſtimable riches of heuen / and
cōmynge in to this worlde / wolde nat any of theſe ryches of this
world / but cam in ſo great pouertie / that anon as he was borne
for his credell / he was layde in to a crybbe in a vyle ſtable with
out the towne / for his mother culde haue no lodgyng in the cytie.In flor. lib. v. Cap. xxx.
Of his pouertie alſo appereth by his anſwere that he made to one
the whiche ſayd that he wold folowe hym where ſo euer he went.
And our lord anſwered and ſayd:Math. 8. C. 
                     Vulpes foueas habent, et volucres
celi nidos, filius autem hominis non habet vbi caput ſuum recli
net. Foxis haue cauys / or dennys / and byrdes of the ayre haue
neſtes / but the ſonne of the virgine hath no place wherin to hyde
or reſte his heed. In this neceſſitie was thapoſtle Paule / as it
appereth by his wordes ſaynge: I was in many labours / ofte in
pryſon / bette and ſcourged aboue good ordre / very ofte in peryll
of dethe / in perylles of flodes / in perylles of theues / in perylles
of gentyles / in daungers within the cytye / in great daūgers alſo
in wyldernes / and alſo in the ſee / in perylles of the falſe Iues.2. Corin. xi. E. F. I
was alſo in labour & great miſerie / in great watch / in hūger and
thriſt / in moche abſtinēce / in cold & in nakednes. Theſe and many
mo dyd thapoſtle ſuffer. And the mo yt we paciently ſuffer of theſe
or ſuch lyke / the more ſhal we fele the paſſion of Chriſt in our ſelf.
               
               
                  ¶How we ſhuld fele Chriſtes paſſion in our rebukes
and diſpiſynges. The .v. Chap
                  
                     
                     FYftly we ought to fele the paſſion of Chriſt in our
rebukes and reproues / that is with moſt profoūd
mekenes / we ſhulde vtterly diſpyſe our ſelfe and
thynke our ſelfe the warſt of all other: ſayng euer
in our hertes with mournynge: I am gyltye of
Chriſtes deth / for I am the cauſe of his deth. He
ſuffered for me / and I in no thynge reanſwere to his benefytes.
And therfore it is conuenient that we ſomwhat recompenſe with
a contrite and meke ſpirite / that whiche we can nat or do nat in
our warkes or dedes outwarde / that as Chriſte dyd meke hym
ſelfe for vs vnto the deth / yea to the moſt vyle and ſhamfull deth
of the croſſe / ſo we ſhulde meke our ſelfe as gyltie and culpable
for his deth. Theſe maner of wayes we ſhulde fele that Chriſte
ſuffred for vs / for theſe maner of wayes we were in hym. Fyrſte
 we were in his vnderſtandyng eternally before the begynnynge
of the worlde / and ſo in his mynde that he wyll neuer forget vs.
And therfore he ſayth by his prophete Eſaye:Eſa. 49. D. 
                     Nunquid poteſt
obliuiſci mater infantem ſuum vt non miſereatur filio vteri ſui, Et ſi
illa oblita fuerit: ego tamen non obliuiſcar tui. May a naturall
mother (ſayth our lorde by the prophet) forget her yonge chylde
borne of her owne body? and ſo forget hym that ſhe wyl nat haue
any pitie of hym? as he myght ſay / Nay. And though it ſo be
that ſhe forget hym / yet I aſſure the I wyl neuer forget the. Secondly
 we were in Chriſte / nat onely in his vnderſtandynge or
mynde / but alſo in his affection and loue. And this appereth wel
by his owne wordes ſpoken by the prophet Hieremy / where as
he ſayth thus: In charitate perpetua dilexi te, ideo attraxi te, miſerans
tui.
                     Hier. 31. A. I haue (ſayth our lorde) loued the in a perpetual charitie / 
and therfore hauyng great compaſſion on the / I haue drawen
 the to me. Thyrdly we were in hym / that is in theffecte of
his werkes / for all that god wrought in this worlde / was to the
helpe of man. And what ſo euer Chriſte dyd or ſuffered in this
world / was nat for his owne profit / but all was for the comforth
of man.Ser. feri
                           •
                        . 4. 
                           •
                        bdomade pe
                           •
                        oſe. And herunto ſaynt Barnarde (after that he had recoū
                     ted
or noumbred all the labours and paynes that Chriſte ſuffered
in this lyfe) ſayde: Who is he that knoweth whether the fruite
and profyt of all theſe labours and paynes redounde or come to
my profyt or nat / And he anſwereth and ſayth: It is all done and
gyuen to my profit and comforth. For it coulde be gyuen to none
other. Nat to aungell / for he had no nede therof. Nat to the
deuyll / for he myght take no profit therof / for he ſhall neuer ryſe

from dampnation. Alſo our ſauiour toke nat of hym the nature
and ſimilitude of aungell / nor yet the ſimilitude of the deuyl / but
he toke the nature of man / and that to redeme man. Fourthly 
we were in Chriſte / that is in his pouertie and penurie / for all
the payne / pouertie and miſerie that he ſuffred / was for vs. And
herunto ſpeaketh ſaynt Paule ſayng:2. Corin. 8. B. 
                     Chriſtus cum diues eſſet factus
eſt pro nobis pauper: vt illius inopia nos diuites eſſemus. Chriſte
beynge moſt ryche / became poore for vs / that by his pouertie and
neceſſitie we may be made riche. Fyftly we were in Chriſte / that 
is in his rebukes and diſpiſinges / for all the mockes / ſcornes / repreues
and diſpiſynges with other lyke that Chriſte ſuffred / was
for vs / that therby he myght reconſile vs to his father in heuen / 
and promote vs vnto the euerlaſtynge glorie. And therfore as
Chriſte dyd all theſe for vs / ſo let vs ſuffer with hym and for our
euerlaſtynge profyte.
               
            
            
               ¶The .iiii. particle.
               
                  ¶Of diuerſe maners and wayes to remēbre Chriſtes
paſſion and it is diuided in to .vi. Chapitres
howe we may conſidre Chriſtes paſſion
with a mynde to folowe it. Chap. i.
                  
                     ANd that thou may the better bere in mynd our lordes
paſſion / thou ought to knowe that a man may behaue
hym ſelf in remembraūce therof .vi. maner of wayes
Fyrſt he may conſidre this paſſion with a mynd to folowe
it. Secondly to haue cōpaſſion therof. Thyrdly
to merueyl therof. Fourtly to ioy therof. Fyftly to reſolue or relēt
his herte in to that paſſion. And ſextly ſurely to reſt therin ſo that
this imitation or folowyng / ſhalbe to the purgation & direction
of his ſoule. The compaſſion: to the vnion and loue / thadmiration
or merueylyng: ſhalbe to the leuation or lyftyng vp of his
mynde / the ioy and gladnes: to the openynge and dilatation of
his herte / the relentynge ſhalbe to his perfecte conformation / and
the reſt or quietnes: ſhalbe to the perfection of his deuotion. Of
eche one of theſe ſeuene we ſhall write a lityll / ſo that the paynful
paſſion of our moſte louynge ſauiour Ieſu / myght the more rather
enflame and kyndle our dull affection and loue / illumyne
and lyghten our blynde reaſon or vnderſtandynge / and alſo that
it myght be the more ſtrongly inprinted in to our ſliper meōries.
¶Fyrſt I ſay we ſhuld cōſidre the paſſion of our ſauiour Chriſte 
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
with a mynde to folowe it. For the imitation and folowynge of
Chriſte is the moſt hyghe and perfite religion and rule of a perfite
perſon. To folowe Chriſte (I ſay) in his paſſion and deth
by a continuall remēbraunce / a louynge and affectuous compaſſion
and by vertuous operation: is thexemplar of perfection of
all lyfe and treuth / ſo that this paſſion be our rule and thordre of
our liuynge in all our meritorious dedes. For Chriſte is as a
boke layd open on the pulpyt of the croſſe / where as he taught
obedience / pacience / mekenes and charitie / for the whiche: if we
dayly vſe and performe them / we ſhalbe crowned in eternall felicitie.
And ſpecyally we ſhuld lerne here / how our ſauiour Chriſte
behaued hym ſelf in the chapitre / whiche was holden and kept for
hym. Of the whiche ſaynt Barnarde ſpeketh ſayng: Ieſus ſtode
before the preſident: inclynynge or bowynge downe his heed / 
ſpeakynge but fewe wordes with a ſofte voyce / a quiete chere or
countenaunce / lokynge downwarde to the erthe / and redy to receyue
or beare patiently all rebukes and beatynges / which thynges / 
whan we do nat: or elles be negligent to do and ſuffer them
how can or may we ſay that we folowe Chriſt. Truely ſomoche
the more be we deſolate of goodnes: in how moche we be ſeparate
or departed for this exemplar & rule / our ſauiour Ieſu. We ſhuld
haue a wyl and mynde (as moche as is in vs) to be diſpiſed of all
men / deiect / troden vnder foote / ſet at nought / mocked & ſcorned / 
to be ſcourged / whipped / bet / and to ſuffer perſecution for Chriſt / 
and alſo to be rebuked in our good dedes or werkes for Chriſte.
Alſo we ſhuld haue a deſire to be poore or naked with Chriſt / nothyng
couetyng or deſiryng / and that namely inordinatly / but to
be fully cōtent with ſuche pouertie as god ſendeth vs. And more
ouer it ſhuld be a greuous payne to vs / and moche ſharp ſorowe
to our hert / to haue any thynge and that ſuperfluous. We ſhulde
abhorre to taſt of any delectable and ſwete thyng / rather deſiryng
to be fed with vyle and bitter meates or drynkes / remēbryng that
our ſauiour Ieſu was ſo fed at this paſſion. And ſhortly to conclude / 
we ſhulde remembre and depely conſidre what our ſauiour
Ieſu ſuffred for vs / and how he ordered hym ſelfe in his paſſyon
and paynes / that we myght conforme our ſelfe to hym in aſmoche
as we may. For his paſſyon ſhall nat ſaue vs ſynners that haue
vſe of reaſon / except we enforce our ſelf to folowe hym / and to conforme
our ſelfe vnto his pacience in ſome maner / or at leeſt / haue
a full wyl & deſyre therunto / accordyng to the ſayng of the prophet
Eſay / where as the ſonne of god complaynethe to his father of

ſuche as wyll nat folowe hym ſaynge:Eſa. xlix. A. 
                     In vacuum laboraui, ſine
cauſa et vane fortitudinem meam conſumpſi. I haue laboured in
vayne / without frute or vaynly I haue conſumed or waſted my
ſtrength / for fewe take hede to folowe me. Alſo the prophet Hieremy
ſayth:Hiere. vi. G. 
                     Fruſtra conflauit conflator. malicie enim illorum non
ſunt conſumpte. That is the trier or goldſmyth hath tryed / blowen
and laboured in vayne / for the ruſt of theyr malice or ſynne
is nat conſumed. Of the whiche text the gloſe ſayth: the onely paſſion
of Chriſte ſhall nat ſaue them / except they folowe it in good
lyuyng. And herto ſaint Gregory ſayth: If we ſerche & labour
to haue here pleaſaunt and delectable thynges. What truſt we to
haue in the lyfe to come? he that wyll nat mourne here where as
he is as a pilgrem: he ſhall nat ioy in heuen as a cytezen or as of
the houſhold of heuen. Therfore the more thou perceyue thy ſelfe
to abounde in temporal goodes / in worldly honour and corporal
pleaſure or conſolation here in this lyfe / the more cauſe haſt thou
to be heuy and ſad / for aſmoch as thou art farre from the true conformitie
and folowyng of Chriſt / and ſo farre from the cōſolation
of god. wherfore if we wyll reigne with Chriſte / it is neceſſarie
that we ſuffer for Chriſt. For there is no diſciple aboue his mayſſter.
Sith therfore we be put in this world as in a felde to feight / 
where as our maiſter Chriſte faught ſtrongly vnto ye dethe / that
ſowdiour or perſon the which here ſuffereth no beatyngꝭ or woū
                     des
for Chriſte / ſhall ryghtuouſly appere in ye world to come vnglorious
and without glory or vnworthy rewarde. And therfore
ſaint Gregory expoūdyng theſe wordes of our lord:Math. vii. B. 
                     Anguſta eſt
via que ducit ad vitam. It is a narowe or ſtreit way yt ledeth man
to euerlaſtyng life: ſaith thus. It is a ſtrait way yt ledeth to heuen
for if we wyl come thider / we muſt liue here in this worlde / & yet
nothyng to haue or to folowe of the cōcupiſcence of the worlde / to
couit nothyng that apperteineth to any other man / to gyue & forſak
our owne goodes / to diſpiſe the laudes and praiſynges of the
world / to honour them that diſpiſe vs / to forgyue hertly iniuries
done to vs / and alſo to loue them with hert and continually that
doth ſuche wronges vnto vs / and to do good to them whiche all
our ſauiour Chriſte fulfylled here in this lyfe / leauynge example
vnto vs to folowe his ſteppes / whiche ſteppes and examples the
more narowe and paynfull or ſtrayt they be in this lyfe / the more
they ſhalbe ampliate / cōfortable & ioyful in this lyfe to come. And
therfore the prophet Dauid ſayth.
                        Pſal. iiii▪
                      
                     In tribulatione dilataſti mihi.
In tyme of tribulation thou haſt opened and ſpred abrode to me

thy conſolations and comfortes. And therfore the holy ſeruauntes
of god / whan they perceyue them ſelfe to abounde in the proſperities
of this worlde / then they be very ferefull ſuſpectynge
leſte that they ſhuld receyue here in this lyfe the frute and reward
of theyr labours / fearyng leſte that the iuſtice of god ſhulde ſe in
them any priuy or lorkynge wounde of ſynne. For the whiche of
the ryghtuouſnes of god they ought to be dampned. And therfore
he rewardynge theyr good dedes here in this lyfe with temporall
pleaſures wyl expel them from ye true inward & eternal pleaſures.
               
               
                  ¶How we may cōſidre the paſſion of Chriſt with a mynde
to haue compaſſion therof. The .ii.. Chaptre.
                  
                     SEcondly we ſhulde conſidre the paſſion of our lord 
to haue compaſſion therof / that is to ſay: we ſhulde
ofte remēbre in our hertes / his beatynges and woundes / 
mockes and rebukes / and euery ymaginyng in
ourſelf / what deiection / cōtempt / ſorowe and affliction
he ſuffred in his herte and in his bodye as we ſayd before.
O how then the ſwetnes and pleaſure of aungelles Ieſus Chriſt
was repleniſſhed with great bitternes and ſorowe of payne. O
howe moche that payne dyd greue hym / but moche more our
vnkyndnes. And aboue al dyd greue hym the trouble and affliction
of his mother / whom he ſo tēderly dyd loue / and agayn was
ſo derely loued of her / that for compaſſion of his payn and dethe / 
ſhe was in a maner as deed or ſemed to dye. In remēbraunce herof / 
we haue great matter and cauſe to wepe / for our ſynnes were
the cauſe of his paſſion and deth / and alſo of her compaſſion and
great dolore or heuynes. Wherfore to haue cōpaſſion of Chriſtes
paſſion / let vs depely and inwardly cōſidre that we were the occaſyon
of the deth of the onely ſone of god / we were falſe tratours
vnto hym and ſo deſerued deth / but he of his ineſtimable charitie
wolde ſuffer that ſhamful deth / to deliuer vs from eternall dethe.
Let this charite / his ſcourginges / woūdes / mockes / rebukes and
deth perſe the inward depnes of our hert / let there be nothynge in
vs / but that it be anoynted with this cōpaſſion / and alſo be wrapped
with ſorowe and heuynes for that deth: and ſo we ſhuld dayly
mourne as the louing mother mourneth the deth of her onely and
tēderly belouyd ſone. O how moch ought we to loue hym / and to
be kynd to hym which ſuffred ſo ſhamful a deth for our redēption.
Therfore let vs ſtudye and labour in all that we may to be aſſociate
and ioyned to hym with a moſt feruent loue. For the more

feruently we loue hym / the more ſhall we haue compaſſion of his
paſſion / and ſo this feruent loue and compaſſion ſhall ſo moche
encreaſe to gether and be augmented / that they ſhall brynge vs to
the perfection of loue / and to the fruition of our louer. Wherfore
let vs be ſory with hym / truſtynge verely / and that without any
doubte / that if we be founde here to be partakers of his ſorowe
in ſorowynge for his deth and paſſion / we ſhalbe made his felowes
and companyons or partakers of his ioy and conſolation.
For ſurely he that wolde nat hyde his reſurrection from Marie
Magdalene that with ſorowe ſought hym / he wyll nat denye his
glorie to vs / that religiouſly and deuoutly do mourne with hym
for his paſſion.Rom̄. 8. C. And therfore ſaynt Paule ſayth: Si tamen compatimur
vt et ſimul glorificemur. If we here ſuffer with Chriſte / 
we ſhalbe glorified with Chriſte. Alſo our ſauiour Chriſt ſaith:
Beati qui perſecutionem patiuntur propter iuſticiam: quoniam ipſorum
eſt regnum celorum.
                     Math. 5. A. Bleſſyd be they that ſuffer perſecution
for iuſtice (that is for Chriſte) for they ſhall haue the kyngdome
of heuen.Ser. C. lxv. de t
                           •
                        . ca. 6. And contrarie wyſe ſaynt Auſten ſayth: If thou be excepte
from paſſion and payne / that is if thou ſuffer nat here ſome
payne / thou ſhalbe exempte from the nombre of the chylderne of
god.Hebre. xii. B. For as ſaynt Paule ſayth: Quem dominus diligit: corrigit:
caſtigat: flagellat autem 
                           ••
                        ominem filium quem recipit. Whom our
lorde loueth / hym he doth chaſtyſe / he correcth euery one of them
whom he receyueth to his mercy and fauoure. Therfore if ye be
nat vnder correction as all the chyldern of god be / ye be nat the
childerne of god / but of the deuyll. Hereby ye may perceyue that
good lyfe doth nat ſtand principally in good fare or wel liuynge / 
but rather in paciently ſufferyng wronges for Chriſte / though it
be a comen prouerbe / that he liueth well / that feadeth well / Sed
mentita eſt iniquitas ſibi / but carnall men ſpeke carnally / and ſo
deceyue them ſelfe with lyes / for as Gerſon ſayth: the more that
ſenſual nature is oppreſſed and ouercome for god / the more grace
we receyue / & our inward man is dayly reformed vnto thimage
of god with newe viſitations of grace. And therfore I may ſay
that man is conformed / vnit and incorporate to god by werynge
that moſte noble and precious garment of payne and paſſion / 
whiche our ſauiour Ieſus lorde and maker of all creatures / dyd
were and ſuffer in his owne bodye in this lyfe. Hereunto ſayth
ſaynt Gregore: The torment and payne that our lorde ſuffered / 
gloryfyeth hym bothe inwardelye and outwardelye. In vs
alſo / it compelleth hym to come to grace that wolde nat come.

It teacheth and enformeth the ignorant / it kepeth vertue / it defendeth
from ſekenes of ſynne / it quyckeneth the dull perſon / it meketh
the proude perſone / it crowneth and rewardeth thinnocent / 
and it ſtirreth or moueth man to ſuffer gladly dethe / wherby he
may come to euerlaſtynge lyfe.Pri. Corin. xv. G. Prayſes and thankes be to god
the father / whiche hath gyuen vnto vs the victorie / thorowe the
deth and paſſion of his ſonne Ieſu Chriſte Amen.
               
               
                  ¶Howe we may conſydre the paſſion of Chriſt with
a mynde to meruayl therof. The .iii. Chap
                  
                     
                     THyrdly we ſhulde conſidre the paſſion of Chriſte to meruayl
therof. It is a wonderous thyng to conſydre / who
ſuffered / what he ſuffered / and for whome he ſuffered.
Fyrſt I ſay it is a meruaylous thynge to conſydre who
ſuffered. It was the ſonne of god theternall / and onely ſonne of
god / very god and man / all good / all myghty / all wyſe / the kynge
of glorie. And what dyd he ſuffer? to be layd and to abyde as an
infirme and frayle chylde .ix. monethes in his mothers wombe to
be poorly borne / to be chaſed and dryuen in to a ſtraunge coūtre / 
he ſufferd hongre / thriſt / heat / colde / penurie / pouertie / tempeſtes / 
ſtormes / perſecutions / lyenge in waite to accuſe hym / beatynges / 
bondes / ſcourgynges / mockes / rebukes / ſclaunders / with many
other paynes and ſorowes as we ſhewed before / ſo that the glorie
of god was be ſpewed and all defowled with ſpittynges / the
iuſtice of god was contempned / the iudge was falſly iudged / he
that neuer offended was blamed / the innocent was accuſed and
ſclaundered / god was blaſphemed / Chriſte was diſpyſed / lyfe
was ſleyne / and therfore the ſonne withdrewe and hyd his lyght / 
and the mone waxed blacke and derke. Theſe and many other
mo paynes ſuffered paciently / our moſt louynge ſauiour Ieſus / 
whiche as a meke lambe was led vnto the dethe / and he wold nat
ones reſiſt his enemyes / though with one worde or one thought
he myght haue caſt downe or drowned all his enemyes in the depeſt
pyt of hell. But for whom ſuffered he all theſe great paines?
ſurely for his moſt cruell and ſynfull enemyes / for his moſt wycked
ſeruauntes or bondmen / for falſe tratoures / contempners or
diſpiſers of his godly maieſtie / and for moſte vnkynde wretches
vnto theyr creatour and maker. Syth therfore ſuche a glorious
kyng pure and innocent ſuffred ſo many paynes and rebukes for
ſo vile / falſe / wycked / and moſt vnkynd caytiues / to whom he had

exhibite and ſhewed before that tyme all ſignes and tokens of benignitye
and goodnes. Was nat this a wonderous and meruaylous
thynge? Who may ſufficiently meruayl of this thyng / to conſidre
and ſe the moſt wyſe / pure / myghtie / holy / and the euerlaſtynge
beautie of glorie of god / to ſuffer ſo ſhamfull dethe for ſo
ſtynkyng carion. In all theſe thynges we may well wonder and
meruayl of the great goodnes and charitie of god. For he of his
infinite charitie made (of his owne fleſſhe and bodye / made reed
with his owne blode) a reclamatorie or a lewer to call vnto his
mercy and grace / thoſe wylde hawkes and vnkynde people / the
whiche by inordinate loue to the fleſſhe and the worlde / had taken
theyr flyght from the hand and fauour of the noble fawconer our
ſauiour Ieſus. Of the which hawkes / ſpeketh the prophet Oſee
ſaynge:Oſee. ix. C. 
                     Effraim quaſi anis auolauit. Effraym hath flowen away
or taken her flyght as a wylde hawke. Effraym is as moche to
ſay by interpretation as augmenta encreaſinges / and it may wel
ſignifye ſuche people as here haue theyr pleaſure in worldly honours
and paſtymes / and encreaſe in them. Suche people lyke
vnto vngentyll or wylde hawkes flye from the hand and fauour
or loue of god / vnto the caryon of the bodye or of the worlde / and
fede therof. And if they wyl nat be reclaymed vnto ye hand of this
fawconer / neyther by his callynge or cryenge / nor yet by the ſhewynge
of his lewre / that is by the remembraunce of his paſſion
and dethe / they ſhalbe lefte vnto the power and handes of the rauenar
of hell the deuyll. Herunto our lorde ſpeaketh by the wyſe
man ſaynge:Pro
                           ••
                        . 1. C. 
                     Vocaui et renuiſtis, extendi manum meam, et non fuit
qui aſpiceret. &c. I haue called you (ſayth our lord) and ye wold
nat come. I haue extended my hand ſhewynge my lewre / that
is gyuynge my benefytes vnto youe and ſpecyally myne owne
precyous bodye and blode / but there is none that wyll beholde
or regarde it and gyue to me due thankes therfore. And it foloweth:
Ego quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         in interitu veſtro ridebo. And I ſhall laughe
at you / whan ye ſhalbe deuoured by the deuyles of hell. We
myght here alſo ſhewe many other occaſions of meruaylynge / 
whiche be written in diuerſe places of this treatys / and ſpecially
in the fyrſte particle of this parte.
               
               
                  ¶How we ſhuld conſydre Chriſtes paſſyon
to reioyſe and ioy therin.
The .iiii. Chap.
                  
                     
                     
                     FOrthly we ſhulde conſidre the paſſion of our lorde to
ioy therin. For we ſhuld ioy therof for the redēption
of mankynde for the reparynge and reſtorynge of the
ruyne and decay of aungelles. And alſo we ſhuld ioy
of the greate charitye and goodnes of god ſhewed in
the ſayd paſſion. Fyrſte without doubte we ought greatly to reioyſe
and ioy in our redemption whiche we had by the deth and
paſſion of Chriſte, Who is he (I beſeche you) that wyll nat be
ioyfull and gladde of this deth and paſſion / whan he conſidereth
that therby he is redemed from eternal dampnation / from the rebuke
of ſynne / from the powre of the deuyll / and from the miſerable
paynes of hell? Secondly we ſhuld ioy that ye tall of aungellꝭ
is repared by the paſſion of Chriſte. Surely it may be a greate
reioyſynge to vs / whan we conſidre that ſo noble a college as is
the companye of aungelles / thorough the deth of Chriſte ſhalbe
repared and fulfilled with vs / ſo that of aungelles & of men ſhalbe
one heerd or flocke vnder one herdmā our ſauiour Ieſu Chriſt
ſo that they and we may be all one in hym. Thirdly we oughte
moſte ſpecyally to reioyſe beholdynge in al the forſayd thynges
the great and ineſtimable charite of our ſauiour Ieſu Chriſt our
lorde and god. Howe or in what thynge myght he haue ſhewed
more clerly or more to our comforth his moſt benigne goodnes / 
then in his moſt glorious paſſion / where as he ſuffered ſo ſhamfull
ſharpe and greuous paynes for the deliueraunce of his enemy / 
and to glorifye hym that was worthy to be punyſſhed with
eternall dethe?Deu
                           •
                        . 32. C. And therfore ſcripture ſayth: Inundationes maris
quaſi lac ſugent, et theſauros altiſſimos arenarum. They ſhal ſucke
as it were mylke the ſwellynges or inundations and tempeſtes
of the ſee, and alſo the depe and hyd treaſoures of the ſande or grauell.
By this ſuckynge is ſignifyed the confortable ſwetnes that
we haue in the receyuynge of the precious bodye of our lorde / the
whiche we receyue in the remēbraunce of the paſſion of our lord / 
and of the great treaſure that was hyd in the manyfolde paynes
and ſorowes that he ſuffred before his dethe / wherby we were redemed / 
whiche we ought at all tymes to remembre. And therfore
the prophet Dauid ſayth:
                        Pſal. 136. 
                     Adhereat lingua mea faucibus meis ſi non
meminero tui. I wolde my tunge ſhulde cleue faſte to my iawes
if I do nat remembre the. Then dothe the tunge cleue faſt to the
iawes / when a man nothynge regardynge ſpirituall pleaſures / 
enforceth hymſelfe to folowe worldly or carnall pleaſures. The
ſwetnes that cōmeth in to the ſoule by receyuynge of the ſacramēt

redoundeth in to the iawes or chekes that be wel diſpoſed / that is
to ſay: it is nat onely comforth to a good ſoule / but alſo to all the
poures of the bodye / as the ſuckynge of the ſalt water of the ſee / 
wherby is ſignified the bitter paynes of Chriſtes paſſion. And
theſe ſpirituall conſolations be the treaſures more precious then
golde and precious ſtone. Alſo they be hyd treaſures / for no man
knoweth them / but he that receyueth them. And as the prophet
Dauid ſayth:Pſal. 18. they be moche more to be deſyred then golde or precious
ſtone / and more pleaſaūt or ſwetter then hony or any hony
combe. For they that be replenyſſhed with this hyd treaſure / that
is / with thabundaūt remēbraūce of the paſſion of Chriſt through
the plentuouſnes therof: they ſpeake wordes of ſwetnes and comforth / 
and ioy in a great iuſtice / for they haue the great plentuouſnes
of graces.Eſa. lvi. D. And herunto the prophet Eſay ſayth: Gaudete ſuper
eam gaud
                           •
                        o vniuerſi qui lugebatis ſuper eam: et vt ſugatis et repleamini
ab vberibus conſolationis eius. &c. All ye that in tyme
paſt mourned or wept in the cōſideration of the paſſion of Chriſt:
ioy now therof in cōſiderynge the great profites that cometh therof / 
ſucke them / that is / depely and inwardly conſidre them / that
ye may be repleniſſhed with the teates or pappes of his conſolations.
And alſo ye ſhall mylke thoſe pappys that ye may aboūde
in all ſpirituall pleaſure by the conſideration of his great glorie.
In the remembraūce of the paſſion of Chriſte when we conſidre
his moſt greuous paynes / and how yt we were the cauſe of them / 
thorowe our vnkyndnes and ſynnes / then we ſucke out of it ſorowe
and heuynes. And when we conſidre what profit comethe
therof vnto mankynde / then we ſuck out of it great comforth and
ioy. And theſe two be the teetes or pappys of the whiche the prophet
Eſay ſpeaketh: and of the whiche the faythfull people ſucke
great comforth in receyuynge the ſacrament of the bodye of our
lorde. From theſe pappys whan they be ſucked cometh the mylke
of chaſtitie and puritie of lyfe / and alſo the ſwetnes of all vertue.
And when they be milked with our handes / that is / when nat only
we conſidre the paſſion of Chriſte as is before ſayd / but alſo in
our lyung and werkes we cōforme our ſelf therunto and werke
therafter. Then we mylke and drawe them and ſo ſhal we flowe
in thaboundaunce of ſpirituall pleaſures thorough the conſolation
of the holy goſt. We myght alſo here for our purpoſe bryng
in the ſaynge of our lorde in the goſpell / where as he ſayth:Lu
                           •
                        . 15. B. 
                     Gaudium
erit angelis dei in celo ſuper vno peccatore penitentiam agente:

                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         ſuper nonaginta nouem iuſtis. There is more ioy in heuen

vnto the aungelles of god vpon one ſinner conuerted from ſynne
and doyng true penaunce / then of nynety and nyne iuſt and ryghtuous
men that nede no penaunce. Who is this one ſynner but
our ſauiour Ieſu Chriſte / whiche thoughe he were no ſynner in
dede: yet he was reputed as the moſt great ſinner / and ſo he wold
be reputed and taken / for he came to beare our ſynnes / and to do
penaunce and to ſuffer for all our ſynnes.
               
               
                  ¶How we may cōſidre Chriſtes paſſion to reſolue or relent
our hertes in to Chriſte and his paſſion. Chaptre. v.
                  FYftly we ſhulde cōſidre the moſt bleſſed paſſion of our ſauiour
 Chriſte / to reſolue and relent our hertes in to our ſauiour
Chriſte and in to his paſſion. And that by a perfite tranſformynge
of our ſelfes in to hym. And that is done whan nat only
we do folowe that paſſion / haue cōpaſſion therof / do meruayll
therof / and ioy therof. But alſo in a maner the hole man is conuerted
in to our lord and ſauiour Ieſus Chriſte crucified / ſo that
in a maner at all tymes and in all places Chriſte crucified is preſent
with hym. And ferthermore that perſon is then in his mynde
abſtract and withdrawen from all thynges / and eleuate or lyfted
vp aboue all pure creatures / and holly conuerted in to his lorde
god crucified for vs. But this conuerſion and relentynge of our
hertes in to Chriſt crucified can nat cōueniently be / except there
be a congruitie or a conuenient proporcion taken of ſome ſimilitude
bytwixt our hertes and the ſacrament of the aulter receyued
of vs ſacramentally or elles ſpiritually with the remēbraunce of
the paſſion of our lorde crucified for vs.Li. 2. de generatione & corruptiō
                        
                           •
                        . For as the philoſopher
ſayth / that nothynge noryſſheth / but that whiche is lyke vnto the
thyng noryſſhed. Wherfore ſith this heuenly and ſpiritual foode
that is the bodye of our lorde doth moche noryſſhe / it folowethe
that it muſt be moche lyke vnto the perſon noryſſhed. The digeſtion
or noryſſhyng is then / whan the meate is altered and conuerted
in to the thyng noriſſhed. And therfore for that the materiall
and corporall foode or meate is cōuerted in to that bodye that is
fedde / it foloweth that the digeſtion muſt be both of the meat and
of the drynke. Herunto it is writen in the firſt boke of the kyngꝭ.
Digere pauliſper vinum quo mades.
                     1. reg
                           •
                        . 1. C. Digeſt that wyne that thou
haſt dronke. But in this ſpirituall meate: for aſmoche as it is nat
tourned in to vs / but cōtrarie wyſe we be cōuerted in to it / it foloweth
that the digeſtion muſt be in vs vnto the ſimilitude of this
heuenly and holſome meate. And this ſimilitude or congruite of

this ſpirituall meate vnto the perſon fed / ſtandeth in .v. thynges / 
that is in our digeſtion or conuerſion in to this heuenly meate / 
in the ſimilitude of ymage / in the cōformitie of nature / in the fayrnes
or good ordre of our cōuerſation / and in the takynge of our
miſerie / by paynes in a maner vntollerable. And theſe .v. bene
more largely declared by the great clerke and noble doctor called
Albertus Magnus:Diſtinē. 3. tract. 1. Ca. vi. in his boke de Euchariſtia / that he wrote of
the ſacrament in a chapitre of theſe ſame .v. thynges.
               
               
                  ¶How we may conſidre Chriſtes paſſion to reſt our
ſelfes ſwetely therin. Chaptre .vi.
                  SExtly we ſhulde conſidre this moſt bleſſed paſſion to reſte 
our ſelfe moſte ſwetely therin. And that is whan our herte
(as we in the laſt cōſideration ſayd) relented / cōuerted and tranſformed
in to our lorde crucified / doth nat yet ceaſe but with a feruent
deſyre remembreth the ſayd paſſion / entryng mekely and deuoutly
in to that hyghe and depe treaſure of Chriſtes paſſion as
farre as is poſſible for man / meltynge and relentyng thoroughe
loue and feruent deuotion in a maner fayntyng or faylyng in our
ſelfe / and reſtyng in our lorde Chriſte Ieſu crucified for vs. And
then in how moche the more we faynt or fayle from our ſelfe / ſo
moche the more we reſt and cleue vnto our dearebeloued lord crucified
for vs. So that theſe .ii. that is / this reſt or cleuyng to our
lorde: and this feruent deuotion of loue do augment and encreaſe
them ſelfe in them ſelfe / for the one helpeth the other. For as we
ſayd before / the more that our nature is oppreſſed / ouercome and
doth languyſſhe or waxe ſeke for loue / the more it approcheth and
draweth nygh vnto her dearebelouyd / and the more grace we receyue / 
& our inwarde man that is our ſoule is dayly viſited with
newe viſitations and reformed vnto the ymage of god / vnto the
tyme that it holly faylynge in it ſelfe be abſorpte and taken in to
that feruent chymney of loue of the paſſion of our moſte beloued
Ieſu / and there to reſt ſwetely / as the ſpouſeſſe ſwetely reſtynge
in the armes or boſome of her dearebeloued ſpouſe / the whiche
ſayth thus in his canticles.Canti. 8. A. 
                     Adiuro vos filie ſion: ne euigilare faciatis
dilectam donec ipſa velit. I adiure and charge you: o you
doughters of ſyon that ye do nat vnreſte / vnquiete or wake my
dearebeloued ſpouſeſſe / vnto ſuche tyme it ſhall pleaſe her. This
penetration and inwarde entrynge of our hertes in to our lorde
god / & there reſtyng as we ſayd before / is perceyued and vnderſtandyd

by the forſayd congruitie or conueniency taken of a ſimilitude
as we declared in the fyfte conſideration as ye may more
clerely perceyue by the declaration of the noble forſayd doctor Albert
in his ſayd boke de Euchariſtia diſtinctione tertis tractatu
primo.Vbi ſupra. Capi. vi.
               
            
            
               ¶The .v. particle is diuided in to .xix. Chaptres.
               
                  ¶The firſt is of .xx. profites and fruites that cometh to man
by the medytation of Chriſtes paſſion / and that
by thordre of the letters of the Alphabete
or A. B. C. Fyrſte Chapitre.
                  THeſe profites bene writen by a deuout father of thordre of
ſaynt Auſten / a reder of diuinitie or holy ſcripture / called
Rycharde of Laudenburge in his paſſionarie or boke yt he wrote
of the paſſion of our lorde Ieſu Chriſte and for your comforthe
we wryte them here.
                  
                     ¶The fyrſte profite. Animorum purgat feditatem.
                     
                        
                        THe meditation of the paſſion of Chriſte doth purge
the fylthynes of our myndes or ſoules. Hereunto
ſaynt Iohan ſayth: Sanguis Ieſu Chriſti emundat
nos ab omni peccato.
                        1. Ioh. 1. C. The blode of Ieſu Chriſt doth
clenſe and make vs clene from all ſynne. And in his
Apocalipſe he ſayth:Apoc. 1. B. 
                        Lauit nos a peccatis noſtris in
ſanguine ſuo. He hath waſſhed vs from our ſynnes in his blode.
And therfore Chriſte in his goſpel called his paſſion a baptiſme / 
bycauſe it purgeth vs from our ſynnes / ſayng thus:Luce. 12. F. 
                        Baptiſmo habeo
baptiſari et quomodo coartor vſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            dum perficiatur. I muſt be
baptyſed with a certen baptiſme / and I am in great anguiſſhe vnto
it be performed and done. And therfore the ſynners that be in
good wyll & mynde to clenſe theyr cōſciences from the ſpottes of
vices and ſynnes / ſhulde ofte remembre the paſſion of Chriſte.
Euery mortall and dampnable ſynne / is as it were a buckler or
ſhelde to defende the deuyll that he be nat expelled from the ſoule
of the ſynner / but Chriſte brake this buckler and ſhelde by his
paſſion and deth that he ſuffered on the croſſe. And therfore the
prophet Dauid ſayde of Chriſte. Arcum conteret et confringet
arma et ſcuta comburet igne.
                        Pſal. xlv. He ſhall breke the bowe and the armour / 
and he ſhall burne in the fyer the ſheldes or bucklers: that
is / he ſhal burne and conſume our ſynnes (whiche be the bucklers

of the deuyll) with the feruent fyer of charitie / whiche he had in
his glorious paſſion that he ſuffered on the croſſe. And therfore
we may ſay that he burned .vii. bucklers / that is the .vii. deedly
ſynnes with the foreſayd fyer of charitie. Fyrſt pryde / by the inclynation
and bowynge downe of his heed / for by that bowynge
downe of his heed: it ſeamed as that he wolde haue fledde from
the ſolempne title that was written aboue his croſſe:Iohis. xix. D. 
                        Ieſus naza
renus rex iudeorum. This is / Ieſus of Nazareth ye kyng of Iues.
Secondly he conſumed enuy by thextention and caſtyng abrode
of his armes / as redy to receyue & halfe his enemyes for the great
loue he had vnto them. Thyrdly / he burned the bukler of auarice
or couitice / in his large gyftes that he gaue in his paſſion. And
hereto ſath ſaynt Barnarde: Lerne thou chriſtiane how moche
thou ought to loue thy ſauiour Chriſte / whiche gaue hym ſelfe
vnto the deth for our redemption / he gaue his fleſſhe vnto vs in
meate / his blode to our drynke / the water of his ſyde / to waſſhe
vs / his garmentes / to his crucifiers / his bodye / to his diſciples / 
and his mother / to his diſciple Iohan. Fourtly he burned ſlouth
by his wylfull and ſpedy comynge to his paſſion. Fyftly he conſumed
wroth / by his ſylence and ſofte or gentyll ſpeche. Sextly
he diſtroyed glotony / by the drynkyng of aſel & gall. And ſeuently / 
he ouercame lychery / by the openynge and woundynge of his
ſyde. And therfore we may ſay well that the meditation and remembraunce
of the paſſion of Chriſte / doth purge and clenſe the
fylthynes of our ſoules.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .ii. profit. Bellatorum roborat puſillanimitatem.
                     THe remembraunce of the paſſion of Chriſte doth conforte
and ſtrength warryours or fyghters / and that aſwell in
iuſt corporal batel / as in ſpirittuall. Of corporal batell it appered
in the noble emperour Conſtantine / whiche cauſed the ſigne of
the croſſe to be borne before his hoſte or army / to the intent that
the paſſion of Chriſte ſhulde gyue ſtrengthe vnto his knyghtes
and ſawdiours that faught vnder that baner of the croſſe / and ſo
it dyd.Li. 1. Ca. v. For as we rede in Hiſtoria tripertita / whan theyr enemys
came agaynſt them / he that bare the baner of the croſſe was ſore
afrayd / and for that feare / he wold nat beare that banar but toke
it vnto an other man / and ſo fled from ye felde / but or that he could
conuey hym ſelfe away / he was wounded and ſlayne / where as
the other ꝑſon that bare the baner of ye croſſe / thorowe the vertue

of the paſſion of Chriſte / was ſaued from all hurt / thoughe ofte
tymes he were in great daunger of his enemyes / and many dartes
ſhotte at hym whiche all dyd lyght in the baner and cleued faſt
therin. The paſſion of Chriſte doth alſo ſtrength vs in our ſpirituall
battell / for therby onely we opteyne victorie. Herunto
ſpeaketh ſaynt Paule:Pri. corin. xv. G. 
                        Deo gratias qui ded it nobis victoriam per
dominum noſtrum Ieſum Chriſtum. Prayſed and thanked be god
that hathe gyuen to vs the victorie by the merites of our lorde
Ieſus Chriſte.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .iii. profit. Chriſtianorum excitat tepiditatem.
                     IT alſo exciteth and ſtirreth the dulnes and coldnes of chriſtians
vnto deuotion. And herunto ſaynt Paule ſayth: Recogitate
eum qui talem ſuſtinuit a peccatoribꝰ contradictionem.
                        Heb. 12. A. 
                        &c.
Remēbre hym that ſuffered ſuch cōtradiction of ſynners agaynſt
hym ſelfe / that is / ſuche rebukes / diſpiſynges and ſhamefull deth
that ye by ſuche remembraunce ſhulde nat faynt or waxe dull in
your myndes. As if he ſayde: If ye haue in mynde the paſſion
of Chriſte / ye ſhall haue no tediouſnes or dulnes in your good
and meritorious werkes.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .iiii. profit. Diabolorum fugat poteſtatem.
                     IT chaſeth away the power of the deuyles.Ser. 19. de ſ
                              •
                           tis ī fine. And therfore
ſaynt Auſten ſayth: The ſigne of the croſſe chaſeth away
from vs our goſtly enemy / if ſo be that god inhabit our hertes by
ofte remembraunce of his paſſion.Pri. reg. 16. D. We rede that Dauid with
playenge on his harpe / chaſed away the euyl ſpirit from kynge
Saul. Not yt there was ſo great vertue in the herpe / but in the
ſigne of the croſſe figured and ſignified by the tree of the herpe
and thextention or ſtreynynge of the ſtrynges. And therfore at
euery ſuggeſtion or temptation of the deuyll / it is expedient
for vs to haue recours vnto the meditation of ye paſſion of Chriſt
and to the ſigne of the croſſe / of the whiche the deuyll is afrayd / 
and by it he is chaſed away lyke as the dogge is afrayd and fleith
away whan he ſeith a ſtaffe lyfted vp. And no meruayll / for thorowe
the vertue of the paſſion of Chriſte the whiche he ſuffered
on the croſſe / the deuyll was ſmyten downe and ouercome.
                     Herunto ſpeaketh the prophet Eſay / ſaynge:Eſa. 30. B. 
                        A voce domini pauebit
Aſſur virga percuſſus. Aſſur ſmyten with the rodde of god / 

ſhall feare the voyce of god.1. Pe
                              •
                           . 5. C. Aſſure is asmoche to ſay by interpretation / 
as Negotiator / a marchaunt that laboureth in many places
or labours / and it ſignifieth the deuyll / the whiche laboryng
and ronnynge about the worlde / ſearcheth whome he myght deuoure / 
he is neuer idle / but for as moche as he was ons ſmyten
with the rodde of the croſſe in the paſſion of Chriſte. Therfore
he is greatly afrayd whan ſo euer he ſeeth the ſigne of the croſſe
made of that perſone that faythfully calleth on the father / on the
ſonne / and on the holy goſt / ſaynge: In nomine patris: et filij: et
ſpiritus ſancti. Moreouer lyke as a knyght or any other valiant
man ouercome in battel / wolde be aſhamed to abyde in that chambre
or place / where as his falle or vaynqueſſhynge were paynted
ſo the deuyll ouercome thorowe the paſſion of Chriſte / wyll in
no meanys abyde in that ſoule / where as he ſeeth the paſſion of
Chriſte lyuely paynted by diligent remembraunce therof.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .v. profit. Erroneorum reuocat puſilla nimitatem.
                     THe meditation of the paſſion of Chriſte doth call agayne
thoſe that bene in erroure. For Chriſte hath made a caller
or a lewer of his owne bodye / dyed / made reed with his owne
precious blode, to call agayne his hawkes / the whiche hath flowen
away from the hande of the noble man / that is / the ſoule of
them that haue forſaken Chriſte by ſynne or erroure.Oſee. 9. C. Of whom
the prophet Oſee ſayth: Effraim quaſi auis auolauit. Effraim hath
taken his flyght lyke vnto a wylde hawke. Effraim is aſmoche
to ſay by interpretation as fat or encreaſed / and it ſignifieth thoſe
perſons that be encreaſed and made fatte in worldly and carnall
pleaſures / or in folowynge of theyr owne frowarde wylles and
ſenſuall reaſons. Suche perſons haue taken theyr flyght from
the loue of god / and if they wyll nat retourne and come agayne
to the voyce of the caller or preacher / or at the ſhewynge of his
lewer / that is / at the remembraunce of the paſſion of Chriſte / he
wyll dimyſſe them / leaue them to the rauynous faucououre of
hell / to the deuyll. It is wryten by the prophete Hyeremye / 
that our lorde ſayth thus.Heire. 3. A. 
                        Reuertere ad me: et ego ſuſcipiam te.
Thoughe thou haſte done neuer ſo many ſynnes / or folowed all
hereſes / yet retourne to me / and I ſhall receyue the. Alſo our
lorde ſaythe by the prophete Eſay.Eſa. xliiii. D. 
                        Reuertere ad me ꝙ redemi te.
Retourne to me thou ſynner or erroneous perſone / for I haue

redemed the and bought the agayne with my precious blode and
paſſion. Take hede vnto this callynge / and obey therunto / for
I aſſure you it is moche perilous and daungerous to withſtand
it. And it apereth wel by the wordes of our lorde ſpoken by the
wyſe man ſaynge:Prouer. 1. 
                        Vocaui et renuiſtis: extendi manum meam: et non
erat qui aſpiceret: ego quo
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            in interitu veſtro ridebo. I haue called
you and ye refuſed to come to me. I haue extendyd my hand
with greate gyftes and benefites. I haue ſhewed vnto you my
lewer / ſhed my precious blode for you / and ye wolde nat regarde
theſe thyngꝭ / and therfore I ſhalbe glad & ioyful of your ꝑdicion.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .vi. profit. Flagiciorum dibilitat pronitatem.
                     THis meditation of the paſſion of Chriſte doth enfeble / 
make weyke and ſubdue our pronitie and redynes vnto
vice.In manual Cap. xxii. And therfore ſaynt Auſten ſayth: Whan ſo euer my foule
cogitation doth moue me: then I rūne to the woundes of Chriſt.
Whan the fleſſhe or the ſenſualytie therof doth oppreſſe me: I
ryſe agayne thoroughe the remembraunce of the woundes of my
lorde god. If the fyer of carnal cōcupiſcēce enflame my mēbres / 
it is quenchyd by the remembraunce of the ſonne of god. Alſo
Origene ſayth: Suche is the vertue of the croſſe / that if it be in
the ſyght of man / and faythfully holden and kepte in his herte / ſo
that feruently and deuoutly that man beholde and remembre the
deth and paſſion of Chriſte / there ſhall no concupiſcence / no carnall
motion / no furie or angre / nor any enuy ouercome that perſone / 
but ſodenly at the preſence and ſyght of that paſſion / all
vice and ſynne ſhalbe chaſed and dryuen away.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .vii. profit. Gaudiorum donat vbertatem.
                     IT gyueth vnto man great plentie of ſpirituall ioy.Eſa. 12. B. Herevnto
ſpeaketh the prophet Eſay / ſaynge: Haurietis aquas in
gaudio de fontibus ſaluatoris. Ye ſhall drawe from the profound
and depe miſterie of the pitie and mercy of god / waters / that is / 
abundaunce of teares / in ioy of deuotion / from the wellys and
fountayns / that is / from the woundes of our ſauiour Chriſte / the
which at one tyme dyd ſhed furth blode in great abundaunce / but
now dayly and cōtinually they bryng furth the inceſſable waters
of grace. Wherfore the deuout ſoule reſtynge in this meditation
ſayth in the canticles: Sub vmbra illius quem deſideraueram ſedi:
et fructus eius duicis gutturi meo.
                        Canti. 2▪ A. I haue ſitten & reſted me vnder

the ſhadowe of hym whom I deſired / and his frute is pleaſaunt
to my mouth and taſtynge. And therfore Celeſtine ſayth: thoſe
holy ſayntes and ſeruauntes of god bene dyed in the blode of the
moſt holy that ſhed his blode for them when they be crucified with
Chriſte crucified / that is when they haue compaſſion of his ſorowfull
paynes of deth / and ioy in his loue and with his ioyfull
loue drynkynge his blode / and eatynge his fleſſhe / embraſynge
or halſynge with great pleaſure his croſſe and paynfull deth / lyekynge
and ſuckyng his woundes / entryng in to his moſt louyng
herte that was opened with a ſpere / and naylynge them ſelfe faſt
to hym vnſeparably with the nayles of true and faythfull loue.
Theſe perſons I ſay ben dyed & colored with the blode of Chriſt.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .viii. profit. Horrorum vitat perpetuitatem.
                     THis meditation of the paſſion of Chriſte oft remembred / 
doth deliuer vs from the paynes of hel. And herunto ſaint
Paule ſayth:Coloſ. 2. C. 
                        Expolians principatus et poteſtates. gloſa 
                              〈◊〉
                           . inferni.
Our ſauiour Chriſt ſpoilynge the principates and powers
of hel of theyr pray / that is of Adam / Noe / Abraham / and all other
ryghtuous perſons brought them to heuen with greate power.
And therfore who ſo wyll nat occupy his mynde with the meditation
of the paſſion of Chriſte / it is to be feared of his dampnation.Omelia. 15.
For as ſaynt Gregory ſayth: The worde of god / and ſpecyally
of the paſſion of Chriſte / is the meate and foode of ye ſoule / 
and as a quaſye or ſeke ſtomake caſteth vp the meat that it receyueth:
ſo that ſoule is ſeke that forgetteth the worde of god / herde
of the preacher. But as that perſon is in peryll of dethe that can
nat receyue or kepe his meate / ſo he is in peryll of eternall dethe
that doth nat remēbre and lyue accordyngly to the ſpiritual food
of the ſoule. Alſo ſaynt Barnarde ſayth: It may be thought that
that perſon ſhalbe eternally dampned by the ryghtuous iudgmēt
of god / that in this tyme of grace is vnkynde vnto Chriſtes paſſion / 
and therfore vnworthy the frute therof.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .ix. profit. Ingeniorum illuminat ceci
                           •
                        atem.
                     IT is alſo an oyntment to oynt the blynde yen of our ſoule▪
and herunto ſayth Iohn̄ in his Apocalipſe:Apoc. 3. D. 
                        Collirio 
                              •••
                           unge
oculos tuos vt videas. Anoynte the yene of thy ſoule with the
blode of Chriſte that thou myghteſt ſe.Suꝑ canti
                              •
                            ſermo. lxii. And ſaynt Barnarde
ſayth / There is nothynge of ſo great efficacitie and vertue to
purge and quycken the ſyght of our ſoule / as is the continuall

and diligent remēbraunce of the woundes and paſſion of Chriſt.Pri. Cor. 2. A.
And therfore ſayd ſaynt Paule: Non iudicaui me ſcire aliquid inter
vos: niſi Ieſum Chriſtum et hunc crucifixum. I iudged & thoght
my ſelfe to knowe nothynge but Ieſus Chriſte crucifyed. So
ſaynt Laurence by the ſigne of ye croſſe dyd gyue ſyght vnto them
that were blynde / and ſo cōuerted them vnto the light of the faith.In legenda 
                              •
                           iꝰ.
¶The meditation of the paſſion of Chriſte doth gyue vnto the
remembrer thre maner of knowledges. Fyrſt is the knowledge
of god / for therby we knowe what mercy and charitie he hath to
vs, Secondly: therby we knowe ourſelfe / for by it we ſe manifeſtlie
of what dignytie and howe precious our ſoules be in the
ſyght of god ſithe that our ſauiour Ieſu god and man wolde put
hym ſelfe to the deth for to redeme our ſoules. The thyrde knowledge
is of ſynne / for therby we knowe moſte manifeſtlie howe
moche god the father dyd hate ſynne / ſyth for the deſtruction therof
he wolde nat ſpare his natural and onely ſonne / but gaue hym
to the dethe for to deſtroy ſynne.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .x. profit. Iuſtorum letificat mortalitatem.
                     IT maketh a man redy and glade to dye.Salath. vi. D. And therfore ſaint
Paule bearynge the ſignes and tokens of the woundes of
our lorde Ieſu Chriſte in his bodye ſayde: Cupio diſſolui et eſſe
cum Chriſto: mihi viuire Chriſtus eſt et mori lucrum.
                        Philip. 1. C. D. I couit to be
diſſolued and ſeparate from this bodye / and ſo to be with Chriſt.
I lyue here in Chriſte / and for to magnifie Chriſte / and to dye / 
it ſhuld be great auauntage and profit to me.In legenda 
                              •
                           iꝰ. So ſaynt Andrew
went gladly to the dethe of the croſſe / ſaynge: Hayle holy croſſe
take me from the compaigney of mortal men / and rendre or gyue
me to my maiſter Chriſte that he by the / myght receyue me / that
by the bought and redemed me. Alſo I rede how that a certen pagane
and tyrante meruaylynge how that the Chriſtians myght
ſuffer ſo great tormentes and paynes and why they went ſo gladly
vnto the deth? It was anſwered to hym by the brother of ſaynt
Victor / howe that they haue the remembraunce of the paſſion of
Chriſte imprinted in theyr hert / and therfore remēbryng what he
ſuffred for them / they with great gladnes ſuffer all paynes & deth
for his name and loue. And the iudge heryng this anſwere / commaūded
to put hym to deth / and after that his bodye to be opened
and his hert drawen out / and ſo to be kut and deuided / and therin
they founde the forme and ſhappe of the croſſe and the crucifix
moſt ſubtilie and curiouſly made of ſynewes and vaynes.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶The .xi. profit. Leſorum reconſiliat contrarietatem.
                     THe meditation of the paſſion of Chriſt reconſileth enemis
and induceth a man to the loue of god and of his neghbor.Iohīs. xii. E.
And ſo our lorde ſayde in the goſpell: Si exaltatus 
                              •
                           ue
                              •
                           o a terra:
omnia traham ad meipſum. If I be exalted from the erth (ſignifienge
therby his crucifieng) I ſhall drawe all thynges vnto me
by my loue.Coloſ. 1. C. Alſo ſaynt Paule ſayth: Pacificans per ſanguinem
crucis: ſiue que in terris: ſiue que in celis ſunt. He dyd reconſile and
pacifie by his blode that he ſhedde on the croſſe / both thoſe thyngꝭ
that were in erth and thoſe that were in heuens. He that feruently
remēbreth the paſſion of Chriſte / is all drawen in to the loue of
god and in to the loue of his neighbor. And therfore ſaynt Barnard
ſaith:Ser. xx. ſuꝑ cautica. O ſwete Ieſu / the cuppe of paſſion that thou dranke
for vs / doth cauſe the to be loued of vs aboue all thyngꝭ. There is
nothynge that moueth vs ſo moche to the loue of god / as the paſſion
of Chriſte / in the whiche he more laboured and ſuffred more
payne / and had more contradiction then in the creation of all the
worlde. For in his paſſion and the acte of our redemption ſome
dyd contrarie hym in his wordes / ſome dyd ley in a wayt to take
hym with a defaut in his actes & dedes / ſome dyd ſcorne & mocke
hym in his tormentes and paynes / and ſome dyd rebuke hym on
the croſſe at his dethe. Wherfore who ſo euer feruently doth remembre
this paſſion of Chriſt / is drawen and reuyſſhed vnto the
loue of Chriſte god & man / and ſo cōſequently he is drawen vnto
the loue of his neighbor / for ye one can nat be had without ye other.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .xii. profit. Meritorum recompenſat exiguitatem.
                     IT alſo encreaſeth our merites / herunto ſpeaketh ſaynt Auſten
ſaynge:In manuali. ca. xxi. What ſo euer grace of merites or goodnes that
I want / I do vſurpe and take it vnto my comforth of the woundes
of my ſauiour Ieſu Chriſte / for great mercy flowethe from
hym / nor theyr wanteth no conduites: by the whiche they may
flowe vnto me. Thoſe py
                           •
                        pes and conduites ben the woundes
of my ſauiour Chriſte / whiche be full of mercy / ful of pitie / ſwetnes
and charitie. And hereof we may perceyue fyrſt / that this
meditation ſuppleyth in vs that grace and thoſe good meritorious
dedes / whiche other wyſe we be negligent to laboure for.
¶Secondely it may appere that there is no penaunce / that
may be compared to this inwarde and feruente meditation.

And therfore ſayth that greate lerned doctor Albertus Magnus:
that this meditation is more profitable / than that a man ſhulde
faſt one hole yere in breade and water / or that euery day by one
hole yere he ſhulde ſay one hole Dauid pſalter / or if he ſhulde diſcipline
and ſcourge hym ſelfe euery day vnto the effuſion of his
blode. And no meruayll / for without the paſſion of Chriſte / 
all our actes and dedes ben vnprofitable / as ſayth the mayſter
of the ſentence: Diſtinc. 16. libro tertio.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The .xiii. profit. Nocumētorum fugat inopinabilitatem.
                     THis meditation of the paſſion of Chriſte doth preſerue a
man from many perylles that may come ſodenly before
we haue any conſideration or knowledge of them. Herunto it is
writen in the Apocalipſe: that our lorde cōmaunded by his aungell
to certen aungelles / to whom he had gyuen in cōmaundmēt
to trouble and puniſſhe the people of the world / ſaynge:Apoc̄. 4. A. 
                        Nolite
nocere terre et mari ne
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            arboribus: quoaduſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ſignemus ſeruos dei
noſtri in frontibus eorum. Noy nat nor hurte the erth nor the ſee / 
ne yet the trees / vnto ſuche tyme we haue marked the ſeruauntes
of our lorde god in theyr forheedes: that is with the ſigne of the
croſſe / and that we do by the meditation of the paſſion of Chriſte.
In figure herof the aungell that dyd kyl and ſley the fyrſt gotten
both of man and of beeſt thoroughout all Egipte / dyd ſpare and
ſaue hermles the Iues:Exodi. xii. D. whoſe houſes or poſtes of theyr doores
were ſprynkeled with the blode of the lambe.Capi. iii. Alſo ſaynt Gregory
in his ſecond boke of his Dialogꝭ ſheweth yt when one certen malicious
perſon purpoſing to poiſon ſaint Benedict: dyd gyue vnto
hym wyne mixted with poyſon / he made the ſigne of the croſſe
and anone the cuppe brake in to pecys / and ſo eſcaped the peryll
of deth / thoroughe the vertue of the croſſe.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .xiiii. profit. Orthodoxorum ſpeificat timiditatem.
                     IT alſo gyueth great hope and truſte vnto faythfull people
And herunto ſaynt Barnarde expounynge theſe wordes of
the canticle:Ser. lx. ſuꝑ canti
                              •
                            canti co
                              
                                 
                              
                              rum
                           . 2. D. 
                        In foraminibus petre. ſayth thus: I ſhall ſpeke theſe
thynges / I ſhall ſure abyde and reſt in the hooles of the ſtone / 
that is in the woundes of my ſauiour / for I haue ſet my feet ſurevpon
that ſtone / though the worlde frowne and be troubled with
me / and the fleſſhe or ſenſualitie ſtryue agaynſt me / and alſo the

deuyll ley in await of me: I ſhall nat fall / for I haue ſet my fete
and affection or loue vpon a ſure ſtone / I haue offendyd in a greuouſe
and dampnable ſynne / my ſoule therby ſhall be troubled or
vexed / but it ſhal nat be vtterly caſt downe by diſpaire: for I ſhal
remembre the woūdes of my ſauyour Ieſu / for he was wounded
for my ſynnes.In manuali. ca. xxiii. Alſo ſaint Auſtin ſayeth / Longius opened the ſide
and herte of my ſauiour Ieſu for me / that I myght entre therein.
And I haue entred therin and do reſt there ſurely & quietly. The
nayles and the ſpere do call & crye vnto me / that I may be truely
reconſiled vnto Chriſte: yf that I wyll loue hym.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .xv. profite. Peccatorum aduocat viuacitatem.
                     THis meditacion induceth and bryngeth to man the grace
of god / whiche is the lyfe of the ſoule / and therefore ſaynte
Bernard ſayeth. As ofte as that perſon that deuoutely remēbreth
the paſſion of Chriſte bre
                           ••
                        eth & receyueth brethe agayne: ſo ofte
he receyueth a new gyft of grace / and grace is the life of the ſoule.
Phiſiciens don ſay that whan a ſicke man wepyth: it is a ſigne &
token of lyfe. So whan a ſynner wepyth for cōpaſſion of the paſſion
of our lorde: it is a ſigne of the lyfe of grace and quickenes
of the ſoule. And therfore ſayeth the prophete Hieremy in his lamentacions.Tren̄. 4. D.
                        Spiritus oris noſtri x
                              •
                           s dominus captus eſt in pecatis
noſtris, cui dicimus. In vmbra tua viuemus. Our lorde Chriſte
the ſpirite of our mouthe (that is to ſaye / the ſpirite whereby our
ſoule liueth / lyke as the body liueth by the ayre or brethe receiued
at the mouthe) This ſpirite Chriſte (I ſay) giuynge lyfe vnto the
ſoule: is taken in our ſynnes / that is / he ſuffred payne & dethe for
our ſynnes. We ſhall lyue in his ſhadow / that is / we ſhal haue the
lyfe of grace thrughe the deuout & feruent remembraunce of that
his dethe and paſſion.Mat. 27. F. And ſo Chriſte by his bleſſid paſſion doeth
gyue the lyfe of nature / the lyfe of grace / & the lyfe of glory. Fyrſte
I ſay he giueth the lyfe of nature / for dede men after his paſſion &
reſurrection dyd ryſe vnto lyfe agayne / & appered vnto many in
Hieruſalem. Secondly he giueth the lyfe of grace / for many after
his paſſion were conuerted vnto the faythe. And he gyueth alſo
the lyfe of glory / as it well appered in the thefe / to whom he ſayd
(whā he was faſt nayled on the croſſe) Hodie mecū eris ī paradiſo,
                        Luce. 23. F.
This day ſhalt thou be with me in glory.In ſer. pri. in die ſanc
                              •
                            Andree. Alſo hereunto ſpeketh
ſaynt Bernarde / ſayenge. The tree of the croſſe (yf there be any
man that wyll gader it by feruent meditacion) doeth burgyn and

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
brynge furth lyfe / it fructifieth ioy & gladnes / it droppeth oile of
confort / & it ſweteth the balme of ſpiritual gracꝭ. This tree of life
is no wilde & vnfruitfull tree,Ser. lxxiiii. de tꝑe. E. to them yt wyll gader it. Alſo ſaint
Auſtin ſayth:Itē ſer. xix. de 
                              〈◊〉
                           . H. The blood of the phiſicien is ſhed to make a medecin
for the mad & ſicke ſoule. The ſoule & ſpouſe of Chriſte, ſayth
in the canticles:Canti. 2. A. 
                        Sub vmbra illiꝰ quē deſideraui: ſedi et fructꝰ eius
dulcis gutturi meo. I haue ſittten & reſtyd vnder ye ſhadow of him
in whom is all my deſyre & confort / & his fruit is ſwete & pleaſaūt
vnto my taſte. For who ſo euer doeth ſauourly taſte of the fruit of
the croſſe: all carnall pleaſure ſhal be vnſauoury to hym.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .xvi. profite. Quaſſatorum mitigat aduerſitatem.
                     THis meditacion of the paſſion of Chriſt, doeth mitigate &
ſwage all tribulacions / & doeth giue pacience in all aduerſities / 
& ſo maketh vs quiet.Hebr. 12. A. Herunto ſpeketh ſaint Paule / ſayng:
Recogitate eū qui talē ſuſtinuit a p
                              •
                           tōribꝰ cōtradictionē aduerſꝰ ſemetipſū,
vt non fatige mini animis veſtris deficiētes. Remēbre hym
that ſuffred great contradiction of ſynners againſt him ſelfe / that
is / ſuche rebukes / ſlaunderous wordes / & at laſt mooſt painefull
deth / that ye by ſuche remembraūce ſhuld nat faynt in your myndes
whan ye ſuffre aduerſities. As yf he ſhulde ſaye; ye can nat
faynte or be ouercom in your tribulacions, yf ye haue the deuout
remembraunce of his paines & paſſion.Au. 1. lib. de cōflu. virtu tū et vitiotū ca. ix. And this approueth ſaint
Auſtin / ſayenge: There is nothynge ſo harde or painfull: but yt
it may be eaſely borne, yf the paſſion of Chriſte be quicke & feruēt
in our myndes. And this is ye reaſon herof (for the leſſe paſſion or
payne is nat perceyued, or at leeſt it is nat regarded: where as ye
more greuous payn or paſſion is felt, or doeth occupy the minde
of man. And therefore Auicenna ſayeth / that ſuche perſones as be
in feruent agues or axes, doeth nat fele or perceiue the apoſtume.
And ſo the paſſion of Chriſte, yf it be feruētly remembred: it putteth
away all worldly tribulacion. For lyke as wyne (thoughe it
be ſumwhat ſtronge & ſharpe of it ſelfe) yf it be myxte with ſuger
and other ſpyces / or be put in the potecarye ſpiced bagge, & ſo go
thrugh it: it is made mooſt dulce & pleaſant: So the tribulaciōs
of this worlde / yf they be ioyned & mixte with the remembraunce
of the paſſion of Chriſte, they be moche pleaſant & confortable to
the ſoule. And therfore our lorde ſayeth vnto his ſpouſe the ſoule
in his canticles:Cātic. 
                              •
                           . A. 
                        Dabo tibi poculum ex vino condito. I ſhall gyue
to the Ipocras for thy drynke / that is wyne made pleaſaunt with

ſpices. And this ſignifieth ye wine of worldly tribulaciō or aduerſitie / 
whā it is ioyned & mixte with the meditacion of ye paſſion of
Chriſte.Primo macha
                              •
                           . 6. D. Alſo we rede in ye boke of ye Machabeis / how that kyng
Antiochus, whan he ſhuld fight againſt the Iues: he ſhewed vnto
his Olephantes & put in theyr ſight the blood / that is the red colour
& licour of the grape & of ye molbery / to thintent yt thoſe Olephantes
ſhulde be prouoked to fight, & to be the more quicke in bataile.
In lyke maner the knightꝭ of Chriſte, accordyng to thexample
of theſe Olephantꝭ, ſhuld be animate & quickened to ſuffre paciently
all tribulaciōs & aduerſities, whan ſo euer they here, ſe, or
remembre the blood & paſſion of Chriſte / whiche was preſſed out
of his body at his paſſion: as ye wyne is preſſed out of the grape.
Moreouer the prophet Hieremy ſayeth:Tren̄. 3. G. 
                        Dabis eis ſcutum cordis
laborem tuum. Thou (good lorde) ſhal gyue vnto them a buckeler
or a ſhelde for theyr hert or ſoule / yt is thy labour, paſſion, or deth.
This buckler or ſhelde receiueth without any perill vnto ye ſoule,
al maner of dartes / & ſpecially .iii. maner of dartes / that is, loſſe of
goodes, infirmities of the body, and contumeliouſe or rebukyng
worde, with this buckeler (that is with the feruent meditacion of
ye labour & paine or paſſion of Chriſte) a man ouercūmeth almighty
god in paciently ſuffryng his corrections & louyng viſitatiōs.
He alſo ouercūmeth the deuyll, in auoidyng his ſnares & temptaciōs.
And thyrdly he ouercūmeth him ſelfe in reſiſtyng all carnall
mociōs & paſſiōs of yre or wrath / & in paciently ſuffering all infirmities
of the body. And thus the remembraunce of the paſſion of
Chriſt doth mitigate thaduerſities & troubles of ſuche as be troubled
therwith. And as ye ſe yt a litle floode or ryuer doeth loſe his
name whā he is entred into ye ſee or into a greater water: ſo I like
maner al labours, paines, & paſſiōs, cōpared to ye labours, paines
& paſſion of Chriſte, leſe theyr name, & be nat to be called paines.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .xviii. profite. Rectorū confirmat ſtabilitatem.
                     THe meditacion of ye paſſion of Chriſte, maketh rightuouſe
& good men ſtable in faith & in good werkes.In poli
                              •
                           ro. li. 
                              •
                           o. ca. 35. We rede that
there is a certayn welle in Englande of this nature / that yf a tree
be put therin, & continue there any long ſpace or tyme: it is tourned
into a ſtone: So ſpiritually, if a chriſtian continue longe in
this welle yt is in the remēbraūce of the woūdes & dethe of chriſte,
he ſhal be tourned into a ſtone / that is / he ſhal be conſtant & ſtable
in all vertue & goodnes, for thā he ſhal abide faſtened with chriſte

vnto ye croſſe by pacience.In ſtimulo amoris lib. pri. Capi. 1. Herunto ſayth ſaint Bonauenture: O
meruelous deth & paſſion of Chriſte, whiche doeth allienate & ſeclude
the remembrer from dethe ſpūall & alſo eternall / & nat only
that: but alſo it maketh him angelicall: & nothyng els to conſider
& thynke, but Ieſu Chriſte crucified. He wyl bere his croſſe with
Chriſte: & ſo he bereth in his hert Ieſu Chriſte, who cōteineth in
his hāde & power bothe heuyn & erthe. And ſo for ye loue of Chriſt
he ſhal bere moſt eaſely & ſuffre paciētly al troubles & paines. He
wold be crowned with thornes with Chriſte & for chriſt: & chriſt
ſhal crowne hym with the crowne of glory / and ſo, as ye may perceyue,
ſuche a feruent meditacion of the paſſion of Chriſte, doeth
greatly ſtable vs in goodnes.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .xviii. profite. Supernovum Placat diſplicentiam.
                     THis meditacion doeth ſtrongly ſwage & pacify ye wrath &
diſpleaſure of god & al his ſaintꝭ.Suꝑ cantiē ſermo
                              •
                           . 43. Herunto ſaith ſaint Bernard:
The remēbraūce of ye labours & paines of my ſauiour Ieſu
doeth erect & ſtrēgth me in al aduerſities / it doth repreſſe me and
kepe me ī al ꝓſperites / & it alſo gydeth or ledeth me by a ſure way
in this lyfe / where as is now ioy, now ſorow, now pleaſur, now
payne. &c. This meditacion putteth away all peryls. It reconſileth
me to ye high iudge of ye worlde, whyles it declareth vnto me
hym to be very meke & mylde here in erthe / to whoſe maieſty all
aūgels in heuen do reuerence, & haue him in reuerent feare. Alſo
the ſame ſaint entraytyng theſe wordes of Iob.Iob. vi. A. 
                        Vtinā appēderen
tur petā mea quibꝰ irā merui▪ &c,
                        In ſerm de paſſd
                              ••
                           . ſaieth thus: Good lorde, behold ye
face of thy ſon chriſte / whiche was obedient to thy wyll vnto his
dethe / & (good lorde) let neuer ye printes of his woūdes depart frō
thy ſight & remēbraūce. Cōſider (good lord) what ſatiſfaction he
hath done for our ſynnes to reconſyle vs vnto the. I wold that
thou (god lorde) wold wey and pondre our ſynnes in a balance
with the paynes that thy innocent ſonne Ieſus ſuffered for them.
And then (good lorde) it ſhulde well appere that his paynes excedeth
our ſynnes / ſo that thou rather ſhewe thy mercy vnto vs
for the merytes of his paſſyon / then to kepe our ſynnes in thy
remembraunce to reuenge and punyſſhe them.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .xix, profit. Terrenorum peſſundat vanitatem.
                     IT alſo maketh man to contempne and ſet at nought the
worlde with all the pleaſures therof.Gal. vi. D. And therfore ſaynt
Paule ſayde. Mihi mundus crucifixus eſt et ego mundo. The

worlde is crucified to me: and I to the worlde / as if he ſayd: I
diſpiſe the worlde and the worlde diſpiſeth me. Auicen reciteth
how that a certen man by ſtronge ymaginacion that he had ymaginynge
him ſelfe to be a leprouſe man: therby he was made a leprouſe
man: So in lyke maner, yf a man feruently & deuoutly cō
                        tinue
in the remēbraūce of the paſſion of Chriſte: he may ſo haue
a great ſorow in his hert, & true cōpaſſion of ye paſſion of Chriſte,
& ſo ſuffre payn with hym / & ſo conſequently al Worldly pleaſure
ſhall be bytter & paynfull vnto hym.In ſtimulo amoris lib. 
                              •
                           mo. ca. 9. Herunto ſayeth ſaynt Bonauenture.
Who ſo feruently remēbreth the paſſion of Chriſte, he deſyreth
to be crucified with Chriſte Ieſu / he reputeth & thynketh
hym ſelfe to be in ſeruitude, bondage, & miſery / he doth ſygh & ſorow / 
& is in continuall heuynes, vnto ye tyme he be all to waſſhed
or drowned in the blood of Chriſte / & ſo trāſfourmed into his lord
crucified / & yf he be nat kept in the blood of his ſauiour, he thynketh
him ſelfe no man / yea worſe thā a beaſt, yf he be nat clad with
the paſſion of Chriſte. Therefore, who ſo euer doeth ofte and feruently
remembre the paſſion of Chriſte, he ſhall lytle regarde the
vanities of this worlde, and ſet them at nought.
                  
                  
                     ¶The .xx. profite. Viatorum gubernat proſperitatē.
                     THe meditacion of the paſſyon of Chriſte doeth gouerne &
direct men lyuyng in this worlde, vnto the lyfe of eternall
felicitie. For the paſſion of Chriſte, is the kynges hygh waye / the
right & compendiouſe waye to cum to the kyngdom of god in heuyn.
And therfore our lorde ſayeth: Ego ſum via, veritas, et vita.
I am the way,Ioh. 14. A. the truth, & the life eternall. And in an other place
he ſayeth: As Moyſes dyd exalt & ſet vp a braſen ſerpent in ye wildernes,Ioh. 3. B.
to thintent yt who ſo behelde that ſerpent, ſhuld be deliuered
from the venimons ſtingyng of ye burnyng ſerpent:Num̄. 21. C ſo it was
cōueniēt & neceſſary for our ſaluacion, yt the ſon of a vyrgin ſhuld
be exalted vpon the croſſe / yt who ſo euer wold beholde him with
true formed fayth, ſhulde nat peryſſh: but haue euerlaſtyng lyfe / 
& that this lyfe ſhulde be gyuen to vs: Chriſt ſuffred his paſſion.
And ſaint Auſtin ſayeth:Suꝑ Iob. tractat. 12. As thoo perſons that beheld the braſen
ſerpent ſet vpon a pole in the wildernes by Moyſes, were deliuered
from peryll of deth (as we ſayd before) ſo now, who ſo euer be
ſtynged or bytten by the ſuggeſtion or craft of the deuyll: let him
beholde (with a faythfull affection) Chriſte hangynge vppon the
croſſe / & he ſhall haue cōfort / for there dethe was ouercum & ſlayn / 
but our ſauiour Chriſte doeth lyue, & euer ſhall lyue. But that he

myght ouercum dethe, he was clad with dethe for a lyttle tyme.
Deathe myght neuer be ouercum, but by lyfe. And who is this
lyfe, but our ſauiour Chriſte? And ſo by his deathe we all haue
lyfe.Numer. 35. D. This was well fygured in the olde teſtament: where as it
is ſayd, that ſuche as were banyſſhed from theyr cities: ſhulde
retourne agayne to theyr inheritaunce after the dethe of the high
preeſt or Biſhop / and nat afore: So the faythfull people of god,
banyſſhed frō theyr inheritaunce, the kyngdom of glory: myght
nat cum thereunto agayne, vnto the dethe of Chriſte our hyghe
Byſſhop. But now by the merites of his paſſion, and the remembraunce
therof: we that ben exyled in this vale of miſery and teares,
may freely entre into the kyngedome of heuyn / and poſſeſſe
that glory promyſed vnto vs. And hereunto ſayeth ſaynt Auſtin:
We be called by the merytes of the dethe and paſſion of our redemer
Ieſu Chriſte, frō the darkenes, vnto lyght / from dethe, vnto
lyfe / from corrupcion, to incorrupcion / from our exyle and banyſſhement,
vnto our cuntrey and inherytaunce / from ſorow, to
ioye / and from this worlde, vnto heuyn. And therefore our ſauyour
Chriſte / for that he myght exalte and lyfte vs vp to the glory
of heuyn: he in a maner put hym in one ſcale or one parte of the
balaunce, and vs in the other. He put hym ſelfe to mooſt paynefull
and ſhamefull dethe / and vs in the merites of his vertuouſe
lyfe and dethe. And ſo he drewe his balaunce ſo lowe / that is, by
mekenes and paynes ſufferyng, he deſcended ſo low, that he lyfted
vp all his electe people vnto heuyn. And hereunto our lorde
ſayeth:Ioh. 12. E. 
                        Ego ſi exaltatus fuero a terra: omnia traham ad me ipſum.
If I be exalted from the erthe, from all worldly pleaſures, and
put vnto the payne of the croſſe / aſcendynge it as my chiefe palfray
to fyght agaynſt myne enemies / and ſo as a valiaunt knight
ſubduynge theym vnder my fete, and ouercummynge all theyr
myght and power: I ſhall draw vnto me by my charitie and pacience,
all myne electe people from all the partes of the worlde / 
where ſo euer they be, to reigne with me in glory for euermore.
                  
               
               
                  ¶In the paſſion of Chriſte is conteyned
all perfection of all the orders of
aungels. Seconde Chapiter.
                  
                     
                     IN the moſt bleſſed paſſion of Chriſt is conteyned all
perfection, fayrnes, and beauty of all the bleſſyd ſpirites
and aungels in heuyn. Fyrſt & aboue all other 
doeth apere in Chriſte that burnyng loue / attribute
and aſſigned to the higheſt order of aungels / called
Seraphin. For there was neuer creature that had ſo highe charitie
and burnynge loue, that therby wolde & dyd ſuffre ſo great
& many paines, as our ſauiour Ieſu Chriſte dyd ſuffre for vs his
mooſt vile ſeruauntes / or rather (I ſhulde ſay) his mooſt wicked
& vnkynde enemies. Secondly, there was in hym thabundant & 
plenteouſe cunnyng or knowledge of truthe, gyuen to ye ſeconde
order of aūgels, called Cherubin. And this maner of knowledge
is nat onely in Chriſte: but alſo there is nothyng in this worlde
that ſo moche doeth helpe to the true knowledge of ſcrypture / nothynge
ſo moche doeth allecte and moue man to the contemplacion
of heuenly thynges / nothynge ſo muche doeth illuminate and
lyghten the ſoule to know and haue ſauour or pleaſure in god, as
doeth the paſſion of Ieſu Chriſte: for in it, and by it, is founde
the fulnes of true knowledge / as we ſhall declare to you hereafter.
Thyrdely, there ſhyneth in this paſſion, ſpecially towardes 
the eterne maieſty of god, the reuerence, attributed or aſſigned
to the thyrd order of aungels, named Thronys. For as thoſe
ſpyrytes be called Thronys, for aſmuche as it is ſayde that god
reſtyth and ſytteth in them as in his ſeet or Throne, for the reuerence
that they haue vnto his diuine maieſtye / for he reſtyth (as
the prophet ſayeth) vpon the meke perſons,Eſa. 66. A. and vpon them that
reuerently feryth & kepyth his commaundementes: So it may
be ſayd that almighty god ſytteth and reſtyth in this moſt bleſſed
paſſion, as in his Throne / for therein appered the mooſt excellent
humilitie, humanitie, veneracion, and reuerence of Chriſte,
vnto the diuine & eterne maieſtie. Fourthly in this bleſſyd paſſion 
ſhyneth the high dignitie of preſidencie or dominion, attributed
to the fourth order of aūgels, called Dominaciōs. For Chriſt
dyd meke hym ſelfe, & was obedient vnto the dethe / & that vnto ye
mooſt ſhamefull dethe of the croſſe. For the whiche mekenes god
dyd exalt hym to great preſidēcie & dominion / & gaue vnto hym a
name aboue all names / as ſaynt Paule ſayeth.
                        Phil. 2. B. Fyftely, in this 
bleſſed paſſion apereth the great power & ſtrength of ye fyft order
of aūgels, called powers. For chriſt moſt victoriouſly by his bleſſed
paſſion hath ſubdued the great power of the deuyll / of whom
Iob ſayeth,Iob. 41. D. that there is no power vpon the erthe, yt may be compared

vnto his power / but Chriſte by his paſſiō & dethe ouercam
 all his power / as we ſayd before. Sixtly, in this paſſion ſhyneth
the mighty operacion of the vertues that be named the ſyrt order
of aungels. For there Chriſte ſhewed his vertue / whiche dyd penetrate,
perce, & draw vnto his loue the hertes of all his elect people.Ioh. 12. E.
And therfore he ſaid: Yf I be exalted from the erthe vpon the
croſſe: I ſhal draw vnto me all thinges / that is, all his elect people.
Wherfore yf any perſon haue true fayth into god, & loue god:
let him nat aſcribe that to his owne merites: but rather to the meritꝭ
of the paſſion of Chriſt.Ioh. 6. E. For no man may cum to hym by true
fayth & loue, except he be drawen by almighty god / by his grace / 
and this grace we haue by the merites of the paſſion of Chriſte.
                  
                      In this paſſion alſo is cōteyned the kyngdom of the principates / 
yt be the .vii. order of aungels. For as the prophet ſayth: Factꝰ eſt
principatus ſuper humerum eius:
                     Eſay. 9. B. His principalitie & kyngdom is
made vpon his ſholder / that is, in that he bare the croſſe & ſuffred
the paines & dethe of the croſſe: he gat his kyngdom / & ſo bought
 it for vs / that is the kyngedome of heuyn. Alſo in the paſſion of
Chriſte apereth the releuacion of archangels / that be the .viii. order.
For by the paſſyon of Chriſte we were ſufficiently releuyd &
deliuered a pena et culpa / that is, both from ſynne, & frō payn due
for ſynne. But now, yf we ſynne actually after our baptiſme: it
is conuenient yt we ſuffre payne temporall for our ſynne / though
thrugh the vertue of ye ſacramentes of the chyrch, theternall payn
be cōmuted into temporall payne. And therfore our lorde ſayeth:
Date eleemoſinā,
                     Luce. 11. F. 
                     & ecce oīa mūda ſūt vobis: Gyue almoſe, and all
 thynges ſhalbe clenſed in you. In this paſſion alſo ſhineth the reuelacion
and manifeſt doctryne & teachynge of aungels / that be
called the nynthe order. For all the hyd ſecretes of ſcripture, & all
the ſecret miſteries of god, were reueled & made open by the paſſion
of Chriſte,Ma. 27. F. & openynge of his herte with the ſpere. And in token
hereof, at the paſſion of Chriſte, the veile of the temple was
broken or diuided into two partes / that all the thyngꝭ that before
were ſecret & hyd in the inner ſacrate temple, might be open and
manifeſtly ſene. And thus by theſe forſayd conformities whiche
the paſſion of Chriſte hath with the orders of aungels, it is done
moſt conueniently yt nat onely Chriſte ſhuld redeme mankynde:
but alſo that he ſhulde mooſte ordinately order, diſpoſe, & repare
the ruyne & fall of aungels. For by the great loue & charity which
he had in the croſſe, he kindled the fyre of loue in the hertes of his
electe people towardes god and theyr neyghbours / that ſuche as

folowed and duely executed that feruent loue: were made and
yet be made apte to repare the moſte hyghe ordre called Seraphin.
By the true knowledge expreſſed in that bleſſed paſſyon
were his electe people illuminate to the hyghe contemplacyon of
the knowledge of god and hyghe miſteryes / that ſo they may be
apte to the reparacyon of the ſeconde ordre: called Cherubym.
                  Agayne for his great meaknes and reuerence that Chriſt had in
his blyſſed paſſion towardes the hyghe maieſtie of god / his electe
people were prouoked to lyke meaknes and reuerence and
due honoure to be rendred to the hyghe maieſtie of god / as far
                        •
                     e
fourthe as theyr frayle nature wolde ſerue them / and ſo to be apte
to ye reparcyon of thordre called: Thrones. Morouer thorough
the example of his great pacyence and obedience vnto the dethe
of the croſſe / for the whiche he was exalted of god, as we ſayde
before / he prouoked his electe people to ouercome all vices and
concupiſcence by labour / abſtinence and affliccions / and to ſubdue
all inordinate appetites vnto reaſon / that no vayne / or inordinate
thynge ſhulde haue any domynacyon in them / that ſo they
myght be made apte to the reparation of the ordre called: Dominationes.
And ſo who ſo euer humbleth hymſelfe: ſhalbe exalted.
And ſo truely to paſſe ouer all the reſidue of thordres of aungelles / 
our ſauiour Chriſte in his blyſſed paſſion gaue example
vnto his ſeruauntes to reſiſt and ouercome the ſuggeſtyons and
temptacyons of the deuyll: that they myght be apte to the reparacion
of the Poteſtates. Alſo he gaue vnto them exāple of good
conuerſacion and vertuous operacions / that they myght aſcend
to the ordre of Vertues. He gaue them alſo example ſo to directe
and gouerne theyr outwarde ſenſes and inwarde mocyons / and
all other thynges that be vnder theyr cure that they might aſcend
vnto the Principates. Morouer he gaue them example ſo to releue
and comforthe the nede and neceſſities of other perſons that
be in nede / that they myght aſcende vnto the Archaūgelles. And
leſt he gaue them example ſo to inſtruct and teache the ignorant / 
that they myght be apte to aſcende vnto the ordre of Aūgelles.
               
               
                  ¶In the paſſion of Chriſte is alſo conteyned the beatitude
of men. Chaptre .iii.
                  IT may be declayrede that the true beatytude and blyſſe or
ioye of men is conteyned in the paſſion of Chriſte: by the
ſame reaſons wherby we haue nowe declared that the beautye
and perfeccyon of aungelles done ſhyne in the ſayde paſſyon.
For to that cleare knoweledge of treuthe whiche appeared in

that bliſſed paſſion, as we ſayd afore in thorder of Cherubin: correſpondeth
ye open & clere viſion of ye godhed, yt thelect people of
god ſhall haue in heuyn to ſaciate & beatitie the reaſonable or intellectable
power of the ſoule. Secondly to yt profoūde mekenes
& reuerence, wherby we ſayd that the paſſion of Chriſte hathe the
perfection of the order of the thrones: correſpondeth the ſurety of
blyſſe / wherewith the wrathfull power of ye ſoule (comonly called
Vis iraſcibilis) is ſaciate. For on whom ſhall reſt & continue ye ſpirite
& glory of god: but vpon the meke perſon? Thyrdely to that
excellent charitie yt was ſhewed at the paſſion of Chriſte: correſpondeth
theternall fruicion & loue of the deitie / wherwith ye wyll
& reaſonable appetite of man ſhal be fulfilled / and this for the beatitude
of the ſoule. Now for the .iiii. dowries of the glorified body.
Fyrſt to that high dignitie of preſidencie yt our lorde had by
his ſufferaūce & obediēce vnto ye deth / for ye which he was exalted
to hygh dignity: correſpondeth in ye glorified body agility / wherby
he may do what he will. Secondly, to yt great power & ſtrēgth
wherby our ſauiour ouercam dethe: correſpondeth impaſſibilitie / 
that is, yt the glorified body ſhall ſuffre no payne. Thyrdly, to
that mighty operacion of vertue, whereby he drew all thynges to
him ſelf: correſpondeth ſubtility / wherby the glorified body may
penetrate all thynges. Fourthly, to that noblenes or principality
for ye whiche the prophet ſaid of Chriſte:Eſay. 9. B. 
                     Factꝰ eſt pricipatꝰ ſuꝑ humerū
eiꝰ. His principalitie or noblenes is made vpō his ſhulder / 
& alſo of this noblenes or clerenes is ſayd in the goſpell / where as
chriſt ſaid to his father:Ioh. 17. A. 
                     Pater clarifica filiū tuū. Father clarify thy
ſon / or make knowē the noblenes of thy ſon. To this noblenes (I
ſay) correſpōdeth ye fourth dowry of thy glorified body, called clerenes / 
for thā our bodies ſhal be clere, & ſhyne as ye ſon / & ſo ſayeth
our lorde in ye goſpel:Mat. 13. F. 
                     Tūc iuſti fulgebūt ſicut ſol ī regno patris eorū.
Than after ye generall reſurrectiō, ye rightuouſe mē ſhalbe clere, &
ſhyne as ye ſon in ye kyngedom of theyr father. Furthermore to the
office & ꝑfectiō of archaugels & aūgels / which (as we ſaid before)
were ſhewed in ye paſſiō of criſte: correſpōdeth the beauty or accidētall
glory called ī latin Aureola / a circle or a litle crowne / which
is a ſpecial ioy of ye ſoule giuē to mā for ſum excellēt act don ī this
life / & it is only giuē to martirs for their martirdō / to virgins, for
virginite kept for ye loue of god / & to doctors or prechers, for theyr
tethyng ye truthe of god. And thus it apereth manifeſtly how yt in
the bleſſyd paſſiō of Chriſte doth ſhine (as in a moſt pure glas) all
the beatitude of man / & all the plentiouſnes of grace & glorye. All

glory (I ſay) that is bothe theſſenciall glory of the ſoule that conſiſteth
in the viſion / tencion / or ſurety / & fruicion of the deity that
ben called the .iii. dowries of the ſoule. And alſo the conſubſtanciall
glory / that is the .iiii. dowries of the body, & alſo the accidentall
glory. Wherfore ſithe in Chriſtes paſſion is thexcellent manifeſtacion
or declaracion of his moſt high power / mooſt high wiſdom / 
& moſt high goodnes: therfore this paſſiō is to all ye ſeruaū
                     tes
of god, a mater & cauſe of mooſt excellent ioy & gladnes. And
therfore though men ioy conſideryng them ſelfe to be redemed by
this glorious paſſion, & haue great profite therby / & alſo aungels
ioye, knowynge theyr ruine repared by the ſame paſſion / conſideryng
this thynge as to theyr owne ioye & profite: Yet I beleue, &
ſo it is, that both aungels & men do more ioye & be glad without
compariſon / referryng all theſe thynges to god / and hoolly or all
to gyder extendynge theyr cogitacions & myndes to the glory of
god: than they dyd conſiderynge theyr owne glory & profite that
they haue by the ſayd paſſion. Moreouer, as here appereth the
moſt high & ineſtimable charite & ſhewing of the goodnes of god
outwardely, to the great confort of aungell & man: ſo I beleue, &
ſo it is, that bothe aūgell & man in theyr mooſt excellent & full maner
don ſhew their loue with great ioy & gladnes, glorifieng and
prayſyng and louyng god for that excellent gifte eternally without
ende in glory.
               
               
                  ¶In this paſſion alſo doeth ſhyne the vertues theologicall / 
the giftes of the holy gooſt / the beatitudes of the goſpell / &
alſo the fruites of the ſpirite. The .iiii. Chapiter.
                  
                     FYrſt in this paſſion appere the vertues theologicall.
For this paſſion of our lorde is ye ſtrēgth & foūdaciō
of all chriſten faith. It is therection & reyſynge vp of
our hope / & alſo it is thinflamacion & kyndelynge of
our loue & charity / for here he dyd offre hym ſelfe for
vs. Secōdly in this paſſion don ſhine as in a glaſſe the giftes of
the holy gooſt / the gift of wiſdom & vnderſtandyng / ye gyft of coū
                     cell
& ſtrength / of ſcience / of pitie / & alſo of the feare of god / of the
whiche we ſhall ſpeke herafter in dyuerſe & ſinguler chapiters.
                  Thirdly, in this paſſion don appere ye .viii. beatitudꝭ / for this paſſion
is theyr foūtayn & begynnyng / theyr allectiue & exemplar.
                  Who may be called ſo pore in ſpirite as Chriſt yt hyng naked vpō
                     
the croſſe? Who may be named ſo mylde as Chriſt / the which as a 
milde lābe was led vnto the deth / & whā he was ſcourged, bet, buffeted,
ſcorned, & falſly ſlaūdered, wolde nat ones open his mouthe

                      to contrary them. Who was ſo mournyng as he Whiche with teres
and a loude mournynge voice prayed for his enemies? and he
for his reuerence (as ſaynt Paule ſayeth) was herde of god.Hebr. 5. C. But
than he more mourned our ſynnes: than his owne payne / as we
ſhall ſhew hereafter. He had more compaſſion of vs, than of hym
 ſelfe. Who fardermore do ſo moche hunger and thurſt iuſtice, as
Chriſte / whiche by the payne of the croſſe dyd ſatiſfye for our ſynnes / 
and ſo dyd reconſile vs vnto his father / hungeryng and thyr
ſtynge the helthe and ſaluacion of our ſoules.Ioh. 19. F. And in token herof
he ſayd, hangynge vpon the croſſe Sitio / I thyrſte, and deſyre the
 helth of mannes ſoule. Who alſo was ſo mercifull as Chriſte, the
very true ſamaritane?Luce. 10. F. the which (where as the preeſt and Leuite
paſſed by the wounded men, nat regardynge hym) waſſhed his
woundes with wyne, and anointed them with oile / byndyng vp
his woundes / and layeng the wounded man vpon his b
                        •
                     eſt / that
is vpon his owne body / ſuffryng deth for our ſinnes / & ſo led him
 vnto thoſtry of holy chirch &c. And where (I pray you) was there
ſo muche puritie and clennes of herte,Apoca. 1. B as in Chriſte, which as an
innocent lambe was offred vpon the croſſe for vs / waſſhyng and
clenſynge our vnclene & ſynfull hertes with his precyous blood?
 And who alſo was ſo peaceful as Chriſte / whiche was our peace
and corner ſtone,Ephe. 2. D. ioynynge into one people of god / the Iues and
the Gentiles / whiche alſo by his paſſion dyd pacify vs vnto god
 in his bloode. Moreouer, who ſo verely ſuffered perſecucion for
iuſtice as Chriſte, which for his iuſtice that he preached and ſhewed
vnto the Iues, was crucified? & truely he myght well be called
bleſſed / for the worldly and deuelyſſhe people, curſed hym or
ſpake euyll of hym / and made many falſe lyes and ſlaunders of
hym. Theſe be the .viii. beatitudes the whiche Chriſte taught in
the goſpell / and gaue vs example in his owne perſone how we
ſhuld fulfyll them.Math. 5. A Fourthely in the paſſion of Chriſte don clerely
appere the .xii. fruites of the ſpirite: Of the which ſaint Paule
ſayth.Gala. 5. D 
                     Fructus ſpiritus eſt charitas, gaudium. &c. The fruites of the
ſpirite, ben theſe / charitie, ioye, peace, paciēce, lōganimitie, goodnes,
benignitie, mildenes or gentilnes, fayth. For in this paſſion
reſtyth the foundacion and ſtrength of our faith, as concernynge
his obiecte or ſubiect. It foloweth in the wordes of ſaint Paule / 
continence, good maners, and chaſtitie. All theſe do manifeſtly
ſhyne in this paſſion, dethe, and croſſe of Chriſte / as we ſhall declare
more at large hereafter. And therefore it conueniently foloweth
in ſaynt Paule.Ibidem. 
                     Qui chriſti ſunt: carnem ſuam crufixerunt cū
                        
viciis et concupiſcentiis. Who ſo be the childeren of Chriſte: they
do cru
                        •
                     iſy and ſubdue theyr bodies, and alſo all vices and inordinate
concupiſcence. This ſayd ſaynt Paule, to ſhewe manifeſtly
vnto vs that theſe .xii. fruites do hange vpon the mooſt holy tree
of the croſſe / & ſuche perſones do take & gader them there: whiche
conforme them ſelf vnto Chriſte crucified: For by vertuouſe operacions
in folowynge the lyfe and pacience of our ſauiour Ieſu
Chriſte: men be made vertuouſe / for ſuche beholde the lyfe and
dethe of our lorde with diligence / remembre it by ofte and feruent
meditacion / and alſo haue pleaſure therein / and folow it as theyr
frailtie wyll ſuffre them. And ſo they be made apte to the reparacion
of thorder of vertues / as we ſayd before / and ſhall ſay more
hereafter.
               
               
                  ¶By the paſſion of Chriſte we haue the efficacitie
and vertue of all ſpirituall goodnes.
The fyfte Chapiter.
                  
                     BY the fruitfull and gloryouſe paſſion of Chriſt, there
is miniſtred vnto vs habundantly the matter of all
ſpirituall goodes. For where is or ſhulde be our gloriacion
or reioicynge / our hope and gladnes, but in
one Chriſte, moſt high and true goodnes, and in the
mooſt preciouſe treaſure of his paſſion / from the whiche all the ſacramentes
of the Chriſte receiue theyr vertue & efficacitie / which
be to vs as a mooſt holſum medicyn agaynſt all our ſpirituall ſekenes.
Alſo this mooſt bleſſyd paſſion is to vs as a key that openeth
to vs the ſecretes of holy ſcripture / whiche openeth:Apoc. 3. B. & no mā
may than ſhyt it / and whan it ſhitteth: no man may than open it.
Without Chriſt crucified & this key of his paſſion: it is impoſſible
to vnderſtande holy ſcripture. And this key feruently imprynted
in our mynde: all thynges be manifeſt / as yf they were in the
clere lyght. For who ſo euer deſyreth to cum or attayne vnto the
knowledge of the godhed: he muſt aſcende therunto by the manhode
and paſſion of Chriſte, as by the kynges high waye / for by
it he ſhall aſcende by lyttle and lyttle vnto higher thynges / as I
ſhall ſhew vnto you more playnly hereafter. For no man may attayne
to the high knowledge of the godhed / and to the great ſwetenes
and pleaſure therein conteined: excepte he be fyrſte drawen
vp with a feruent and godly affection of faythe and loue by
the bytternes of the humanitie of Chriſte, that he ſuffered in his

paſſion / as ye ſhall perceiue hereafter. And the more that any
man preſumeth to aſcende without this paſſion: the more deper
ſhal he fall. For this is the onely way by the whiche we ſhulde aſcende.
This is the onely yate or entraunce vnto our mooſte deſyred
ende. And briefely to ſpeake / who ſo euer deſyreth to haue
eternall helthe, and the highe crowne of glorye / or wolde aſcende
to the perfection and highe toure of vertues / or wolde optayne
knowledge and wyſdome / or by pacyence / to ſtande ſtrongely
and euynly, as well in aduerſytie as in proſperytie / or to walke
the ſure waye / or elles deſyreth to taſte of the bytternes of the paſſion
of Chriſte / and drynke the mooſte pleaſaunt drynke of his
conſolacion: he muſt bere Ieſu Chriſte / I ſay Ieſu Chriſte crucified
in his ſoule and bodye, by continuall remembrance of his
paſſion, and pacyent ſufferaunce of all aduerſities bothe corporall
and ſpirituall / and alſo abſteyne frome all other delectacion
and conſolacion. For ſurely, carnall conſolacion, and the contemplacyon
of Chriſtes paſſion, do neuer well accorde in one
perſone / for they be as contrarye bothe in name and in effecte.
                  Nor the fleſſhe or ſenſualitie can haue pleaſure in that thyng that
deliteth the ſpirite.Gala. 5. C. For as ſaynte Paule ſayeth / they be aduerſaries,
& at continuall warre. But halas, there be many that whan
they can nat fynde or get heuenly or ſpirituall conſolacion: anon
they ſearche and laboure for carnall or worldly conforte / and ſo
they ſhytte theyr ſoules from the conſolacion of god / and they
rightuouſly want it. For it is very delicate / and nat gyuen vnto
ſuche perſones as wyll receiue any vaine conſolacion. For yf the
mynde or ſoule haue any thynge wherein it hathe pleaſure outwardely:
it ſhall remayne without inwarde pleaſure. And contrary
wyſe / yf the ſpirituall delectacion be ones perfectly taſted:
all carnall pleaſure is made vnſauoury to that ſoule. Wherefore,
yf thou woldeſt haue ſpirituall conforte: laboure nat therefore
with a double affection or deſyre / for ſo thou makeſt thy ſelfe
vnworthy to receiue that godly and ſpirituall conforte. And
hereunto ſayeth ſaynte Bernarde:In declamatio
                           •
                         ſuꝑ euāg. Ecce nos reliquimus omnia in fine. He is vnworthy the heuenly
benediction and conforte, that laboureth therefore with a double
affection or deſyre. He laboureth with a double affection:
that purpoſeth (yf he can nat get ſpirituall conforte) to laboure
for vayne and tranſitorye pleaſures or conforte. And ſo therefore
he is vnworthy to receyue ſpirituall delectacion.Ioſue. 5. C.
                  
                  An example or fygure hereof we rede in ſcrypture / how that after

the chylderen of Iſraell had ones taſted of the corne and fruytes
of the lande of promiſſion: the foode of aungels,Sapi. 16. C called Manna / 
and gyuen to them by god, was taken from them. By this Manna,
whiche was very delycate, and had in it ſelfe all delectacion
and pleaſaunte taſte of all maner of meates: is ſignified the ſwetenes
and conforte of Chriſte / whiche is taken frome religiouſe
perſones, and from all Chriſtians, after that they begyn to eate
of the fruytes of the erthe / that is, after that they gyue them ſelfe
to worldly and erthely delectacions or pleaſures. And therefore
the true ſeruaunt of god ought to ſay with the prophete Dauid:
Renuit conſolari anima mea,
                     Pſalm. 76. 
                     ſcilicet exterius. That is, my ſoule
hathe refuſed all outwarde and vayne conſolacion. And it foloweth:Richard
                           •
                        .
                     Memor fui dei, et delectatus ſum. I remembred god, and
I had great delectacion therein in all the powers of my ſoule.
                  And hereunto ſayeth one deuout Doctour: The vnderſtandyng
of man is neuer drawen perfitely vnto the contemplacion of heuenly
thynges: excepte the body be fyrſt ſtrongely drawen from
all ſuperfluouſe thynges, and all his pleaſures. And hereunto accordeth
ſaynt Gregory / ſayenge: If we cut and take away from
the body that whiche is to it pleaſaunte: we ſhall ſhortely fynde
that is delectable to the ſpyryte. And that ſhall well appere in
them that conforme theyr lyfe vnto our ſauyoure Ieſu Chriſte / 
whoſe lyfe was all bytter and paynefull from the begynnyng vnto
his dethe. And therefore our lorde dyd nat gyue vnto the Iues
Manna: but in the deſerte or wildernes / where as was no delectable
meate to be had for theyr refreſſhynge and conforte. And ſo
in lyke maner, the ſwetenes of grace and the taſte of ſpirituall
delectacion, is nat felt or perceyued but of them yt tranſpoſe & put
them ſelfe into the deſerte of theyr herte / that is, to repute thē ſelfe
forſaken of all creatures, that they ſhulde nat fele or receyue any
worldly or vaine delectacions. And therefore it is wrytten by the
prophete:Pſalm. 64. 
                     Pingueſcent ſpecioſa deſerti et exultatione colles accingentur.
The pleaſaunt places of ye deſerte ſhall waxe fat / & the hilles
ſhalbe compaſſed with ioye / yt is to ſay / thoſe ſpeciouſe & pleaſant
places of deſert / yt is, thoſe ꝑſons that make thē ſelfe deſerte &
forſaken of the world, ſo that the world cum nat tyll them / that is,
moue them to any carnall, worldly, or vain pleaſure & delectaciō / 
thoſe perſons (I ſay) waxe fat in godly deuocion & conſolacion / &
thoſe hilles / yt is the hertes of them yt be fyxed in god: be cōpaſſed
& ſet about with great ioye of heuenly confortes. And yt we ſhuld
cum vnto this deſerte:Mar. 6. D. our lorde moueth vs in ye goſpell / ſayenge

                     Venite ſeorſum in deſertū locū, et requieſcite puſillū: Cum ye into
the deſert or wildernes, and reſt a lytle / that is, leue ye the pleaſures
of the worlde, and forſake them / and reſt a lytle / that is, feruently
and deuoutely remembre our lordes payne and paſſion: &
ye ſhal fynde reſt & confort to your ſoules. For as our lorde ſayeth
in an other place:Ioh. 16. G. 
                     In mundo, preſſuram habebitis: in me autem pacem:
Ye ſhall haue trouble & oppreſſion in the worlde: but in me
ye ſhal haue peace & reſt.Mat. 14. B et. 15. D. Our lorde fed the people twiſe in ye wyldernes / 
& nat in any other place. Alſo the Iues eat Manna in the
wildernes, to ſignify that we can nat haue ye conſolacion of god,
but in the deſert / that is, whan we forſake all worldly pleaſures.
Of this wildernes it is wryten by the prophet Eſay / ſayeng: Erit
deſertum Libanus in Charmel:
                     Eſay. 29. F 
                     et Charmel in ſaltum reputabitur.
                  
                  The deſert or wood of Libane ſhalbe as the mount of Charmeli / 
& Charmel ſhal be reputed as a grene wood. Charmelꝰ or Charmel,
is as muche to ſay by interpretacion as a lābe / or tendernes.
And it ſignifieth, that who ſo euer be in the ſpirituall deſerte (of
the whiche we ſpake of before) he ſhal perceiue the tendernes and
paynes of our ſpirituall lambe Chriſte / and alſo receyue his delites
and heuenly confortes / and ſo ſhall be grene and flouriſſhyng
in all vertues and ſpirituall conſolacions.
               
               
                  ¶The ſeuen gyftes of the holy gooſt are conteyned in this paſſion / 
and thrugh the feruent remembraunce therof, they may
be opteyned. And fyrſte of the gyfte of feare of
god. The ſyxte Chapitre.
                  
                     O My mooſt dere beloued brother / thou mayſt behold
in this moſt glorious paſſion of Chriſte (the whiche
I am vnworthy to meane) ſeuen aſcencions / correſpondynge
to the ſeuen folde grace or gyftes of the
holy gooſt / that is, the gyfte of wiſdome and of vnderſtandynge / 
of ſcience, and gooſtly ſtrengthe / of councell, and
of pitie / and the gyfte of the feare of god. Fyrſte (I ſay) by the
ofte, continuall, and deuoute remembraunce of the paſſyon of
our lorde, is gyuen to man the gyfte of the feare of god / and that
agaynſt the falſe ſurety of this preſent lyfe, & his moſt wicked promyſe / 
wherby many men bē withdrawen frō the loue of god / & letted
frō theyr true couerſion vnto hym. For this fere conſtreyneth
men to do well, and with all theyr herte to dyſpyſe all worldly
pleaſures. And therfore a deuout doctour ſayeth, yt fere is ye auoidaunce

of euyll, & the proſecucion or wynnynge of goodnes. It is
the begynnynge of godly wyſdome, & thexpulſion of ignoraunce.
By fere, all the perfection of actyue lyfe, & alſo of contemplatyue
is preſerued and kept / ſo that all bondage or ſeruile fere be excluded:
For who ſo euer thrugh the feruent & deuout remēbraunce of
this paſſion is crucified with Chriſte, to thauoidaunce of euyll, &
gettyng of goodnes / to the ſtabliſſhment of his mynde, & mekyng
of his hert: therunto he is prepared & induced by the gyft of ye fere
of god / & that in this maner. A man ſeyng & conſideryng that the
ſon of god & our lord god in the nature of man ſuffred ſo great paines
for our ſynnes / & how he puniſſhed our ſynne ſo greuouſly in
hym ſelfe, mooſt innocent iudge, & mooſt pure & very god: More
ouer, what paines, rebukes, & turmentes he is worthy, which dyd
yt wickednes & moſt abhominable ſyn / for whiche, the mooſt innocent
& amorous or louely Ieſu ſo greuouſly was turmēted. Thinkynge
alſo herby, how muche this his ſyn dyd diſpleaſe the hygh
maieſty of god / & how muche god dyd abhorre it: ſo muche I ſay
he abhorred it, yt he wold rather ſuffre his ſon / his own naturall &
onely ſon to dye, than that ſyn ſhuld reigne in man / & it was more
pleaſure to hym to gyue his dere beloued ſon to the moſt ſhamfull
dethe of the croſſe: than yt he wold ſuffre any lōger tyme ye ſhamefaſtnes
of our ſyn. Furthermore, a man ſeyng & conſideryng how
muche he offēdeth the high maieſty of god, by his continuaūce in
actually ſynnyng & offendyng his high goodnes / contēpnynge or
litle regardyng the paſſion of Chriſte / & therby his redemption:
but dayly offendynge & doyng aſmuche as lieth in hym to crucify
Chriſte agayne, & put hym to thoſe mooſt ſhamefull & cruell turmentes.
A man (I ſay) conſideryng all theſe thynges, no maruell
though in ſuche conſideracion he trēble & quake before the preſēce
of god, whom he hath ſo greuouſly offended / & be ferefull, & ſhake
as the aſpen lefe yt is continually blowen & moued by the wynde / 
& ſo by fere, thinke hym ſelfe worthy of hym ſelfe, nothyng els but
diſtruction or dāpnacion / & ſo he may in ſuche conſideracions vtterly
diſpiſe hym ſelfe, & opteyne the feare of god. Wherfore good
deuout brethern, let vs haue a recourſe, & cōſider depely our own
vanities and ſinnes / and alſo the high maieſtie & goodnes of god,
whom we haue ſo greuouſly offended. And ſo let vs meke our ſelf
before hym aſmuche as we may. For all that we can do, is to lytle / 
conſidering his maieſty & our wickednes. Let vs therfore fere
& be aſſhamed to lifte vp our iyes vnto heuē.Luce. 18. C. But knock vpon our
breſtes / & pray with ye Publican / yt he of infinite goodnes wold be

mercyfull to vs ſynners. It is a great mercy, yf it wolde pleaſe
hym to beholde or loke vpon vs, whiche haue contempned & diſpiſed
hym for a tryfle or a lytle vayne pleaſure of the fleſſhe or of
the worlde. Wherfore (as is ſayd) let vs thrugh the conſideracion
& fere of his maieſty, repute our ſelfe as nought / & herafter thynk
our ſelfe mooſt vile and vnworthy any goodnes / & ſo let vs arme
our ſelfe agaynſte our wyckednes and ſynne / and ſo be our owne
proper Iuges. Let vs reuenge & punyſſhe in our ſelfe thiniury &
offence that we haue done agaynſte god / and ſubdue our ſelfe as
muche as we may. And let euery one of vs ſay thus in him ſelfe, or
to hym ſelfe: If my lorde god be thus diſpiſed & tourmented for
my ſake & for my ſynne, how may I ſpare my ſelfe from punyſſhment
and payne, that hathe ſynned? or how may I deſyre or loke
for any pleaſure here? God forbyd that I ſhulde at any tyme preſume
to deſyre any thynge of pleaſure or dignity: but rather diſpiſe
my ſelfe, & repute my ſelfe as mooſt vile, deteſtable, and abhominable
ſtynkynge carayn or dunge / whoſe ſtynche, I in my
ſelfe can nat ſuſtayn or bere / for I haue diſpiſed my lord god. For
my wretchydnes he ſuffred dethe. Now myn owne raymentes abhorre
me / and all creatures diſpiſe me / for I haue contempned the
creatoure and maker of all thynges. What yf all creatures now
myght haue voice and ſhulde ſpeke / wolde nat they (thynke you)
ſpeke on this maner: This is he mooſt wicked and abhominable
that haue contempned our lorde god / he hath loued vanitie more
than god / he hath abuſed all vs, the creatures of god / wyllyng rather
to ſerue the deuyll, than our lorde: He hathe derided & contempned
by his abhominable vyces, the power, wiſdome, and
goodnes of god: He hath feryd or drad more man, than god: He
hathe more deſyred the mucke of this world, than the mooſt high
and pure goodnes: He wolde neither be drawen to goodnes by
the ſwete giftes of god, ne yet feryd by his terrible & ferefull iudgementes / 
for he was nat affrayde to do his mooſt abhominable
ſynnes in the preſence & ſight of god. Cum ye all the creatures of
god, & let vs vtterly diſtroy this perſon that is holly & fully gyuē
to do iniury vnto our lord. O thou erthe, why doeſt thou bere vp
ſo wicked a perſon? Thou water, why doeſt yu nat drowne hym?
Thou ayre, why doeſt yu nat withdraw thy ſelfe from him? Thou
fyre, why doeſt thou nat burne hym? Thou wylde and rauenous
beeſt, why doeſt thou nat deuoure hym? Thou ſtone, why doeſt
thou nat ſtone hym to dethe? O thou hell, why doeſt thou nat ſwalow
vp this mooſt vnkynde and wretched creature? And ſo furth

we might imagin of all the creatures of god / and meue them to reuenge
the iniury of theyr creatour and maker. All this well conſidered,
than we ſhall thynke or ſaye: Alas, wretche that I am / 
what ſhall I do? for I haue armed and prouoked agaynſt me all
thyngꝭ. To whom ſhal I go? To whom ſhall I make my mone?
I haue done contrary to all thynges / I haue contempned and offended
my lorde god / I haue prouoked his aungels / I haue diſhonoured
his ſaintes / I haue in many wayes diſpleaſed my neyghbours:
And ſhortly (to ſay the truthe) I haue offended all the creatures
of god, in that that I haue done iniury, and contempned
god the creatour and maker of them all. To whome ſhal I go for
ſocour, that hath made my ſelfe enemy to god and to all his creatures?
I know / I knowe what I ſhall do. I ſhall entre into the
woundes of my lorde god / & I ſhall tranſfourme my / ſelfe / or take
vpon me his paynes, ſorowes, and rebukes / knowynge for a ſurety
that no creature ſhall be diſpleaſant or heuy vnto me, yf they
perceyue that I bere the pryntes of the woundes and ſorowes of
my lorde Ieſu in my ſoule and body. And good brother, let vs reduce
all theſe to .iii. poyntes / that is to thonour of god / to the paſſion
of Chriſte, and to our owne direction and good order / & that
bothe in ſoule and body. Nothynge wyllyng / non other deſyryng
but Ieſu Chriſte / and that crucified / as ſaynt Paule ſayd.1. Co
                           •
                        . 2. A. Yet in
all theſe thynges ſo order we our fere, that we euer truſt in the infinite
goodnes of god. For his infinite mercy farre excedeth all
our malice and iniquity. This godly fere, is the occaſion and begynnynge
of humilitie and reuerence / of a meruelous aſcencion
vnto god / and of contemplacion. For by this feare, man is ſpecyally
led and brought vnto the ſuperabundaunce of grace / wherby
he may auoyd all euill / and get goodnes / and may liue modeſtly / 
with good maners / continently / temperatly / & chaſtly. Theſe .iii.
fruites of the holy gooſt / that is modeſtia / that is gentyll behauour
in wordes and dedes. Continence, that is to abſteyne from
thynges vnlawfull: And chaſtity / that is, rightely to vſe thynges
lawfull. Theſe thre fruites (I ſay) accorde and perteyne to ye gyft
of fere. Wherfore I may call this fere a Paradiſe of delites / from
whence doeth procede abundaunce of all ſwetenes and pleaſure.
There man is inebriate with a pure ſwetenes / and with a meruelous
gladnes he is (as it were) allienate from hym ſelfe. With an
hygh feruent deuocion he ſlepeth and ſlumbereth in our lorde.
                  And thus, to haue the ſpirite of the fere of god▪ is to be conuerted
into god, to do well, and with all the deſyre and affection of the

herte, to diſpyſe all vayn and tranſitory thynges. And therfore to
this gyfte of feare, correſpondeth the fyrſt beatitude / that is, the
pouerty of ſpirite.Libro. 1. de ſerm. d
                           •
                        i in monte. C. For as ſaint Auſtine ſayeth: The feare of god
perteineth to meke men. Of the which it is wryten: Beati pauperes
ſpiritu:
                     Mat. 5. A. Bleſſed be the pore in ſpirite: that is, meke perſones.
For ſithe it apperteineth to the feare of god to giue due reuerence
vnto god, and to be ſubdued vnto hym: that thyng that foloweth
of this ſubiection, perteineth to the gyft of feare. And in that that
a man ſubdueth hymſelfe to god: he doeth nat labour to be magnified
for any thyng in hym ſelfe, or for that he doeth to any other
perſone / nor yet wyll be magnified therefore: but referreth all to
god. For otherwiſe he ſhulde do contrary vnto the perfite ſubiection
vnto god. And therfore the prophet Dauid ſaieth: Hii in curribus,
& hii in equis,
                     Pſalm. 19. 
                     nos autem in nomine domini dei noſtri inuocabimus:
Theſe men do truſt or reioice in theyr chariots / & other reioice
in theyr horſes: But we reioice in ye name of our lorde god.
And therfore it ſoloweth yt the gift offere is finally giuen to man
for this intent / that the holy gooſt, therewith enterynge into the
ſoule, ſhulde giue to vs the vertue of mekenes, whiche cureth our
wounde of pryde / ſo that the meke perſon may therby aſcende vnto
glory of heuyn / whiche the proude aungell loſt by his pryde.
                  And this is it that we ſayd before / that by the great mekenes and
reuerence that our ſauiour Ieſu had towarde the high maieſty of
god the father, in his mooſt bleſſyd paſſion: men, beholdynge &
remembrynge the ſame, ſhulde be prouoked vnto lyke mekenes,
reuerence, and honour towardes god, accordynge to theyr power,
as theyr frailtie wolde ſuffre them / that thereby they myght
be made apte to repare the order of the thronys.
               
               
                  ¶Example of this gyfte of the feare of
god. The ſeuenth Chapitre.
                  
                     ANd that this gyfte of feare is ofte tymes gyuen vnto
ſuche perſones as do feruently remembre the paſſion
of Chriſte: we haue example of the bleſſed woman of
whome we ſpake before,Capitu
                           •
                        . 2. 
                     Maria de Ogines. It is wryten
in the foreſayd boke of thiſtories of Vincent / that
this bleſſed woman Marie had the chaſte and louynge feare of
god / and that without doubt,Li. 31. ca. 29 thrugh the ofte and feruent remembraunce
of the paſſion of Chriſte / as we ſhewed before.Capitu. 2. And this
godly feare was in her herte, as an ornamente of her breſt, or a

ſtomacher / wherwith ſhe repreſſeth her hert frō all vaine thoughtes.
                  It was in her mouthe as a brydell to reſtrayne her tongue.
This feare of god was in his werke, as a pricke or brod to dryue
her to labour, and kepe her from ſlouthe and ſluggyſſhnes. And
in all thynges it was to her as a ſquyre or rule to order her, that
ſhe ſhuld nat excede a due meane. This godly fere was in her, as
a be
                        •
                     ome to make clene her herte from all doublenes / her mouthe
from all falſhed / and her werkes from all vanitie: By the which
ſpirite of feare, at length ſhe conceiued ſo great loue vnto pouertie,
yt ſcarcely ſhe wolde kepe or reteyne to her vſe thoſe thynges
that were very neceſſary for her. And for the loue that ſhe had vnto
pouerty, ſhe was fully purpoſed in her mynde, to haue departed
from her frendes, and gone into a ſtraunge cuntrey / and there
as a vile & abiecte perſon, to haue beggyd her lyuynge from dore
to dore for goddꝭ ſake. And for the ſame purpoſe ſhe had prepared
a bag, wherein ſhe wold put ſuche thynges as ſhe ſhulde receiue
of almoſe / & a lytle cup, wherwith to drynke water or els potage / 
yf ſhe had any gyuen to her / & alſo ſhe prepared for her werynge,
olde clothes and patched garmentes / & ſo wolde haue performed
theſe thyngꝭ in dede, ne had ben the great inſtance of her frendes / 
the whiche with many teares and diligent deſyres might ſcarcely
withholde her from that purpoſe. Nat withſtandyng her good
wyll dyd appere in the premiſſes / for ſhe dyd that ſhe might. Alſo
ſhe continued in this loue of pouerty / which appered in that that
ſhe cut hir table clothes or napkyns / and alſo her ſhetes / and gaue
the one parte to the pore / reſeruynge the reſidue for her ſelfe. And
nat only by this feare of god ſhe contempned all worldly riches:
but alſo ſhe diſpiſed all worldly honour and glory / and all vayne
praiſe of man / and that for the great ſwetenes and pleaſure that
ſhe had in heuenly thynges. And nat onely ſhe wold nat admyt or
loke towardes theſe vanities: but alſo ſhe refuſed them with abhominacion
of herte, & vtterly abhorred them. The loue of Chriſt
was ſo feruent in her herte, that nothynge els was pleaſaunt or
ſauory to her, but Chriſte. And moche more ye may ſe of her mekenes
and pouerty in the ſayd boke of Vincent hiſtoriall.
               
               
                  ¶The gyfte of pitie is alſo gyuen to man by
the feruent remembraunce of Chriſtes
paſſion. The .viii. Chapitre.
                  
                     
                     THe gyfte of pitie is gyuen to man by the continuall and
feruent meditacion of the paſſion of Chriſte / wherwith
a man ordereth & behaueth hym ſelfe iuſtly and deuoutly
in the due honoure and worſhyppynge of god / in due
reuerence and intreatynge of holy ſcripture / and in the loue & due
confortynge of his neighboure. In the whiche thre thynges conſiſteth
& ſtandeth the gyfte of pitie:Prima Timoth. 4. C. Whiche pitie (as ſaint Paule
ſayeth (is profitable to all thynges / & ſpecially againſt the hardnes
and malice of the herte. For that perſone whiche is crucified
with Chriſte thrugh the feruent remembraunce of his moſt bleſſed
paſſion: is kyndled with this gifte of pitie vnto the high compaſſion,
benignitie, and mercy of his neighbour / and that on this
maner. Whan a perſone deuoutly and feruently beholdeth in his
remembraunce the compaſſion and mercy that our ſauiour Ieſu
Chriſte ſhewed vnto mankinde / and ſpecially at his dethe & paſſion
(as we declared before in the gyfte of feare) anon he is moued
and kyndeled / and his herte is opened towarde his neighboure,Ca. vi. huiꝰ particule.
bought & redemyd with the bloode of Chriſte, as we all be. I ſay
this man thus conſiderynge, is ſo kyndeled vnto the loue of his
neighboure / and that for the loue of his lorde god: that he is redy
to gyue all that he hathe, and hym ſelfe alſo with glad mynde for
the helthe and ſaluacion of his neighbour / for he conſidereth that
his lorde god ſuffred dethe with mooſt greuouſe paynes for his
ſayd neighbour. And moreouer, as he hath compaſſion vpon his
ſauiour Chriſte hangynge vpon the croſſe, and that with all his
hert: ſo he hath as great inwarde ſorowe in his hert vppon his
neighbour / whiche by his ſynfull lyuynge forſaketh the conforte
that he myght haue by Chriſtes woundes and paſſion / and ſo in
his maner diſpiſeth the blood and dethe of Chriſte. I ſay he hath
inwardly as great compaſſion of this perſon, as he wolde haue
vpon hym ſelfe. Fyrſt he is wounded and greued in his herte, for
the contempt of his lord god. Secondly, for the hurt and damage
of his neighbour whiche hath forſaken lyfe & glory euerlaſtynge,
and hathe choſen voluntarily or wylfully eternall dethe & dampnacion.
This good man ſeeth & conſidereth the contempt of god,
the blood of Chriſte diſpiſed / and the mooſt noble creature made
to the ymage of god, wylfully to go to eternall paynes / and therfore
his herte melteth thrugh pitie, and is relented or reſolued by
compaſſion. And in like maner as he hath compaſſion of the hurt
of his neighbour: ſo by the ſame gyfte of pitie, he hathe great reioice
and gladnes in his ſoule, of the goodnes and ſpirituall profite

of other perſons / whan he ꝑceiueth that they order thē ſelfe to
receiue the fruite & profite of the woūdes of Chriſte / with whom
he entreth into the ſame woūdes / & is made one with thē. He ioyeth
with them that be ioyfull of any goodnes. He is ſory with thē
that be ſorowfull for theyr hurt & damage. He reputeth euery one
of his neighbours, as hym ſelfe / ſeynge & conſideryng yt bothe he
& his neighbours be create & made of our lord god / marked & dignified
with his image / redemyd & bought with the ſame blood of
Chriſte / & ordered to cum to one & the ſame glory. And moſt ſpecially
he openeth his hert vnto his neighbour, by this gift of pitie:
for that he ſeeth & conſidereth his lorde god to be crucified for all
people / & therfore he ſeeth & cōſidereth his lorde god in all people▪
He requireth & ſercheth his ſauiour crucified in all his neibours.
He beholdeth him in thē all after his pore maner. He is all giuē to
his neighbour: for he is hoolly & fully gyuē to his ſauiour crucified.
O what ioye is it vnto his hert, whā he ſeeth his neighbour
do due honor vnto his ſauiour crucified? He hath non enuy therat / 
he is nat diſpleaſed therwith / he doth nat detract hym or ſpeke
euyll of hym / he wyll nat let hym nor hynder hym from yt honour / 
by ſigne, worde, or dede / nor giue hym any occaſion to withdraw
him from yt honour: but hoolly he deſireth his neighbours ꝓfite / 
& abhorreth his hurte or peryll / reputyng & acceptynge bothe his
neighbours hurt or profite, as his owne profite or hurt. And yt is
ſpecially for the loue yt he hath to our lord Ieſu Chriſt / the which
for the great loue that he had vnto the helthe of mannes ſoules / &
to the honour of his father: he ſuffred moſt paynfull & ſhamefull
deth of the croſſe. Wherfore the zele & thonour of god / the compaſſion
of Chriſte / & the inflamacion or kyndelynge of his owne hert
hereunto: be mooſt properly to be attended & beholden in ye woū
                     des
of Chriſt / for there they be had & gotē. And by this gifte of pitie,
ye hert of man is in a meruelous maner eleuate & lifte vp vnto
his lorde god. For whan a man doeth enforce hym ſelfe aſmuche
as he may, to conforme hym ſelfe vnto the pitie and compaſſion
that Chriſte god and man had and ſhewed vnto vs whan he ſuffered
the dethe of the croſſe / than that ſoule pleaſeth god ſingulerly / 
in ſo muche that Chriſte wyll take that ſoule ſo comformable
to his godly pitie, vnto his ſinguler loue and fauoure, vnto his
ſwete enbracynges & halſynges / & kepe yt ſoule as his dere beloued
ſpouſe / & induce and brynge that ſoule to perceiue his ſwete
conſolacions / ſuche a ſoule our ſauioure loueth: aſmuche as ſhe
loueth hym / that ſoule our lorde draweth to hym: for as muche

as that ſoule hath one felyng with Chriſt, in hauyng compaſſion
of Chriſt, & of his neighbour with Chriſt. Alſo it hath one ſauory
knowledge with Chriſte: in duely honouryng god / one zele and
feruent deſyre to the ſaluacion of mannes ſoule with Chriſte / and
ſo that ſoule is in a maner tranſfourmed into Chriſt, thrugh this
gifte of pitie / whiche (as we ſayd before) is profitable to all thynges.
It couetyth thonour of god / it expelleth ſorowes and troubles
from mannes ſoule / it feruently they ſteth and deſyreth the
fruite and profite of ſoules / it laboureth that the blood of Chriſte
might take effecte in other perſones / and it kyndeleth the ſoule in
feruent loue to god and his neighbour. Wherefore dere beloued
frendes, let vs approche hereunto, and labour diligently for this
gyfte. For doubtles this one, amonge all other (and peraduenture
before all other gyftes) doeth mooſt pleaſe god. I pray you
therfore let vs labour to do the wyll and pleaſure of god / and let
vs draw or ſucke out of his woundes and ſyde this gifte of pitie.
Let vs be all one in our lorde Ieſu Chriſte crucified / and let vs
requyre, ſe, or deſyre non other thyng in our neighbour, but Ieſus
Chriſte crucified. So louyng our neighbour, that with him
we runne at all tymes into the woundes of Chriſte: Nat beholdynge
or louynge hym as fayre, beautifull, ſtronge, or wyſe / or
any other ſuche lyke vaine and tranſitory thynges whiche may
hinder or withdraw our ſoule from the loue of god: but onely beholdynge
and louynge our neighbour, as redemyd and bought
by the precyouſe blood and dethe of our lorde, as anointed & waſſhed
with his blood / and applied or put to the woundes of Chriſt
by receiuyng the fruit of them. Let it nat be ſene or thought hard
and painefull to vs to ſuffre great paines / or (yf nede ſhulde requyre)
mooſt ſhamefull dethe for our neighbour: for whō Chriſt
(the onely ſonne of god) ſuffred mooſt greuous paynes, and the
mooſt ſhamefull dethe of the croſſe. Let vs all couet and deſire for
the profite and helthe of ſoules, all maner of rebukes and diſpiſynges / 
all afflictions, and tourmentes / and alſo to ſuffre mooſt
vile or ſhamfull dethe. Let euery man be to vs, as our owne hert:
for whom the hert of Chriſt was perced with a ſpere. Let vs multiply
our preachynges and exhortacions, good examples, prayers,
faſtynges, knelynges, watche, labours / & alſo ſuffre mockes
or ſcornes for the helthe of ſoules. Let this be our office and
dayly excerciſe / our glory and ioye / and our conſolacion, euer to
offre ſum thyng to almighty god for the profite of ſoules. Let nat
the ryuer & fountaine of teares ceaſe from our iyen: for our owne

ſynnes and alſo for the ſynnes of other. Let vs be content to be ſaciat
and fulfylled with ſuche wepynges and ſorowes in this vale
of myſerye and teares. Let our ſynnes and alſo the ſynnes of our
ueighbours hynge euer in our ſyght / nat to iudge or condempne
our neighbours, but to lament and wepe for them at all tymes / &
nat onely let them be in our ſyght: but alſo let them entre & perce
the ynner partes of our hertes. Let vs at all tymes and in all places
haue our ſauyour Chriſte crucified in our preſence. Let vs alwayes
be feruent and deuout in all honour due to god, in the reuerence
of holy ſcrypture, and in the loue and compaſſion of our
neyghbours. In the whiche thre conſyſteth the gyfte of pitie.
                  This ordre and aſcencion in our ſoule doeth molifie all our hert,
and ſprede it abrood, and make it apte to receyue the ſpyryte of pitie / 
whiche doeth quyet vs & ſet vs in great pleaſure and fauour of
Chriſte / where as we ſhall fynde ſpirituall foode, bothe within &
outwarde / that is our mooſt tendre louer our lorde Ieſu Chriſte,
the reſt or our ſoules, & the rewarde of our good dedes that we do
thrugh this gyfte of pitie. And to this gyfte of pitie doeth correſponde
the ſeconde beatitude: Beati mites. Bleſſed the mylde.
                  And hereunto ſaynt Auſtin ſayeth:Li. 1. de 
                           〈…〉
                         in monte. C. Pitie accordeth and is conuenient
vnto mylde perſons. And as concernynge the fruites of the
holy gooſt: theſe .ii. that is, goodnes and benignitie, ben directly
attributed & appropriate vnto this gyfte of pitie / but the thyrde, yt
is called Manſuetudo / that is, myldenes or gētilnes, perteineth to
this gyfte of pitie indyrectly / for it taketh away the lettes & impedimentes
of the actes of pitie. And the ſpirite of pitie is gyuen to
man, for that his hert ſhuld be moued & kyndled vnto be
                        •
                     ignitie / 
ſo that man vſyng duely this gyfte ſhuld cum to the ſame eternall
poſſeſſion & heritage yt he wold haue other men cum to. And this
is it that we ſayd before, yt by the great compaſſion, pitie, & mercy
yt our ſauiour Ieſu Chriſt ſhewed vpon vs & vnto vs on ye croſſe,
we ſhuld be ſtyred, moued, & kyndled to lyke werkes of pitie accordyng
to our power & habilitie vnto our neighbour / yt thereby we
myght be made apt to the reſtauracion of thorder of archaūgels.
               
               
                  ¶Example of this gifte of the ſpirite of pitie. Cha. ix.
                  
                     OF this gyfte of pitie we haue example in the forſayd bleſſed
woman Maria de Ogines, in the ſayde boke of the
hiſtories of Vincent.Li. 31. ca. 3
                           •
                        
                      Where as it is writen that nat only
ſhe auoyded all maner of euyll by the gyfte of the feare of
god: but alſo by the ſpyryte of pytye (whiche ſhe had withoute
doubte) by the ofte and feruente remembraunce of the paſſyon

of Chriſte) ſhe was made very feruente and prone or redye to all
goodnes. She laboured and enforced hyr ſelfe as farre as hyr
power wolde ſtretche, to fulfyll all the werkes of mercy, of a great
and aboundaunte pytye that was in hyr. And aboue all other
werkes of pitie, ſhe had a feruent deſyre to vyſyte the ſycke, and
to aſſyſte them in theyr infirmities, and alſo to be preſent at the
deathe and ſepulture or buryenge of the ded folkes, where ſhe very
oft tymes receyued from god great ſpyrytuall conforte / and alſo
thrughe the reuelacion of god knewe many ſecrete and heuenly
myſteryes. And this well appered in this hiſtory folowynge.
                  Vppon a certayne day whan one of the ſyſters of Ogines laboured
in the extreme panges of dethe: this bleſſyd woman Maria
beynge in hyr celle, ſe in ſpyryte a great multitude of deuylles about
the bed of the ſycke ſyſter. And as the couent dyd ſay cōmendacions
for the ſoule of the ſayd ſycke ſyſter, whō they thought to
haue be ded: this holy Mary (in a maner forgettynge hyr mylde
grauitie & ſad ſhamfaſtnes) ran with haſt vnto the bed of the ſicke
ſyſter
                        •
                      & ſtryuynge with thoſe wicked ſpirites, nat only dyd reſiſt
thē with hyr feruent prayers: but alſo dyd chaſe & dryue thē away
with hyr mantell or pall, as a man wolde chaſe away the flyes.
                  And whan theſe wycked ſpyrytes dyd terrybly reſyſt hyr, and alledgyd
reaſons for them yt this ſoule ſhuld perteyn to them: than
ſhe nat content with theyr importunitie, cryed and called vppon
Chriſte, & vppon the blood of Chriſte that he ſhed for mannes ſaluacion / 
& continually with a feruent mynde remembred the dethe
of Chriſte that he ſuffred for vs. And yet theſe woode raungynge
fendes, nat ceaſyng of theyr importunity, but euer buſy to deuour
this ſoule by many craftye and deceytfull reaſons: than this bleſſyd
woman Maris, conceyuynge in hyr ſoule a great truſt and
confidence in god by the grace of the holy gooſte.2. Corī. 3 A. (For as Paule
ſayth, where as is the ſpyryte of god) there is lyberty & great confidence)
ſhe I ſay, hauyng great truſt in god, ſayd with a free ſpirite
& great boldenes: Good lorde, I wyll be pledge & ſurety for
this ſoule. And thā furthwith the dāpned ſpirites fled & vtterly auoyded / 
and the good aūgels cam and toke the ſoule. And ſo this
bleſſyd woman gyuyng thankes to god, went to hyr owne cell / &
prayed for ye ſayd ſoule. And afterward as ſhe was ī deuout prayer
in ye day of ye feeſt of ſaint Peter & Paule for ye ſayd ſoule: ſaint
Peter appered to hyr, and ſhewed vnto hyr how the ſoule of the
foreſayd woman was in greuouſe paynes of purgatorye, for as
moche as ſhe in hyr lyfe had moche inordinat loue to ye world & to

the pleaſures therof, though at her dethe ſhe had very contricion
therof. And than this bleſſed woman, moued of pitie (as ſhe was
alwayes full of pitie, and ſpecyally towardes the ſoules in purgatory)
dyd praye moche feruently and deuoutely for that ſoule.
And nat content with hyr onely and owne prayers: requyred inſtantly,
and opteyned the prayers of many other deuout perſons / 
and alſo cauſed many maſſes to be ſayd for the ſayde ſoule, vnto
the tyme ſhe was delyuered from payne, and taken vnto ioye
and glory eternall. Many other examples of hyr pitie and compaſſion
ye may rede in the ſayde .xxxi. booke of the hyſtoryes of
Vincent.
               
               
                  ¶The gyfte of ſcience or knowledge is opteyned
by the feruent remembraunce of
the paſſyon of Chryſte.
The .x. Chapitre.
                  
                     THe gyfte alſo of ſcyence and kuowledge of ſpyrytuall
and godly thynges is gyuen to man by the continuall
and deuoute remembraunce of the paſſion of Chriſte / 
thorughe the whiche gyfte, man may duely and iuſtly
lyue in this wretched worlde, where as flouryſſhe many frowarde
and wycked perſons. And yet that man that hath this gyft
ſhall lyue godly, though he be amonges them / for he ſhall contynue
in his faythe, and defende it / and haue true compunction in
his herte. He ſhall abſteyne from euyll, and wyſely admynyſtre
or vſe theſe temporall goodes. He ſhall dyrecte and ordre all his
werkes to ryght reaſon / and applye his wyll to the wyll of god.
                  Or we may ſaye that this gyfte of ſcyence doeth teache vs to beholde
as in a mooſt pure glaſſe, all maner of contemplacion, and
all maner of pacyence. And that is, yf we take this gyfte knowledge
as a ſcience or knowledge of theſe inferior thynges, in that
that they be helpynge and inducynge to the contemplacion and
knowledge of ſpyrytuall and heuenly thynges. As be the knowledge
of our ſynnes that we haue done, of the benefytes that we
haue receyued of god, and of the paynes that we haue deſerued
for our ſynnes. For the fyrſte, that is for the knowledge of 
oure ſynnes,Hier. 2. D. it is ſayde by the prophete: Arguet te malicia tua,
& auerſio tua increpabit te ſcito. &c. Thy malyce and ſynne
ſhall reproue the / and thy tournynge frome god ſhall rebuke
the / therefore know thou and dilygently conſyder that it is bytter

and paynefull to the to haue forſaken thy lorde god / and to wante
his feare in the. This maner of ſcience is a very true knowledge
and moche neceſſarye for vs / that is to knowe our ſelfe, and ſo to
 meke, diſpiſe, or ſet lytle by our ſelfe. Of the ſeconde maner of
knowledge / that is of the benefites of god: I ſay vnto you that
amonges all the benefites that we receiuyd or dayly receyue, the
greateſt benefite of all other is the benefite of our redemption / in
the which our lorde hath ſhewed vnto vs a ſure argument or ꝓfe
of his infinit and ineſtimable loue / that was, whan he ſuffred the
mooſt ſhamefull and paynefull dethe for vs his enemies. This
argumente or profe doeth engendre and greatly encreaſe in vs a
knowledge moche pleaſaunte and alſo neceſſarye for vs. Of the
whiche knowledge ſaynt Paule ſayeth: Non enim iudicaui me aliquid
ſeire inter vos niſi Ieſum Chriſtum et hūc cruciſixum.
                     1. Cori. 2. A. I haue
iudged & thoughte in my ſelfe that I haue non other knowledge
amonges you, but the knowledge of Ieſu Chriſte crucified.
                  
                      The thyrd maner of knowledge that is of the paynes due for our
ſynnes, is alſo neceſſary for vs / & the profe or argument thereof / 
that is the knowledge of the paynes of hell or of purgatory: hath
ben reueled and ſhewed to many holy ſayntes. And thoſe paynes
of hell ben conteined in theſe two verſes folowynge.
                  
                     Sitis & eſuries, 
                           •
                        rigus, ignis, fetor, et horror. Tenebre, deſperantes,
victi, vermeſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         rodentes. That is: Thyrſte & hunger, colde, fyre,
ſtynche and vgſomnes or lotheſomnes. Darkenes, deſperacion,
ſubiection, and gnaſtynge or gnawynge wormes. Theſe thre maner
of ſciences with many other we may mooſt ſpecially fynde &
get in the meditacion of the paſſion of our lorde. And mooſt of all
we ſhall get moche knowledge: yf ye diligētly ſerche the fygures
of the olde law, correſpondynge or ſignifienge this ſayd paſſion
of our lorde. For there is innumerable treaſure hyd vnder thoſe
fygures, whiche may be founde with diligent ſerche. In ye which
fygures be hyd a meruelouſe ſwetenes of deuocion / all maner of
ſcyence and ſacietie or full contentacion of the ſoule for this lyfe.
                  For he that is crucified with Chriſte by the continuall & feruent
meditacion of his paſſion: ſhall ſe how theſe fygures & the ſcripture
of god do ſhyne in the ſayd paſſion / and ſo by the gyfte of ſcience
he ſhall be eleuate and lyfted vp vnto a meruelouſe ſwetenes
of deuocion, and vnto an high perfection of contemplacion / and
that on this maner. For fyrſte to ſuche a perſon that feruently remembreth
this paſſion, and depely ſercheth theſe figures, ſhall
appere how that the mooſt hygh goodnes of god the father hath

ordryd all thynges muche diligently vnto our profite. Secondly
it ſhal appere how the onely ſonne of god the father, our lord Ieſus
Chriſte: muche godly and faithfully hath ſhewed vnto vs all
thynges neceſſary vnto our helthe & ſaluacion. Nat onely by his
wordes: but alſo by his examples. Thirdly, it ſhall appere how
the paſſion of our ſauiour Ieſu was figured & ſignified from the
begynnyng of the world / as it clerely appereth in holy ſcripture.
What inwarde ioye & pleaſure ſhall this be (thynke you) to that
perſon that feareth theſe thinges & knoweth them? All theſe great
and meruelouſe thynges were done for vs. And to declare vnto
you how all theſe thynges do figure and ſignifie our ſauiour Ieſus
crucified: let vs begyn at the begynnynge of the Bible / and
ſo procede.Geneſ. 1. A. Fyrſt, where it is ſayd: In principio creauit deus celū
et terram. In the begynnyng god hath creat heuen & erthe. That
is to ſay: In his ſonne Ieſu crucified, god hathe reſtaured & repared
the nature of aungels / and the nature of man. It foloweth
Dixit deus:
                     Ibidem. 
                     Fiat lux, et facta eſt lux. God ſayd, I wyll that lyght
be made / and furthwith it was made. That is to ſaye / god wolde
that his ſonne Ieſus ſhulde be as a light, ſet vpon the croſſe / to expell
& put awaye all darkenes of ſynne / and it was don. And this
light alſo diuided the night from the day. That is, ſynne frō vertue
and grace. Alſo this light by his preſence, cauſeth the day of
grace and vertue. And by his abſence, it is nyght of ſynne. Alſo
Ieſus Chriſte crucified,Ibidem. was as the firmament in the middeſt of
the waters / diuidynge the waters of temporall and worldly conſolacion,
from the waters of eternall & ſpirituall conſolacion. Or
els diuidynge the waters of mannes wiſdom, from the waters of
godly wyſdome. Or diuidynge the waters of vice, from the waters
of grace. Or els diuidynge the waters of worldly tribulacion,
from the waters of heuenly conſolacion. In Ieſu alſo crucified,
were gaderyd to gyder all the waters that were vnder the
heuen / that is, he bare all our iniquities / and ſuffred payn for all
our ſynne: Therefore in hym were gadered to gyder all the waters / 
ſo that in hym was a great flode of tribulacions / that is, of
afflictions, diſpiſinges, and many other paynes. And ſo by his
grace & goodnes: was our etrhe made drye. For before his bleſſyd
paſſiō: we were worthely deputed to all paines & eternall tribulacions / 
but now we be deliuered from thoſe eternall paines
by the merytes of his mooſt holy paſſion. Alſo he was that great,
depe, large, & broode ſee, of the whiche ſpeaketh the Prophete Dauid / 
and that well appered in his paſſion.
                  
                     
Note well here, how clerely and manifeſtly theſe figures done
ſignifie our lordes paſſion. In lyke maner we may ſerche thrugh
the hole ſcripture / and take what ſo euer figure we wyll / thoughe
it appere very farre and diuerſe from this paſſion. And yet nat
withſtandynge we ſhal perceiue a meruelouſe correſpondence or
a concorde vnto this paſſion / whiche ſhall cauſe a ſwete melodie
in our ſoules / whereby our hertes ſhal be meruelouſly conforted / 
and it ſhal make vs to entre into the contemplacion of god & godly
ſcriptures / yf we diligently ſerche theſe figures.Gene. 18. A Let vs conſider
the figure, whan Abraham prepared a fat calfe and mooſt tender / 
and gaue it vnto the thre aungels that cam to hym / that they
ſhulde eate and fede thereof. This figure in the vtter apparence
of the letter, ſemeth very baren and of litle fruite / but yet inwardly,
it conteineth great ſwetenes of contemplacion. In lyke maner
this ſayenge:Gene. 2. B. 
                     Eſt lignum vite in medio paradiſi. There is the
tree of lyfe in the middle of paradiſe / that is, Chriſte hangynge
vpon the croſſe in the middle of the chyrche / or Chriſte in the vyrgyn
wombe / whiche vyrgyn is as a paradiſe of pleaſure. Alſo
this figure:Ibidem. 
                     Eluuius egrediebatur de loco voluptatis. A flode or ryuer
ranne out of the place of pleaſure / that is, the flode or ryuer of
mercy and grace from the ſyde of Chriſte. And ſo the foreſayd fygure
that Abraham dyd gyue that mooſte tender calfe to the thre
men to eate: doeth ſignifie that god the father of heuyn, dyd giue
his onely begotten ſonne, mooſt tender and mooſt innocent, and
full of all vertues and grace, to the dethe of the croſſe for our ſynnes.
And that thre men dyd fede therof, doeth ſignifie that the holy
trinitie, the father, the ſonne, and the holy gooſt were fed and
ſatiſfied for our tranſgreſſion by the paſſion of Chriſte: whiche
before that paſſion were hungry and redy to take vengeaunce / &
to punyſſhe vs for our ſynnes. And here now we may ſe the great
ſwetenes and pleaſaunt confort of this figure. Here by Abraham
is vnderſtanded god the father / and by the mooſt tender calfe, is
ſignified the ſonne of god / and by theſe thre men, is ſignified the
holy trinitie / and yet the father and the ſonne be nat dyuers goddes:
but one god. For though they be diſtincte perſons, and eche
of them is god: yet the thre perſones ben but one god in trinitie
of perſones. And ſo I ſay, in this figure appereth the meruelouſe
and ineſtimable ſwetenes that is gyuen vnto the ſoule that diligently
ſercheth this figure. For where as god in hym ſelfe was
hungry and deſirouſe to do iuſtice vpon vs for our ſynnes: he of
his infinite benignitie and goodnes, dyd and ſhewed that iuſtice

into hym ſelfe, or vpon hym ſelfe / for els ſurely that iudgement of
iuſtice had deuoured & diſtroyed vs / yf it had fallen vpon vs / for
there was no pure man that might ſaciate and ſatiſfie that hūgry
appetite of god: but onely the ſonne of god and man / that mooſt
tender calfe, whom god the father dyd make redy to meate. That
is, he put hym to ſuffre all affliction, diſpiſinges, mockes, beatynges,
and mooſt cruell dethe: to ſatiſfie his hungry appetite / 
for the great iniury and inobedience that we dyd vnto god. What
is that? Bicauſe we offended hym: ſhuld he ſo iudge & condēpne
him ſelf / & ſo ſuffre paine for our ſynne? He was offended by vs / &
that nat withſtandyng, he was iudged by vs, in vs, and for vs.
And ſo Chriſte, beynge one perſon in two natures / that is, bothe
god and man. He was offended in his godly nature, as god / and
iudged or condempned for our ſynnes in his manhode: So that
the godhede was offended / and he in his manhode ſuffered. And
bycauſe in one perſone he was bothe god and man: therefore we
may truely ſay that we dyd offende hym / and yet he ſuffred for vs / 
and ſo he was bothe offended, and alſo iudged and condempned.
And that is more to be marueiled / after the dethe of this calfe / the
ſonne of god, where as we were worthy to want all his confort &
goodnes / for aſmuche as we had condempned hym and put hym
to moſt ſhamefull dethe: this mooſt benigne and mercifull lorde,
forgettynge in a maner the tyme paſt, & alſo all our malyce, dyd
conforte vs and dayly doeth with his manifolde graces. We dyd
euyll to hym, and he doeth good to vs. We ſlew hym, and he gyueth
ſpirituall lyfe to vs. We put hym to the dethe, and gyueth to
vs hym ſelfe to our ſpirituall foode. Herein we may ſe the great
merueiles of god hyd and couered in the holy ſcripture. Here in
this calfe of Abraham we may receiue meruelous refection of ſpirituall
ſcience, if we ſerche diligently the ſame. And ſo in like maner
of many other figures in holy ſcripture. wherein the ſoule &
mynde of man ought to be eleuate and lyfted vp by this gyfte of
ſcience / and knowledge of ſuche figures, correſpondynge or ſignifienge
the mooſt bleſſyd paſſion of our ſauioure Ieſu Chriſte / 
that by the feruent remembrance of the ſayd paſſion he myght entre
into theſe moſt depe treaſures of the goodnes of god / vnto the
tyme that ſoule or mynde be depely entred into Chriſte crucified / 
and in a maner abſorpte & drowned thrugh or in the feruent loue
of Chriſte crucified. And than that ſoule ſhall receiue the gyfte of
ſcience / & know how to order his werkes accordyngly vnto right
reaſon / and applie hym ſelfe vnto the conformitie of Chriſte. And

this is it that we ſayd in the begynnynge of this chapiter / that the
gyfte of ſcience moueth a man to lyue iuſtly & truely in this wretched
worlde / where as flouryſſhe many froward and wicked perſones / 
and amonges them to defende his faithe / and to haue true
compunction in his hert. The ſpirite of ſcience or knowledge is
for that intent gyuen vnto man, that that ſpirite, enterynge into
the herte or ſoule of man: ſhulde inſtruct hym in thynges neceſſary
for his ſaluacion / and ſhulde moue hym to true compunction &
ſorow for his offences / that man ſhulde know, that what ſo euer
payne or tribulacion he hath: it is for his ſynnes / and if he be pacient:
for his great profite. And what ſo euer goodnes he hathe:
it is of the mercy and grace of god. And ſo thereby he ſhulde lerne
to be euer ſubiect to god / and to praiſe hym in all werkes / & neuer
to murmure againſt hym: but in all thynges and at all tymes to
ſhew mekenes and pacience / and euer confeſſe god to be iuſt and
true in all his werkes / and ſo folow thexample of Chriſte, which
is the myrroure of pacience / and alſo the rewarde eternall of the
true and meke pacie
                        •
                     t. Moreouer, by the true compunction of
herte (whiche ſpringeth of mekenes thrugh thoperacion and help
of this godly ſcience) is ſwaged the wrathe & indignacion of the
mynde. And contrary wayes / wrathe doeth ouercum and ſpiritually
ſlee the vnwiſe perſon that wanteth this gyfte of ſcyence. As
whan in aduerſitie he is moued or ſtyred / and alſo blynded by the
vice of impacience / in ſo muche that he doeth nat know that ſuche
paines and tribulacions as he ſuffereth: cummeth to hym by his
owne demerites and ſynnes. Or els whan he is lyfted vp in proſperitie / 
he is ſo blinded by pryde / that he will nat know how that
all the goodnes that he hath, cummeth of god. And lyke as we
ſe in daily experience, that after rayne cummeth fayre wedder: ſo
after the vertue of true compunction and ſorowe for our ſynnes,
foloweth the rewarde of conſolacion. For who ſo euer wyll freely
punyſſh hym ſelfe in this lyfe for the loue of god: he ſhall fynde
hereafter a true ioye and gladnes without ende. And therfore our
ſauiour ſayth:Math. 5. A 
                     Bea
                           •
                        i qui lugent, quoniam conſolabuntur. Bleſſed
be they that wepe and mourne in this lyfe for the loue of god: for
they ſhall be conforted. And this is the thyrde beatitude / whiche
correſpondeth to the gyfte of ſcience.Li. 1. de ſer. 
                           〈◊〉
                         in monte. C. For as ſaynt Auſtin ſayeth / 
ſcience is accordynge to mourners. Right iudgement of creatures / 
or to iudge truely of creatures: perteineth vnto the gyfte of
ſcience. For oftymes men, thrugh thoccaſion of creatures, turne
them ſelfe from god, and ſo commyt greuouſe ſynne / as the wyſe

man ſayeth:Sapi. 14. B 
                     Creature facte ſunt in odium, & muſcipulam pedibus
inſipientium. Creatures made of mā to the ſeruice of god / thrugh
the ſynne of man, ben made to the hatred of man / and as a trap or
a ſnare to the fete of vnwiſe men / for aſmuche as ſuche men, wantynge
right iudgemente and knowledge of the creatures, do put
theyr full confidence and truſt in them / whiche they ſhulde haue &
put in god / and ſo conſequently they do ſynne and leſe the true &
infinite goodnes. And this great damage of man, is made knowen
to man by the right iudgement of creatures / whiche he hath
by this gyfte of ſcience. And therefore co
                        •
                     ueni
                        ••
                     tly is the beatitude
of mournynge aſſigned to reaunſwere vnto the gyfte of ſcience.
Whiche graunt vnto vs that mooſt tender calfe that hynge
vpon the croſſe for vs. Amen.
               
               
                  ¶An example of this gyfte of the ſpirite of
ſcience. Chapitre .xi.
                  
                     OF this gifte of diſcrecion and of ſcience, we may haue
example in the foreſayde bleſſed woman Maria de
Ogines.Li. 31. ca. 3
                           •
                        
                      Of whō it is wryten in ye hiſtories of Vincent / 
as foloweth. For aſmuche as to this bleſſed woman
(in auoidyng all euill by the ſpirite of the feare
of god / & in doynge good by the ſpirite of pitie) was alſo neceſſary
a warenes & a circumſpection of diſcretion / therefore almighty
god,1. Ioh. 2. 
                           •
                        
                      the father of light and knowledge / whoſe vnction and ſpirite
teacheth vs in all thynges neceſſary, dyd illuminate & lyghten
his doughter Marie with the ſpirite of godly ſcience. (And
that without doubt was thrugh her continuall and feruent remē
                     braunce
of Chriſtes paſſion). God I ſayde gaue to her the gyfte
of knowlege / that thereby ſhe might know what was to be done / 
and whā / and what was to be auoided / and that all her ſacr
                        •
                     fices
and paines taken for god, ſhe might order with diſcrecion. For
oftymes vice wyll ſhew hym ſelfe to be vertue / and euyll oftymes
is taken vnder the colour of goodnes. And whan we wold auoide
one vice: oftimes we fall into the contrary vice / and therfore this
ſpirite of godly knowledge is neceſſary for vs. Sumtyme this
bleſſed woman whan ſhe was made one ſpirite with god, & was
ioyned vnto hym with the glew of feruent loue to hyr great pleaſure
and ſwetenes. If ſhe herde of the cummynge of ſtraungers
to ſpeke with her: ſhe wold (I ſay ſumtyme) with great violence
withdrawe her ſelfe from that great pleaſure of contemplacion / 

from the ſwete halſynges of her ſpouſe Chriſt, leſſe that ſhe ſhuld
ſlaundre thoſe ſtraungers. I ſay ſhe wolde withdraw her mynde
from that contemplacion with ſo great vehemence of ſorow, that
ſumtyme ſhe voyded or ſpytted pure blood / & that in great quantitie,
to her great payne and affliction. Wyllyng rather ſo to puniſſhe
her ſelfe with that great martyrdom, than to trouble or vnquyet
the peace and quyetnes of her ſyſteren and bretheren / and
ſpecyally of pylgrymes or ſtraūgers. Yet ſūtyme whan ſhe knew
(thrughe the reuelacion of the holy gooſt) the cummynge of ſum
ſtraungers: a good tyme before they cam, ſhe wolde go pryuely
into the feldes or woodes nygh vnto her cell, and there wolde ſhe
hyde her ſelfe, that vnneth or ſcarcely hyr owne company myght
fynde her, all thoughe they ſearched for hyr all the daye. And
ſumtyme contrarye wayes, whan ſhe was in ſlepe, yf there cam
to hyr pore and ſymple perſons for theyr neceſſitie or conforte, ſhe
was ſodaynly awaked and compellyd to ryſe, onely by thoperacion
and mouynge of the holy gooſt, whiche than ſayd vnto hyr:
Spede the, there is one that abydeth for the to ſpeke with the / nat
for any curioſitie: but for very neceſſitie. Moreouer though this
bleſſyd woman with a meruelouſe diſcrecion kept alwayes peace
with hyr neighbours, and nat onely with them that were good &
vertuouſe: but alſo with them that appered nat ſo vertuouſe: yet
towardes hyr ſelfe ſhe was meruelouſly vndiſcrete / moche abiectynge
and diſpiſynge hyr ſelfe / and (as it ſemed to hyr company)
punyſſhynge hyr ſelfe ſumtyme aboue meaſure. But certeynly,
ſo moche the more ſhe was dyſcrete to hyr ſelfe: for as moche as
ſhe dyd nat preſume to do any thynge vnto hyr ſelfe, but as ſhe
was famylyarely taught
                        •
                     of the holy gooſt. For ſhe durſt nat abſteyne
one hole day from her refection: except that ſhe were moſt
ſurely rauyſſhed & rapte vp aboue hyr ſelfe, and from all hyr ſenſys.
And yet ſumtyme whan ſhe was rapte, ſhe dyd attempte and
proue to take hyr refection, to auoide thoccaſion and murmure
of other perſons that were in hyr company, but in no meanes ſhe
myght receyue it into hyr ſtomack / and for payne therof, ſhe was
ſumtyme almooſt ouercum. And therfore afterwarde ſhe had that
lyberty to abſteyne whan ſhe wold, and non occaſion taken therof / 
nor any man durſt aſke of her,Ibid. ca. 37 why ſhe dyd ſo. Alſo oftentymes
whan the preeſt lyfted vp the bleſſyd ſacrament of the body of our
lorde aboue his hed: ſhe ſe bytwyxte the handes of the preeſt, the
forme and ſhap of a mooſt fayre chylde. Alſo ſhe ſe a great multitude
of aungels / deſcendyng from heuyn with a great lyght. And

after the vſynge or receyuynge of the ſacrament, ſhe ſe in ſpirite
our lorde remaynynge in the ſoule of the preſte, and lyghtenynge
it with a meruelouſe clerenes. Or els, yf the preeſt receyuyd the
body of our lorde vnworthely, ſhe ſe than our lord departed from
that ſoule with indignacion, leuynge it in a great darkenes, and
voyde of all goodnes.
               
               
                  ¶The gyfte of ſtrengthe is gyuen to man by the
feruent remembraunce of Chriſtes paſſion.
The .xii. Chapitre.
                  
                     BY the deuoute and ofte remembraunce of the paſſion
of our lorde, is alſo gyuen vnto man the gyft of goſtly
ſtrength agaynſte our ſpyrytuall enemies and the
multitude of temptacions. And by this gyfte, inordinate
feare is put away. Hardy and inordynate boldnes
is reduced to a due meaſure / and all aduerſities ben ſtrongly
borne & ſuffred. For who ſo euer be crucified with Chriſte thrugh
the feruent remembraunce of his bleſſyd paſſion▪ is animated and
ſtrengthed to entrepryſe great and harde thynges / to contempne
and ſet at nought all worldly pleaſures / to ſuffre paciently and
gladly all tribulacions, and to expugne or ouercum all vyces.
                  That faythefull ſeruaunt whiche doeth
                        •
                     feruently remembre his
lordes paſſion, and to whom his lorde hathe gyuen many graces,
that perſon I ſay doeth conſydre and ſe the meruelouſe and
incomprehenſible ſtrengthe of Chriſte in his interpryſyng great
battels, in his ſufferaunce, and in the vanqueſſhynge or ſubduynge
of the deuyll. I ſay in his entrepryſynge of great and harde
thynges / for he faught great and terryble battelles for the ſaluacion
of his enemy, vnkynde man. Alſo the meruelouſe ſtrengthe
of Chriſte doeth appere in his pacience, where as he ſuffred moſt
obprobriouſe, ſharpe, and greuouſe tourmentes / and that of his
creatures. And thyrdely his incomprehenſible ſtrengthe was ſhewed
in ſubduynge ſo myghty and ſtrong a lorde (or rather I may
ſaye a tyraunte / the deuyll that vſurped the dominion ouer all the
worlde / whome our lorde by the dethe of the croſſe ſtrongely dyd
ouercum / and ſo by his dethe deſtrued the autor and cauſe of deth.
Theſe thynges well conſidered, it is no maruell yf the faythefull
knyght of Chriſte, and folower of his lorde, moued by theſe examples
of Chriſte, entrepryſe and go
                        •
                      aboute to do great and harde
thynges. And the more harde, vyle or paynefull the thynges be,

the more gladly, diligently, and more feruently wyll he attempte
them. And that ſpecyally yf it be to the laude and honour of god,
and the helthe & conforte of ſoules. For than there can be nothyng
to harde, to vyle, nor to paynfull for hym to do or ſuffre for god / 
whiche dyd ſo great thynges for hym ſo vyle a wretche. Yea alſo
he thynketh all thynges (though they be neuer ſo paynefull) to be
ſwete, pleaſaunt, delectable, commendable, and moche to be deſyred:
yf thereby he may be aſſimulate or made lyke vnto the mooſt
ſhamefull and paynefull dethe of Chriſte his lorde god. Thoſe
thynges this faythfull ſeruant doeth more gladly, in thoſe he occupieth
hym ſelfe more aiudiouſly, thoſe thynges he ſercheth and
oft remembreth / thoſe he deſyreth to fulfyll with a feruent mynde / 
nat grudgynge nor ſayenge, why put you me to this vyle offyce,
to this ſhame, to this labour and payne? But rather thynkynge,
why ſhal I nat do theſe thynges with a glad mynde? Nor he doeth
nat repute or thynke hym ſelfe to be of any reputacion for that
he ſerueth god: but he thynketh it a greate thynge, that it wolde
pleaſe almighty god of his onely goodnes to accept vnto his ſeruyce
ſo vyle, vnworthy, and mooſt myſerable wretche as he is.
                  Wherefore in all theſe thynges, his herte is onely pleaſed in that,
that he may be conformable to his lorde god, and that he doeth folow
hym in ſufferaunce of troubles, as moche as he may for hys
frailtie. And that he ſuffreth: he knowledgeth it to be for his ſynnes.
And all his ioye is, that his lorde is honoured by his glad pacience
and ſufferaunce of tribulacions. This faythfull ſeruaunte
hathe ſo ſtrongly ſubdued and tyed his appetyte vnder the yocke
and captiuitie of ryght reaſon: that it ſhall nat haue his wanton
pleaſure in any carnall or worldly deſyre / nor yet in any vayne or
vnprofytable thynge. Alſo he kepeth his herte with all diligence
as a caſtell of greate ſtrengthe / ſo that he wyll nat ſuffre any ſynfull
thought to reſt therein / nor yet any vayne or vnfruitfull imaginacions
to wandre therein. He is euer thynkynge or conſiderynge
thoſe thynges that ben ſpyrytuall and godly, or inducyng
vnto god / & with great ioye he deſyreth thoſe thinges / & feruently
laboureth to bryng them to effect. But for as moche as in this lyfe
euermore or for the mooſt parte the chaffe is myxt with the corne:
therfore this faythfull ſeruant taketh the rydell or wyndoſe of diſcrecion
in his hande, and ſo wyndeth and purgeth the chaffe from
the corne: in the doore of his herte. He taketh into his hande the
burnynge and ſharpe ſwerde to kepe diligently his herte, as the
paradyſe of god / ſo that what ſo euer in his herte deſyreth to eate

of the tree of lyfe (that is, all ſuche thoughtes as be godlye,
ſpirituall, and lyuely) ſuche he diligentely doeth cheryſſh and
nouryſſhe. And yf any thoughte do onely loke vnto the fruyte
forboden / that is to any thynge contrary to the commaundementes
or pleaſure of god: ſuche thoughtes he wyll ſhortely expell
frome his herte / ſo that they ſhall haue no pleaſaunt abydynge
there. The dyſceytfull ſerpent ſhall haue none entraunce into
that herte. Ne yet the flatterynge perſuacion of the woman.
                  And yf peraduenture he perceyue any ſuche appere in his herte:
anon he wyll remoue it wyth indignacion and ſharpe rebukes / 
for there onely bene nouryſſhed manly / godlye / and vertuouſe
thoughtes. And therefore ſuche a perſone that is thus puryfyed
in ſoule and bodye: may trewly order hym ſelfe to the contemplacyon
of god. For he neuer lyfteth vppe his ſyght or iyes vnto
vayne thynges. Ne hys eares to heare noyſome or vnprofytable
thynges. Nor hys noſe to ſmell ſwete odours nor ſmelles.
Nor hys mouthe, to taſte delycate thynges. Ne yet hys touchynge,
to feele ſofte thynges / and that inordynately: But with
all dylygence he kepeth hym ſelfe bothe inwardely and outwardly / 
ſo that nowe he ſhoulde nat be called a ſeruaunte or bounde:
but rather a lorde and free. For he hathe domynyon ouer hym
ſelfe by ſubdewynge of all inordynate and ſenſuall appetytes / 
as muche as a man may haue lordeſhyppe ouer hym ſelfe in thys
lyfe. And ſo (I ſay) ſuche a perſone for his puritie, is mooſte
apte to receyue the godlye influencys and ſpyrytuall illuſtracions.
For the ſonne of Iuſtyce doeth inhabyte ſuche a pure and
clene ſoule, ſhynynge in euery corner thereof / and lyghtenynge
the inwarde partes of the ſame. That is, the thre powers of the
ſoule / ſo that he may do all thynges neceſſarye for his ſaluacion
by the power of the father almyghty. He knoweth all thynges,
by the wyſdome of the ſonne our ſauyoure Chriſte Ieſus / and
wyll all goodthynges, by the goodnes of the hooly gooſte.
                  Theſe be the thre manſyons or tabernacles that god maketh in
the ſoule of the iuſte and pure perſone / for there he fyndeth nothynge
that ſhulde let or reſyſte contrarye to hym. And ſo
our lorde doeth ſhyne ſo longe in that ſoule: vnto ſuche tyme
that ſoule thorughe that bryghte lyghte and clearenes be abſorpte / 
and (in a maner) as it were drowned or ſwalowed vppe
into god. And than the ſoule ſo rauyſſhed and lyfted vp aboue
it ſelfe:Pſalm. 
                           •
                        38. doeth entre in to the godlye clowde / after thys maner
cryenge and ſayenge thus. Et nox illumininatio mea in delitiis

meis. This nyghte or clowde is my lyghte, to my great conforte
and pleaſure. And thus ye may ſe that the ſoule by the gyfte
or ſpyryte of ſtrengthe is lyfted vp aboue all feare of perylles of
our enemies / it feareth nothynge but ſynne that diſpleaſeth god / 
it is nat ſubdued to any paſſion / and is redy to excercyſe all werkes
of ſtrengthe. It is nat ouercum by any (conflyete or battell
in temptacion. And all this is opteyned and gotten by the continuall
and feruent remembraunce of Chriſtes paſſion. And here
vnto ſaynt Paule ſayeth:Ephe. 6. B. 
                     Confortamini in domino, et in potentia
virtutis eius. Ye be conforted in our lorde, and in the power of his
vertue / that is in his paſſion where as his great power and vertue
was ſhewed,Pſalm. 67. Alſo the prophet Dauid ſayeth: Ipſe dabit virtutem
et fortitudinē plebi ſue. He ſhal giue vertue, power, & ſtrength
to his people. And by his power we haue the vyctorye oure ouer
enemies / as ſaynt Paule ſayeth:1. corī. 15. G 
                     Deo gratias qui fecit nos vincere
per dominum noſtrum Ieſum Chriſtum. Thankes and prayſynges
be to god that hath gyuen to vs the vyctory ouer all our enemies,
by the merytes of our lorde Ieſus Chriſte. And in an other place
ſaint Paule ſayeth thus:Ephe. 6. B. 
                     Indu
                           •
                        te vos armatura dei, vt poſſitis ſtare
aduerſus in
                           •
                        idias diaboli. Put vpon you the armoure of god, that
ye may ſtande ſtrongly agaynſt the diſceites and pryuy aſſautes
of the deuyll. Theſe be the armours of god: and alſo vnder hym
our armoure. Let vs take his crowne of thorne, for our ſalet or
helmet. For our ſwerde, the nayles of his handes. For our ſpurres,
the nayles that perſed his fete. For our Iacke or haubergyn,
the betynges of his body with ſcourges. For our ſheld, the croſſe
as our lorde bare it to the mounte of Caluary. For our horſe, the
ſame croſſe / as Chriſte dyd hynge and dye thereon. With this armoure
we ſhall ouercum the deuyll / for thereunto we ſhall haue
ſtrength thrugh the feruent meditacion of the paſſion of Chriſte.
To this gyfte of gooſtly ſtrength, correſpondeth the fourthe beatitude / 
that is:Math. 5. A. Li. 1. de ſer. d
                           •
                        i in monte. C. 
                     Beati qui eſuriunt et ſitiunt iuſtitiam. Bleſſed be
they that hunger and thyrſte iuſtice. For as ſaynt Auſtyn ſayeth:
Strengthe is conuenient to them that hunger and thyrſt iuſtice.
for they labour diligently deſyrynge to haue ioye and pleaſure in
and of thynges that be very good / and alſo labourynge to tourne
theyr loue from all worldly and vayne thynges. And this conueniency
doeth alſo appere in that, that this gyfte of ſtrengthe conſyſteth
and ſtandeth in harde thinges & of great difficulty (as we
ſayde before). It is a greate and an harde thynge that a man
ſhuld nat only do vertuouſe werkes which comonly bē called the

werkes of iuſtice: but alſo that he ſhulde do them with a feruent,
and (in a maner) an inſaciable deſyre of iuſtyce / whiche is ſignified
by this hungre and thyrſt of iuſtice.
                  To this gyfte alſo of gooſtly ſtrength, correſpondeth and accordeth
amonges the fruites of the ſpyryte, theſe two fruites. Pacience,
whiche concerneth the ſufferaunce of euyll or payne. And
longanimitie, whiche conſyſteth in the taryenge or continuall abydynge
for the good promyſes of god / that is eternall glory, the
rewarde of vertuouſe werkes. And ſo this ſpyryte of ſtrength is
gyuen to man, that it ſhulde aryſe and lyfte vp the tedyouſe & wery
ſoule whiche was almooſt deiect & caſt downe by the dayly ſufferaunce
of euyll and paynes / and for beholdynge or abydynge of
the good promyſes of god. And this gyfte ſo doeth lyfte vp this
ſoule, that it (opteynynge his formar vertue and ſtrength) doeth
put away all ſuche dulnes & werynes, and alſo waxeth ſtronge to
the deſyre of inwarde ſwetenes / and ſo conſequently to the deſyre
of eternall pleaſure. Alſo this ſpyryte of ſtrength doeth cauſe in
mannes ſoule the hunger & deſyre of iuſtice / ſo that the ſoule here
in this lyfe feruently deſyryng the werkes of iuſtice, may herafter
be full ſaciate with conſolacion eternall for his rewarde. And to
this we ſayd before,Capitul. 2. huius part. that by thexample of the mekenes & pacience
of Chriſte in his paſſion, for the whiche he was exalted and had a
name aboue aboue all names / as ſaynt Paule ſayeth:Phill. 2. B. Men ſhuld
be prouoked and moued to the folowynge of Chriſte in corporall
paynes and afflictions. In ſubduynge all vyce & inordinate concupiſcencys
or deſyres. In hungerynge & thryſtynge the werkes
of iuſtice / and in hauynge dominion ouer all his appetytes / and
rewlyng them by ryght reaſon / that they ſo doynge, may be made
apte to the reparacion of thorder of the dominacions / aungels or
heuenly ſpyrytes ſo called.
               
               
                  ¶Example of this ſpyryte of ſtrengthe.
The .xiii. Chapytre.
                  VIncent in his hyſtories ſheweth an example of this gyfte
of ſtrengthe,Li. 31. ca. 3
                           •
                        
                      of the bleſſed woman Maria de Ogines / 
thus ſayenge: For as moche as it but lytle auayleth to auoyde
euyll by the ſpyryte of feare / and to do good by the ſpirite of
pitie / & thyrdely, by the ſpyryte of knowledge to haue diſcreciō in
all thynges / except alſo by ye ſpirite of ſtrength we reſyſt all euyll / 
& kepe our goodnes by pacience / and alſo by fyrme conſtancye &

ſtablenes perſeuer and ſo continue vnto the dethe / & ſo at lengthe
(by our long abydyng) receiue therernall rewarde promiſed vnto
vs / this (I ſay) our lord & father omnipotent conſideryng, dyd
open his infinit treaſures, & dyd adourne & beautifie his dere beloued
doughter Marie (no dout for hyr feruēt & continuall remē
                     braūce
of Chriſtes paſſion) with the fourth precyouſe ſtone / yt is,
with the gyfte of gooſtly ſtrengthe / & ſo dyd arme hyr agaynſt all
aduerſities or dartes of the enemy / that neither ſhe was deiecte &
caſt downe by any trouble or aduerſitie: nor yet lyfte vp in pryde
by any falſe & flatterynge proſperitie. One tyme whan ſhe was
greuouſly vexed with the paraliſie or palſey / in ſo moche that for
great payn ſhe was conſtreyned to crye & knocke vpon hyr breſt:
there was one of hyr familiar frendes, a deuout perſon in a ſecret
place nyghe / the whiche herynge and perceyuynge hyr greuouſe
paynes: with great compaſſion and deuocion prayed for hyr / and
ſhe by the ſpiryte of god, perceyuyng that by his prayers hyr paynes
were miniſſhed, ſayd vnto hyr ſeruynge mayd: Go & ſay vnto
that man, that he ceaſe of his prayers for me / for though by his
prayers myne infirmitie is releuyd: yet thereby I leſe the merit
                        •
                     
that I might haue by pacient ſufferaūce. An other tyme whan ſhe
was vexed with greuouſe paynes or troubles, there was one of
hyr deuout louers whiche ſecretly in his hert was very ſory and
heuy for hyr vexacion and grefe / the whiche ſhe knowynge by the
reuelacion of god: ſent hyr mayde vnto hym, ſayenge: Byd hym
ſorow no more for me. For ſhe was more greued or heuy for the
ſorowes of other perſones, than of hyr owne infirmities or troubles.
And nat onely by the ſpyryte of ſtrengthe ſhe had power to
reſyſte all aduerſaryes: but alſo to abſteyne for all carnall and
wanton deſyres. This blyſſed yonge woman had ſo ſubdued &
dried hyr body betwyxt the two trees of the croſſe / that is betwyxt
the remembraunce of the paſſion of Chriſte / and beryng hyr own
croſſe by continuall penaunce: that by many yeres byfore hyr
dethe, ſhe neuer felte the mocions of vnclennes fyrſt ſtyrynges in
hyr body. And thereby ſhe had a greate confydence or boldenes
to be in the cumpany of men / for ſhe of hyr abundaunt innocency
& pure ſimplicitte, ſuppoſed and thought that all other perſones
had ben as ſhe was. And therefore one tyme whan one of hyr
famylyare frendes of a feruente ſpyrytuall affection that he had
to hyr, dyd holde hyr faſte or wrynge hyr by the hande / thoughe
for his chaſte mynde he thoughte no ſynne: yet as a frayle man
thorughe ſuche touchynge, he felte a lytell pleaſure ſenſuall.
                  
                     
But ſhe nothynge felynge in hyr ſelfe, nor knowynge of his mocions:
herde a voyce from heuen, ſayenge in latyn thus: Noli me
tangere. Touche me nat. Yet ſhe knew nat what what thoſe wordes
ment or ſignified. For our lorde god very mercyfull and benygne,
hauynge compaſſion of our frailtie, wolde nat rebuke or
confounde that man in the preſence of that holy woman. Yet he
wold as a true and faythfull louer, kepe the chaſtitie of his frēde.
Than the bleſſed woman ſayd to that man: I herde a voice, ſayenge
Noli me tangere. But what it meaneth, I knowe nat. And
than that man conſyderynge the goodnes of god towardes hym,
made an honeſt excuſe, ſeyng that our lorde wolde nat confounde
hym openly / and ſo departed, gyuynge thankes to god, and kepte
hym ſelfe more warely afterwarde.
               
               
                  ¶The gyfte of councell is gyuen to man by the
remembraunce of Chriſtes paſſion.
The .xiiii. Chapitre.
                  
                     BY the feruente and contynuall remembraunce of the
paſſyon of Chriſte, is gyuen to man the ſpyryte and
gyfte of godly councell agaynſt our inaduertence and
neclygence. Whereby in this myſerable and daungerouſe
worlde we may beware of all perylles and daū
                     gers / 
we may entrepryſe and take on hande harde thynges / and
alſo do thynges of mooſt dyffyculty. For that perſone whiche is
crucyfyed with Chriſte thorughe the feruent meditacion of hys
gloryouſe paſſion, is ſtyred and rauyſſhed to do the werkes of ſupererogacion.
Whereunto he is nat bounde by the preceptys and
commaundementes of god / and thereunto he is lyfted vp, and louyngely
drawen by the ſpyryte of councell / on this maner folowynge.
Fyrſte he remembreth how oure lorde Ieſus Chriſte
was obedient to his father, and ſo continued vnto the dethe of the
croſſe / ſubdued vnto all vilitie, ſubiection, deriſion, and manyfolde
ſorowes and paynes for vs. And in all theſe, onely requyrynge
and ſerchynge his heuenly father honour and glorye / and
ſo at laſt, ſubdued to the moſt ſhamefull dethe for our redemptiō.
Secōdly he remēbreth how Chriſt, though he were always pore,
yet he was moſt pore whan he, 
                        •
                     poiled & robbed of all his clothes,
was put naked vppon the croſſe for our ſynnes. And thyrdely

he remembreth how he that was mooſt ſwete, pleaſaunt, and ſolace
of aungels: was repleniſſhed & fylled with all bytternes, ſorow,
and payne whan he honge vpon the croſſe. This very true
vyn
                        ••
                      our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt, was oft tymes cut. Fyrſt in his
incarnacion, whan as he was in our nature made of leſſe perfection
than aungels / though by his godly nature: he was the creatour,
maker, and glory of aungels / and ſo was in a maner his glory
cut from hym with the knyfe or cultre of ignominie / for to the
fyghte of the worlde he was nat gloryouſe: but rather he appered
vyle and ignominiouſe. His power was cut with the cultre of derection.
His pleaſure, with the knyfe of ſorow. His rycheſſe, with
he knife of pouerty. And at laſt there was cut from hym with the
cultre of feare, all his frendes and acquaintaūce / ſo that of all his
dere louers, there was nat one man to conforte hym in his tribulacions.
And therefore the prophete ſayd in his perſon: Torcular
calcaui ſolus,
                     Eſay. 63. A 
                     & de gentibus non eſt vir mecum. I alone haue trodē
or laboured in the preſſe of tribulacion: & there was nat one man
that wolde conforte and helpe me. Alſo the prophete Dauyd ſayeth
in the perſon of Chriſte:Pſalm. 68. 
                     Improperium expectauit cor meum &
miſeriam, et ſuſtinui qui ſimul contriſtaretur, et non erat, et qui
conſolaretur: et non inueni. My herte hathe ſuſteyned and ſuffred
rebuke and myſery. And I loked yf that any man wolde ſuffre or
be heuy with me: and there was none. Alſo I loked yf that any
man wolde conforte me: & I founde non. Moreouer he in whom
was all treaſures of wyſdome and knowledge hyd / he that was
kynge of all kynges / and ſo ryche that he had no nede of any other
mannes goodes but of his pleantie gyueth to euery man: This
wyſe and ryche emperoure (I ſay) was made ſo pore, that there
myght none be founde more pore. No, nat amonges the foxes of
the erthe: ne yet amonges the byrdes of the ayre. And therfore he
ſayeth of hym ſelfe:Math. 8. C 
                     Vulpes foueas habent, et volucres celi nidos,
filius autem hominis non habet vbi caput ſuum reclinet. The foxes
haue theyr caues or dennes, & the byrdes of the ayre haue theyr
neſtys / but the ſon of a vyrgyn hath nat where to hyde or laye his
hede. He was pore in his natiuitie or byrthe: Porer in his lyfe,
or proceſſe of his lyfe. And mooſt pore vpon the croſſe at his deth.
At his byrthe he was fedde with the vyrgyns mylke, and lapped
in vyle or pore clothes. In the proceſſe of his lyfe he had pore clothynge.
But oft tymes he wanted meat & drynke for his neceſſary
ſuſtenaunce. But at his dethe thou ſhalt fynde hym naked and in
extreme thyrſte or dryenes / excepte thou ſay that he had vynegre

myxte with bytter myrre and gall to quenche his thyrſte. Theſe
thynges well conſydered, the ſoule of the perſon beholdynge and
depely remembrynge them: is ſhortely and eaſely perſuaded and
moued to folow our ſauiour Ieſu in lyke thynges / ſo that he may
now gladly withdraw him ſelfe from all worldly honours and deſyres
of the ſame / from all poſſeſſion of temporall goodes / & from
all corporall conſolacion and pleaſure / deſyrynge with his lorde
god all vylenes, abiection, and deriſion / and to ſuffre payn in all
his hole body / that thereby he myght in ſum thynge be made conformable
to his lord god, and ſo do to hym ſum thankfull ſeruice.
His appetite and deſyre is nat now to pleaſe men: but rather for
the loue and honour of his lorde god, to be mocked, ſcorned, deſpiſed,
and to be rather hated of them, than honoured. And therefore
all vayne prayſe and laudes gyuen to hym, ben abhominacion &
as ſtynkynge caryon vnto hym / for he onely requyreth and deſyreth
the laudes and prayſes of god. Vnto that, is all his ſtudy, labour,
& payne. That, he deſyreth with an vnſaciable thyrſt. In all
thynges he onely deſyreth thonour of god. Nothynge lokynge to
hym 
                        •
                     elfe, nor regardynge any thynge perteynynge to hym ſelfe,
ne yet wyll be bounde to do any thyng / but all to gyder with hert
and mynde lokynge vnto heuen, where as is mooſt his pleaſure.
And alſo he deſyreth that by his rebukes his lorde god myght be
honoured / greatly and continually deſyrynge thrughe this gyfte
of councell, bothe to be pore and alſo deſpyſed and abiecte for the
loue of god, for as muche as he perceiued bothe theſe to be in his
lorde god crucified. And truely he wolde now and euer be naked
with Chriſte vpon the croſſe / beynge very heuy or ſory yt he ſhuld
haue any thynge that myght helpe the pore / or els that perteyneth
to thonour of god. Therfore he, forſakynge all ſuperfluitie, vſeth
as few thynges as his neceſſitie wyll ſuffre hym / ſo that his pleaſure
is moche more ſet to deſpyſe and caſt awaye rycheſſe, than to
get or multyply it. And to ſpeke of corporall delectacions, conſolacions
and pleaſures: we may truely ſay, that from al theſe, and
alſo from all other conſolacion that is nat in god, of god, or for
god: he vtterly refuſeth them as moche as it is poſſyble for hym / 
euer aſkynge and deſyrynge to be ſaciate and fulfylled with bytternes,
ſorow, and payne or affliction with his lorde and mayſter
Chriſte. Wherfore, what ſo euer he perceyued to be pleaſaunt vnto
his bodye, or yet vnto his herte, by the whiche he may nat be
made conformable vnto the mooſt bleſſed woundes and paſſion
of Chriſte: that thynge he abhorreth / withdrawynge hym ſelfe

from all thynges (thrugh this gyfte of councell) wherein he ſeeth
any peryll or daunger lyke to cum to hym. And therfore he doeth
all thynges with greate deliberacion. And alſo thrughe the ſayde
gyfte of coūcell, he applyeth hym ſelfe to do all tho thynges wherby
thonour of god, ye charitie of his neighbour, & the helth of ſoules
may be in any thynge encreaſed. And for theſe cauſes he is ofte
tymes ſolitarie, depely conſiderynge the paſſion of Chriſte, therin
lerchynge the hygh honours of god, theternall ryches, and heuenly
pleaſures / that the deuout ſoule therin reſtynge, may haue
great ioye. Alſo thereby the bytter ſoule for the compaſſion of
Chriſtes paſſion, is made ſwete and pleaſaunte. And the mynde
eleuate and lyfted aboue it ſelfe: is made dronken or is drowned
in loue. And 
                        •
                     o the ſoule full of pleaſure and lenyng vpon hyr dere
beloued: reſtyth hoolly in hyr lorde god. And this is it that we
ſayd before, how thrugh the ſpyryte of councell we auoide all perylles
and daūgers / make our ſelfes ſure in the holes of the ſtone / 
that is in the woundes of Chriſte to entrepryſe great, herde, and
paynefull thynges / and alſo to excercyſe the werkes of ſupererogaciō / 
as is to loue our enemies, and to forgiue them for Chriſte / 
to gyue all our goodes to pore people for the loue of Chriſte / to
the which werkes don by the ſpiryte of coūcell, correſpondeth the
fyfte beatitude / of the whiche Chriſte ſayeth:Math. 5. A 
                     Beati miſericordes
quoniam ipſi miſericordiam conſequentur. Bleſſed be ye mercyfull / 
for they ſhall haue mercy.Li. 1. de ſer. 
                           〈◊〉
                         in monte. C. For as ſaynt Auſtyn ſayeth: Councell
is accordynge to mercyfull perſones / for there is but one remedy
or meane to be delyuered from all the perylles of this worlde / and
that is this / to forgyue and to gyue. Councell is properly and ſpecially
to be taken of theſe thynges that be to cum, and that be profytable
vnto our ende / that is, to do the werkes of mercy / whiche
mooſt of all correſponde or accorde to the gyfte of councell.
                  And therefore ſaynte Paule ſayeth:1. Timoth. 4. C. 
                     Pietas ad omnia vtilis eſt.
Pytye and mercye is profytable to all thynges. And thus ye
may perceyue that the beatitude of mercye correſpondeth to the
gyfte of councell. Nat that this gyfte of councell doeth produce
and brynge furthe the werkes of mercye as his effecte and operacion:
but that it dyrecteth and orderyth the doer and werker.
For the ſpyryte of councell is ſpecially gyuen to man, to that intent
that he ſhulde lerne therby to forgyue freely and gladly / and
alſo to ſhew mercy vnto thoſe perſons that haue offēdyd agaynſt
hym, knowynge that yf he ſo do: he ſhall fynde lyke mercy in our
lorde, in forgyuynge his ſynnes done agaynſt god / as our lorde

ſayeth in the goſpell.Mat. 6. B. And this is it that we ſpake before, that
men conſyderyng and beholdynge the vnſpekeable pitie & mercy
of our lorde, that he ſhewed whan he prayed for them that put him
to dethe: ſhulde be moued and ſtyrred to lyke pitie and mercy, &
ſo made apte to the reſtauracion of the order of aungelles, called
vertues. O ſayeth the prophete Dauid in the perſone of Chriſte:
Calix-meus inebrians quam peclarus eſt.
                     Pſalm. 22. That is, as the gloſe of
ſaynte Auſtyn ſayeth, the cuppe of the blood of our lorde whiche
inebritynge the mynde and makynge it dronken in god, doeth ſo
cure and heale it, that it maketh it forget all vayne delectacion &
pleaſure. This dronkennes maketh men ſobre. This fulnes and
plenteouſnes maketh men empty and voyde of euyll maners and
vyces. And therfore the prophete ſayeth, that it is preclarus / that
is moche worthy and noble. For beſyde the premiſſes, it bryngeth
a man to the kyngedom of heuens.
               
               
                  ¶Example of this ſpyryte and gyfte of councell.
The .xv. Chapitre.
                  
                     OF this gyfte of godly councell whiche is gyuen to
ſuche as feruently remembre the paſſion of Chriſte,
we may ſe an example in the forſayd bleſſed woman
Maria de Ogines,Li. 31. ca. 39 in the forſayd hiſtories of Vincent / 
whiche ſpeakynge of this holy woman, ſayeth
thus. She, endued with the ſpirite of councell, wold do nothyng
hedlynges, nothynge inordinately: but ſhe dyd all thynges diligently,
wyſely, diſcretely, and with great deliberacion. And all
though ſhe was inwardely vyſyted with the familiar councell of
the holy gooſt, and alſo ſufficiently inſtruct in the holy ſcripture
of god, and all by the feruente and continuall remembraunce of
the paſſion of Chriſte: yet for thabundaunt mekenes that was in
hyr, and that ſhe wolde nat truſt to moche to hyr owne wyt, and
ſo ſeme wiſe in hyr owne ſight: ſhe vtterly forſoke hyr owne wyll
and reaſon, and dyſdayned nat to ſubmyt hyr wyll freely & gladly
to the wyll and councell of other, takynge and folowyng theyr
mynde and councell. This nat withſtandynge, many of hyr famylyar
frendes the whiche had ofte experience of hyr godly wyſdom:
wolde take no great thynge vpon them without hyr councell.
And that ſhe coulde nat know by mannes wyt or reaſon: after
hyr deuout and feruent prayer, ſhe had the knowledge thereof
by the inſpiracion of god. One tyme whan one of hyr dere ſpirituall

frendes whiche had a competent pore lyuynge, wherewith
he was well content / & ſo moche the better content, for that he lyued
quyetly from the turmoiles & troubles of the world / abſtracte
and ſeparate from the cumpany of worldly people, and all worldly
pompe or vanitie. This perſon (I ſay) ſo content and ſeruyng
god in mekenes and deuoute ſpyryte▪ was deſyred of a noble and
great man to be with hym as his maiſter, inſtructour, and councellour / 
& he ſhulde haue all thynges plenteouſly at his pleaſure / 
as meate, drynke, rayment, horſe, and ſeruauntes. This perſon
(after this large offre made) aſked councel of this bleſſed womā
Mary what he ſhulde do. Than ſhe (in no thynge preſumynge of
hyr owne wyt) made hyr herty prayer to god ſecretely / and after
hyr deuoute prayers, ſhe aunſwered to hym and ſayde: I ſawe a
great horſe prepared for you / whiche went or ranne ſtreight way
towardes hell / & I dyd alſo ſe a greate company of deuylles ioyenge
and ſhewynge great gladnes thereof. Therefore after my
councell, forſake that offre and continue in that callyng that god
hathe called you vnto / leſſe by ſuche ambicion & worldly pompe,
ye gyue occaſion to the deuyll to drawe you further vnto youre
eterne perdicion.
               
               
                  ¶By the feruent remembraunce of the paſſion of Chriſte,
the gyfte of vnderſtandynge is gyuen to man.
The .xvi. Chapytre.
                  
                     THere is alſo gyuen vnto man (thrughe the feruent
and continuall remembraunce of the paſſion of our
lorde, the gyfte and ſpyryte of vnderſtandynge / 
wherby we know god / nat effēcially as he is in him
ſelfe: but by collacion & comparyſon vnto his creatures,
as by his effectes, operacions, & creatures / as
it were by ſygnes and tokens. Alſo by this gyfte we receyue a
lyght and knowledge of thoſe thynges which we ſe or here of the
ſcripture of god. And this knowledge is contrary to that brute &
ſenſuall knowledge wherby man onely knoweth and cleueth faſt
to theſe outwarde and vayne thynges / nothynge regardyng, conſyderynge,
or knowynge his owne honour & dignitie / for he onely
conſyderyth theſe viſyble and tranſitory thynges / and wyll nat
ſerche to rede or know inwarde thynges / that is, what he is / nat
in ſubſtaunce: but in grace. What is his lyuynge, vycyouſe or
vertuouſe. How great he is in merytes or in the fauour of god / &

where he is, that is in this exyle & vale of myſery. All theſe thynges
conſidereth the ſpirituall perſon / and that by the feruent meditacion
of Chriſtes paſſion. For he that is crucified with Chriſt
Ieſu by the remembraunce of his moſt bleſſed paſſion▪ doeth aſcende
vnto the clerenes of knowledge by the ſpyryte of vnderſtandynge / 
on this maner. Whan a man doeth feruently and deuoutly
remembre and conſyder how that the ſonne of god wolde ſuffre ſo
greate paynes for to redeme hym: anone he conſydereth of what
dignitie and noblenes his ſoule is / that it is of an excellēt & great
dignitie / ſeynge that the ſonne of god wolde ſuffre ſo ſhamefull a
dethe for the redemption therof. And by this conſideracion he is
animated and moued to conſyder and thynke of hyghe and noble
thynges. For whan he depely conſidereth that that mooſte precyouſe
blood of Ieſu Chriſte was ſhed to waſſhe his ſoule from the
fylthynes of ſynne / and alſo that by that mooſt bleſſed paſſion, the
ruyne and fall of aungels ſhulde be repared & reſtored with mankynde:
anon he dyſdayneth to remēbre or ones to thynke of theſe
vyle and tranſitorye thynges / but rather he is prouoked & moued
to beholde and conſydre ſpirituall and heuenly thynges. And yf
he conſydre or beholde theſe viſible thynges: it is for that intent
that therby he wolde aſcende to the cōſideracion of heuenly thynges / 
ſo that his cōuerſacion is principally in heuyn. And thā alſo
for aſmoche as he ſeeth Chriſte crucified and ſo ſubdued vnto manyfolde
tribulacions and paynes / he in this conſideracion, onely
wyllynge to pleaſe god: recounteth and thynketh all tribulaciōs
and paynes to be very lyght and eaſy for hym to beare. Remembrynge
alſo how moche Chriſte loued hym that wolde be ſo cruelly
and ſhamefully entreated and ſlayne for his redemption: he,
feruentely kyndeled in the loue of Chriſte, laboureth to entre in
that mooſt blyſſed ſyde and hert of Chriſte, whiche he knew was
opened with a ſpere for his loue. His ſoule is burnyng in loue as
a fyre. And therefore with all his herte he deſyreth to be crucified
with Chriſte. Hereunto he ſygheth and wepyth / and feruently deſyreth
that he myghte be all waſſhed or drowned in that paſſion / 
and ſo, hoolly to be tranſfourmed into his lorde god crucified.
                  He reputeth and thinketh hym ſelfe to be in bondage and myſery / 
except he be preſerued and kept by the blood of his redemer. He
iudgeth hym ſelfe to be rather more lyke a beeſte than a man: except
he be clad with his lordes paſſion. It is abhominacion to
hym to be negligent in the conſideracion and remembraunce of
ſo noble a benefite as is the mercyful werke of our redemption / 

and therfore he is euer, or at leeſt hath a wyll to be euer occupied
in the meditacion of the ſayd paſſion. For as he wold euer continue
in the fauoure of god, whiche he gate by that paſſion and redemption:
ſo he wold haue euer in his hert and mynde the paſſion
of Chriſte, the pryce of our redemption. He reputeth Chriſte
crucified, as his lyfe and all his confort or pleaſure / and therfore
he wolde be euer conuerſaunt with hym. O what ſorow, what
heuynes is it to that perſon whiche is inebriate and drowned in
the blood of Chriſte: yf he ſe his hert enclyned to any other thyng
thā to Chriſte crucified? Therfore ſuche a ꝑſon diſdeyneth to vſe
any other potion or drynk with pleaſure, but the blood of Chriſt / 
whiche hath waſſhed hym clene, & greatly beautified & made hym
like vnto Chriſt. He knoweth that thrugh the openyng of the ſyde
or hert of Chriſte, his ſoule is maryed vnto Chriſte / and therfore
he wyll euer ſtande nygh vnto that wounde / touchynge & felynge
his ſpouſe wounded for his loue / & ſo, he feruently deſyreth that
he myght be wounded in his herte / and therfore he oft tymes layeth
his herte vnto thoſe woundes by continuall remembraunce of
them / and alſo ioyneth & byndeth hym ſelfe vnto his ſpouſe woū
                     ded,
with the indiſſoluble and continuall or ſure bonde of charitie / 
for the woūdes of Chriſt be as a cellar of wynes new broched,
whereby our ſoules may be inebriate or made drunke in charitie.
And hereunto it is wrytten in the canticles:Cātic. 2. A. 
                     Introduxit me 
                           •
                        ex in
cellam vinariam, ordinauit in me charitatem. The kynge hathe
brought me into his wyne cellar / that is, into the feruent loue &
remembraunce of his woundes. He hathe made me drunke in his
loue and charitie.Cātic. 1. A. Alſo it is ſayd, Canticorum. 1. Introduxit me
rex in cellaria ſua. The kynge hathe brought me into his cellers.
There ſhall we ſucke hony out of the ſtone / and drynke the mooſt
pureſt blood of ye grape. Chriſte crucified is this ſtone / & alſo this
grape / whereof we all may plenteouſly drynke. And therefore he
ſayeth to his louers:Cātic. 5. A. 
                     Bibite amici, et inebriamini. Cum drynke
frendes hereof at your wyll / and be drunke thereof my mooſt dere
frendes. Alſo the ſpouſe Chriſte ſayeth to his ſpouſeſſe oure
ſoule:Cātic. 4. C. 
                     Vulneraſti cor meum ſoror mea ſponſa, vulneraſti cor meum.
Thou haſte wounded my hert for thy loue, my ſyſter, my ſpouſe / 
thou haſte wounded my hert.Ibidē. 2. A. ſermon. 70. And ſhe agayne wounded with his
loue, ſayeth in lyke maner: Vulnerata charitate ego ſum, ideo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         filis
Ieruſalem nunciate dilecto quia amore langueo. I am woūded
with charitie / and therfore ye doughters of Ieruſalem ſhew vnto
my dere beloued ſpouſe Chriſte that I languyſſhe and am ſyckeCātic. 5. C.
                     
for loue. And ſo the wounded ſpouſes is ioyned to Chriſte crucified
her wounded ſpouſe / and wounde is coupled to woūde / that
is loue to loue. And than alſo the columbyne blood of the ſpouſe / 
that is of Chriſte / whiche is ſymple as the downe / by the whiche
bloode our ſoule (the ſpouſeſſe of god) receyueth hyr ſpirituall
ſyght. This blood I ſay doeth flow into the woūdes of the ſpouſeſſe / 
whiche is ſo wounded by compaſſion that ſhe hathe of hyr
ſpouſe Chriſt crucified: that in a maner ſhe fainteth & ſwowneth
for ſorow / and mylteth or waxeth ſycke for the loue of his ſpouſe / 
and ſo than ſhe ſwetely reſteth in our ſauiuor Ieſu / where ſhe redeth
and ſeeth / vnderſtandeth and fyndeth what ſhe is / & of what
meryte or dignitye in the loue and fauour of god / for whoſe loue
the ſonne of god wolde ſuffre ſo great and greuouſe tourmentes.
Hereunto ſpeaketh ſaynte Bernarde: O good Ieſu / thou haſte
made thy body, as a glaſſe vnto my ſoule. That whiche thou dyd
ſuare openly: I ſuffred pryuely. That whiche thou ſuffred of the
miniſters of Cayphas openly: I ſuffred of the miniſters of wickednes
of Sathanas inwardely. Thy face was couered, and alſo
ſmyten or buffeted in the houſe of the prince of preſtes / and that
was to put away the confuſion of our ignoraunce and ſpirituall
blyndenes. We were ſumtyme darknes / that was before our baptiſme / 
but nowe we walke in the lyght that was ſet or hanged vp
on height vppon the aulter or candelſtycke of the croſſe / and from
thence ſhyneth very bryght vnto our conforte. And ſo Chriſte by
his paſſion doeth illuminate or lyghten our reaſon & vnderſtandynge.Apoc. 3. D.
This is the ointement, wherewith (as ſaynt Iohn̄ ſayeth)
our iyen ſhulde be anointed, that we myght ſe clerely. This
is alſo the rodde,1. Regū. 14. D. wherewith Ionathas toke of the hony and ate
thereof: and ſo his iyen were lyghtenyd. This is more ouer the
gall of the fyſſhe wherwith Thobie anointed his iyen:Thob. 6. B 11. C. and ſo receyued
his ſyght agayne. And ſo Longyne beynge blynde, and
waſſhed with the blood of Chriſte: receyued his ſyght, and was
alſo conuerted to the faythe. And ſo ye may perceyue howe the
paſſion of Chriſte doeth illuminate our vnderſtandyng, and gyueth
knowledge to meke perſons, faythfully and deuoutly remē
                     bryng
his paſſion. And this is thrugh the gyft of vnderſtandyng
to know god by his creatures / or in comparyng hym to his creatures / 
as we ſayd before. And alſo to be illuminat or lyghtened by
the wrytynges and ſaynges of prophetes in the maner of contemplacion
or knowledge of thoſe thynges that be wryten of our lord
Ieſu Chriſte / whereby man begynneth to retourne to his owne

ſelfe / for by this gyfte of vnderſtandynge, he recouereth his ſpirituall
ſyght / wherby he may ſe and know his owne honour and
dignitie / & ſo retourne to his lorde god and ſe hym as it is poſſible
for man in this lyfe. And therefore to this gyfte correſpondeth
the .vi. beatitude / that is, Beati mundo corde: quoniam ipſi deum
videbunt.
                     Mat. 5. A. Bleſſyd be the pure & clene in hert: for they ſhall ſe god.
And ſaynt Auſten ſayeth that the ſyxt operacion or gyft of the holy
gooſt / that is the gyfte of vnderſtandynge, is conuenient and
accordyng to them that be pure in hert. For they ſo clenſed & made
pure: may knowe & ſe that, whiche the corporall iye or ſyght can
nat ſe. And here note, that there be two maners of clennes of the
herte. One is as a diſpoſicion to the ſyght of god / which is a clenſyng
of the wyll or affecte from all mordinate affections / and this
clennes is made or goten by the gyftes and vertues that perteyn
to the wyll / comonly called Vis anime appetitiua. The deſyrouſe
power of the ſoule. There is an other clennes of the hert, which
is as a complete & perfyce clennes / whereby god is ſene. And this
is the clennes of the mynde or vnderſtandynge purified & clenſed
from all fantaſyes & errours / ſo that the ſoule ſo purified, perceyueth
the more clerely & truely thoſe thynges that be wryten or ſpoken
of god / & nat onely perceyueth them by corporall fantaſies, ne
yet vnderſtandeth them as the peruerſe and obſtinate heretykes
done declare them. And this clennes is opteyned or goten by the
gyfte of vnderſtandyng / wherunto correſpondeth (as I ſayd before)
the .vi. beatitude / that is, Bleſſyd be the clene in herte: for
they ſhall ſe god. And faythe or fidelitie / one of the fruytes of the
ſpyryt, accordeth alſo hereunto. And as ye ſe that the fruite of the
tree is the laſt thynge and mooſt delectable or pleaſaunt that we
haue of the fruitfull tree: ſo be the fruites of ye holy gooſt the moſt
pleaſaunt & delectable thynges that cummeth to man by the vertue
and operacion of the holy gooſte. And ſo the ſpirite of vnderſta
                        •
                     dynge,
cummynge to the ſoule of man thrugh the deuout and
ofte remembraunce of Chriſtes paſſion: clenſeth it and purifieth
the inwarde and ſpirituall ſyght of man / whiche was derked and
blynded by the ſynne of our fyrſt parent Adam / and alſo doth cure
and heale it with the knowledge of the worde of god / as it were
with an holſum ointement / and doeth make it ſo pure and lyghtſum,
that it is apte to receyue or to beholde the clearenes of the
deytie.Mat. 5. A. Clennes doeth ſprynge of the gyfte of vnderſtandynge.
And this clennes bryngeth in the viſion or ſyght of god / and therfore
Chriſte ſayeth: Bleſſyd be the clene in herte: for they ſhall ſe

And therfore we ſayd before, that by the truth expreſſed & declared
in the mooſt bleſſyd paſſion of Chriſte: men be illuminate thrugh
the feruent remēbraūce of the ſayd paſſion, vnto the knowledge
of the heuenly and godly truthes / that ſo they may be made apte
vnto the reparacion of thorder of Cherubyn. For man in his fyrſt
creacion was ſo made of god, that yf he had nat ſynned: he ſhulde
euer haue ben preſente in the contemplacion of his creatoure and
maker / that man, ſo ſeynge his lorde god: ſhulde euer haue louyd
hym / and ſo louynge hym: ſhulde euer haue cleued faſt vnto
hym. And in ſo cleuyng faſt to hym, whiche is immortall: he alſo
ſhuld haue had lyfe euerlaſtyngly. But man, for his inobedience,
was caſt from the face & fauour of god. And by his ſynne, he was
blynded with ignoraūce. And he was put from that inward light
of cōtemplacion / bycauſe he inclined his mynde & gaue it to erthly
deſyres. And the more depely he gaue hym ſelfe to the deſyre of
theſe vaine & tranſitory thynges: the more he forgat the ſwetenes
of heuenly deſyres, whoſe taſte and knowledge he had loſt by his
ſyn. And ſo he was exiled & baniſſhed from Paradiſe, for his ſynfull
conſcience / and wandred about here in this vale of miſery, by
inordinate concupiſcence. And alſo the hert of man whiche fyrſte,
fyxed in the loue of god, was than ſtable & permanēt, & in louyng
onely one thynge, that is god, was at all tymes one: after that it
began to ſlyde vnto vayne & worldly deſyres, it was diuided into
as many thinges, as thoo thinges that he deſyred were dyuers
& many. And ſo it foloweth conſequently, that yt mynde which can
nat or wyll nat loue yt one thyng, yt is very good & one in it ſelfe:
yt mynde (I ſay) can neuer be ſtable. For ye mynde, nat fyndyng the
ende of his deſyre & his purpoſe in thoſe thynges yt he loueth / & ſo
euer labouryng in vayne, & deſyryng that thyng which he can nat
opteyn: can neuer reſt ſtably & quietly. And herof foloweth continuall
mouyng without ſtabilitie, labour without reſt, runnyng
without any ende of his runnyng. And ſo the hert is euer vnquyet,
vnto the tyme it cleue faſt by loue vnto one thyng, in the which
his deſyre ſhall be ſaciate & fully content with pleaſure / and alſo
he ſhall haue a ſure confidence and truſt, that that thynge whiche
he ſo loueth, ſhall neuer be taken from hym / & this ſhalbe by our
lorde Ieſu Chriſte / whiche is the way,Ioh. 14. A. truthe and lyfe eternall.
                  And therfore he ſayth:Ioh. 12. E. 
                     Cum exaltatus fuero a terra omnia traham
ad meipſum. Whan I ſhalbe exalted vpon the croſſe: I ſhall draw
all my elect people to my ſelf. And this his eternall father promyſed
vnto hym by the prophet,Eſay. 43. A ſayenge: Ab oriente adducam ſemen

tuum. &c. That is, I ſhall brynge thy ſede and faythfull chyldren
or ſeruantes from the Eeſt, by one parte of the croſſe. And I ſhall
gader to the from the weſt, by an other arme or parte of the croſſe.
And I ſhall ſay vnto Northe: Gyue to my ſonne his ſeruauntes
by the thyrde parte of the croſſe. And I ſhall ſaye to the Southe
parte of the worlde: Let nat my ſonnes ſeruantes to cum to hym,
by the fourthe arme or parte of the croſſe. Brynge my ſonnes or
chyldren from farre cuntreys / and my doughters from thextreme
and vtttermooſt partes of the erthe.
               
               
                  ¶Example of this gyfte or ſpyryte of vnderſtandynge.
The .xvii. Chapytre
                  
                     OF this ſpirite of vnderſtandyng, whiche is oft tymes gyuen
to thoſe that deuoutly remēbre the paſſion of Chriſt:
we haue example in the ſayd hyſtoryes of Vincent,Li. 31. ca. 41 of the
ofte named holy woman Maria de Ogines. Of whome
he ſayeth thus▪ This bleſſyd doughter of Hieruſalem, adourned
by the feruent remēbraunce of Chriſtes paſſion with manyfolde
vertues, & illuſtrate or lyghtenyd with the foreſayd gyftes of the
holy gooſt, and alſo hyr herte purified & clenſed with the gyfte of
vnderſtandyng: ſhe was conuerſant in & with heuenly thynges.
For ſhe, vtterly excludynge from hyr hert all vayne, tranſitory, &
ſenſuall fātaſies: gat into hyr mynde vniforme, vnuariable, & heuenly
imaginaciōs. And the more ſhe apꝓched & drew nigh vnto
thimmutable maieſty of god: the more purely theſe heuenly imaginacions
ſhone in hyr ſoule. And whā hyr ſpirit ſo purified was
kyndled & burnynge in the fyre of feruent loue of god: ſhe aſcēded
into heuen by contemplacion, as the fume or ſmoke of inſence or
other ſwete ſpices doth aſcende / & ſo walkyng in heuen as it were
from place to place euer aſcendynge, ſought about to fynde hym
whom ſhe loued, god omnipotent. And ſo ſerchynge, ſhe was ſū
                     tyme
cōforted with ye lilies of vyrgins. Now refreſſhed with thodiferouſe
& ſwete ſmellyng roſes of the holy martyrs. And ſūtyme
ſhe is venerably or worſhipfully receiued of thonorable cūpany of
the ap
                        ••
                     les / & ſumtyme ſhe is aſſociate to the cūpany of aungels.
Whan ſhe had thus aſcendyd frō degree to degree, & walked with
ioyouſe & glad mynde thrughe many places of heuenly paradiſe:
whan ſhe was a lytle paſt all theſe cūpanies: ſhe foūde hym whō
hyr hert mooſt feruently deſyred / & there ſhe perfitely reſtyd. And
whan ſhe was in this quietnes: it pleaſed our lorde to ſhew vnto
hyr the boke of lyfe / wherin whan ſhe loked: ſhe perceyued many
thynges by the ſpirite of vnderſtandyng / whiche afterward whā
                     
ſhe was cum to hyr ſelfe, ſhe ſhewed by the ſpirit of prophecy. And
ſo vpō a tyme, whan the heretikes called Albigenſes were greatly
multiplied, thre yeres before that the people were marked with
the ſigne of the croſſe to go & fyght againſt them: ſhe ſayd that ſhe
ſe many croſſes deſcende from heuen vppon a great multitude of
people / whiche people moued of god, & feruent zele that they had
to our ſauiour crucified, & intendyng to reuenge the great diſhonour
of god, don by thoſe heretykes: cam frō farre cuntreys. And
whan they cam to a place called Mons gaudii, the mount of ioy:
there were many of theym ſlayne by the heretikes. And than this
blyſſed woman, though ſhe were in a farre cuntrey from yt place:
yet ſhe ſe holy aungels makynge great ioye, & bearynge the ſoules
of thoſe holy martyrs that were ſlayne in that battell, vnto heuyn,
without any other purgatorye. And ſo this bleſſyd woman
ſeynge this: conceyued ſo feruent deſyre to go vnto that place, yt
no thynge ſhulde haue withholde hyr frome that iourney: yf ſhe
myght haue gone without ſlaunder of hyr neighbours. And whā
we with ſmylynge countenaunce aſked of hyr, what ſhe wold do
if ſhe were there: ſhe anſwered & ſayd: Though I can nat fight:
yet at leeſt I wolde there honour & glorifie my lorde god, & there
confeſſe his name, where as thoſe wicked heretikes hath blaſphemyd
hym and denyed hym. Other examples ye may ſe in the ſayd
hiſtories. Ca. xlii.
               
               
                  ¶The gyfte of wyſdome is gyuen to man by
the deuout remembraunce of Chriſtes
paſſion. The .xviii. Chapitre.
                  
                     THere is alſo gyuen to man by the deuout and ofte
remembraunce of Chriſtes paſſion: the ſpyryte or
gyfte of godly wyſdom. Wherwith god is knowen
abſolutely without reſpecte vnto his creatures / or
els by experience. As whan we taſte of the ſwetenes
of god. And therefore Sapientia is nat onely
called a knowledge: but it is a ſauoury knowlege, thrughe the
taſte of vertues. And this gyfte is gyuen to man, agaynſte all
chyldely or vayne knowledge or pleaſure / ſo that hereby a man
lerneth to diſpiſe all wantonnes, and mylke of temporall delectacion
or pleaſure, and all ſuche folyſſhnes / & begynneth to ſauour
heuenly thynges, and to pondre them as thynges very pleaſant,
true, and ſtable, or permanent. And erthly thynges he reputeth as

vayne & tranſitory / and alſo hereby he iudgeth the truthe of euery
thyng as it is in dede / & intermedleth no more than nedeth. And of
this wyſdom ſaynt Paule ſayeth:Colo. 1 B. 
                     Impleamini cognitione voluntatis
dei in omni ſapientia, et intellectu ſpirituali. I praye (ſayeth
ſaynt Paule) yt ye may be repleniſſhed & fulfilled with the knowledge
of ye wyll of god in all wiſdom & ſpirituall vnderſtandyng.
And ſaynt Bernarde ſayeth,Ser. 15. de diuerſis. that there be .iii. maners of wyſdom.
One is the wyſdom of the hert. An other is ye wiſdom of ye mouth.
And the thyrde is of the outwarde werke or dede. The wyſdom of
the hert ſtandeth in the wepynge & ſorowyng for our ſynnes paſt / 
in diſpiſyng of all wordly pleaſures or profites, & in the deſyre of
heuenly thynges & eternall glory. The wyſdom of the mouth cō
                     ſiſteth
in ye confeſſion of our ſynnes / in the laude & prayſynges of
god, & in thedi
                        •
                     ienge of our neighbour by godly ſpeche & exhortacion.
The wyſdom of outwarde werkes ſtandeth in this yt a man
lyue & be conuerſant with other men paciently, obediently, & innocently
or continently / ſo that faithfull & true obedience do mortifie
& ſubdue his owne proper wyl. Meke continēce do cut away
all carnall & worldly cōcupiſcence. And glad pacience do ſuſtayn
& beare manly & ſtrongly all corporall & worldly aduerſitie.Capi. 10. A. Of
the wyſdom of the herte, we may declare vnto you a figure or example
wrytten in the thyrde boke of the kynges / that is, how the
quene Saba, hearyng the great fame of Salomon: cam from ye
extreme partes of the erthe to here his wyſdom / & ſhe cam to hym
with a great cumpany. And kynge Salomon taughte hyr in all
thynges that requyred of hym. And ſo ſhe ſeynge and conſiderynge
the wyſdom, his houſe that he had builded, his miniſters
and ſeruauntes, & thorder of them, theyr rayment, his buttelers,
and thoſtes or oblacions that he dayly offred: ſhe (I ſay) conſideryng
all theſe, hyr ſpirite in a maner failed hyr, for great maruell
and wonder ſhe had therof. Morally or ſpiritually by this quene
Saba is vnderſtond our ſynfull ſoule / which heryng of the fame
of Salomon / that is, by inwarde inſpiracion or outwarde prechynge
or redynge, perceyuynge thinfinite goodnes, loue, and
mercy of our peacefull Salomon Chriſte, by the whiche mercy
& loue he hath preuented our ſynfull ſoule with his grace / & reconſyled
it to his heuēly father. And where our ſoule by our fyrſt parentes
was condempned vnto eternall dethe: he hathe reſtored &
called it agayne vnto lyfe. Our quene Saba and ſynfull ſoule (I
ſay) perceyuyng this great fame, is incited & moued to cum with
all hyr hert and mynde, with a great and muche cumpany / that is,

with many ſighynges & ſobbynges, & great deſyres vnto our true
Salomon Chriſt, from thextreme partes of the erthe / that is, frō
ſynne / that is very farre from god. As the prophete Dauid ſayth:
Longe a peccato 
                           •
                        ibus ſalus.
                     Pſalm. 118. Helth or ſaluacion / that is Chriſte, is
farre from ſynners. And therfore ſynne is called thextreme part of
the erthe: for aſmuche as it ſeparateth & maketh man farre from
god / yea nothynge ſo moche / & alſo bycauſe ſynne comonly doeth
inhabit the ſoules of erthly & worldly people. This ſynfull quene
I ſay cam fro farre to here the wyſdom of our Salomon Chriſt.
And his wyſdom is this / that we ſhulde be 
                        〈◊〉
                      & ſory for our
ſynnes, dyſpyſe the worlde with all his pleaſures, & couet or deſyre
heuenly thynges / that all thynges ſhuld ſauour vnto vs / that
is, that we ſhuld iudge & take euery thyng as it is in it ſelfe / after
ryght reaſon. Alſo our Salomon Chriſt doth teche vnto vs, that
yf we wyll auoyde eternall tourmentes & paynes: we muſt feare
the iuſtice of god, remembre oftymes the ſurety of dethe, and the
vncertaynty of the hour of dethe / & to be aſſhamed to cum to euerlaſtyng
infamy and rebuke. Alſo he techeth vs to haue diſcrecion
in our elections, actes, & debes / that is to preferre ſpirituall thynges
before corporall / eternall, before temporall / heuenly, before
erthly / & honeſt thynges, before vyle & vnhoneſt thynges. This is
the wyſdom of our Salomon Chriſte / this is farre from the wyſdom
of the worlde.1. Cor. 1. C. And therfore ſaint Paule ſayeth: Vbi ſapiens 
                           〈◊〉
                        
vbi ſcriba? &c. Where is the wyſe man of the worlde? where is the
ſcrybe and lerned man? Where is the buylder & purchaſer of this
worlde? Hath nat god alſo ſhewed & declared the wyſdom of this
world to be a folyſſhnes? Surely that wyſdom may wel be called
a folyſſhnes, wherby the worlde is loued, & god diſpiſed. Worldly
honours ben coueted & deſyred: & good maners loſt & diſtroyed / 
wherby ryches is gotē: but good cōſcience is loſt & blynded. But
now let vs ſe how this trew wyſdom of the hert may be goten by
the remēbraūce of Chriſtes paſſion. For who ſo euer be crucified
with Chriſt thrugh ye deuout & continuall remēbrance of his paſſion:
he may aſcēde vnto high contēplacion by the gyft of wyſdō / 
on this maner, folowyng thiſtory & exāple of quene Saba. Firſt
our quene Saba, our ſynfull ſoule, doth here ye fame of ye wyſdō &
goodnes of Chriſt our Salomon, whan ſhe remēbreth how ye ſon
of god was incarnat & becum mā, & alſo ſuffred manifold paines,
& was offred vpon ye croſſe for our ſinnes / & how yt he ſuffred moſt
greuouſe paines & ſhamefull dethe for our redemption. And therfore
ſhe thynketh that no wyſe man wolde gladlye or lyghtely

leſe that thynge whiche he bought ſo derely with his owne preciouſe
blood, yf he might with any iuſtice or ryghtfully kepe it.
                  And ſo conſiderynge theſe: ſhe conceyueth in hyr ſelfe a hope and
truſt of forgiuenes. And thā ſhe maketh hyr ſupplicacion & prayer
to god for his fauour & grace / & promyſeth to make amendes for
hyr offences & ſynnes, as farre as it is poſſible for hyr to do. Thā
ſhe beholdeth & conſidereth his houſe that our Salomon hathe
made / that is, hyr owne body & ſoule / & how hyr ſoule is made to
that intent, that it ſhulde be the houſe & temple of the holy gooſt.
Alſo ſhe cōſidereth how gloryous & goodly this houſe was made / 
that is, to thimage & ſimilitude of god. And how vylely & ſhamefully
ſhe hath defoiled it by hyr owne ſynne. And ſo ſhe beginneth
to haue wonder & maruell of the great mercy of god, that ſo mercyfully
wolde ſpare the ſynfull ſoule. Secondly, ſhe beholdeth ye
meates of his table or borde / that is, ſhe cōſidereth how mercifully
he doeth nouryſſh & fede ſynners with his benefites / though indede
they be nat worthy to haue the bread that they eate. Thyrdly,
our ſynfull Saba conſidereth his miniſters & ſeruantes / that
is, ſhe ſeeth how all creatures were create and made of god for to
do ſeruyce vnto man / and how they contynue they obedience and
ſeruyce vnto man, though man be inobedient vnto his lorde god
creatour & maker / and ſo for his inobedience and ſynne: vnworthy
the ſeruice of any creature. Fourthely ſhe conſidereth theyr
veſtures and garmentes / that is, how mercyfully our lorde hytherto
hath hyd and couered the priuy ſinnes of our ſynfull ſoule / 
though all thynges ben open to his ſyght and knowledge. Fyftely,
ſhe ſeynge his buttlers: doeth conſyder howe benignely our
lorde god doeth byrle and gyue to vs the wyne of contricion and
deuocion.Pſalm. 59. And therefore the prophete Dauid ſayeth: Potaſti nos
vino compunctionis. Thou haſte gyuen vs to drynke the wyne of
compunction and ſorow for our ſynnes. Syxtely, ſhe beholdeth
the oblacions that our Salomon doeth dayly offre / that is, how
Chriſt offred hym ſelfe freely vpon the aulter of the croſſe for our
ſynnes / and how the ſame body and bloode is dayly offered in the
chyrche for our ſpirituall conforte. And this oblacion excedeth all
the other benefites of god gyuen to man. And thus our quene
Saba, our ſynnefull ſoule, hauynge the iyen of hyr wyſdome
in hyr hede Chriſte / that is, beholdynge and depely conſiderynge
all the premiſſes: ſhe faynted, and hyr ſpyryte fayled hyr. She
had no ſpyryte / that is of ſynne & iniquitie / for that hath now lefte
hyr. And bicauſe now the holy ſpirite of god hath entred into that

ſoule: the wycked and vnclene ſpirite is expelled and put away.
And now finally, as Salomon gaue to the quene of Saba many
great & precyouſe gyftes: ſo our kyng that hath wrought our ſaluacion
in the myddeſt of the erth, doeth gyue vnto the ſoule depely
remēbryng the premiſſes, great treaſures of knowledge & wyſdom
of vertue & grace / & that moche more thā ſhe deſerueth or aſketh.
For whan a man inwardly conſidereth how he yt was moſt
myghty of power, was ſo diſpiteouſly troden vnder fote for our
ſynnes. He that was moſt wyſe, was deluded & mocked as a fole.
He that was beſt and all full of goodnes, was repleniſſhed with
the bytternes of ſorow. And he that was mooſt rightuouſe, to be
cōdempned to the mooſt ſhamefull dethe. Whan a man (I ſay) cō
                     ſidereth
all theſe thynges: anon the mynde aryſeth into a greate
meruell & admiracion of ye worthynes & noblenes of god / wonderynge
& meruelynge of the great benignitie & charitie of god towardes
vs mooſt wretched and vnworthy ſeruauntes. And than
begynneth the mynde with a ferue
                        •
                     ent deſyre and burnynge loue
to be kyndled towardes our lorde god. And the ſpirituall taſte of
our affection in a meruelouſe maner is made moche pleaſant and
ſwete / and our appetyte is wonderfully refreſſhed. And ſo all our
inwarde man is in a maner alienate & lyfte vp from hymſelf / and
quietly doeth reſt in our lorde Ieſu. O, a meruelouſe thynge and
neuer herde or ſene before / that is, that vnſpeakable ſwetenes ſhuld
be founde in the mooſt bytternes. The mooſt bytter bytternes of
our dere beloued ſauioure Ieſu is meruelouſly turned in our louynge
mynde / into a ſwetenes yt can nat be expreſſed / rauyſſhyng
and takynge into it the hole ſpirite of man / ſo that that ſwetenes
ones taſted: all carnall and worldly pleaſure waxeth all vnſauory,
and is excluded. And in this ſwetenes is the ſpeculacion or
wyſdom of the perſon, contemplatynge & beholdynge our lordes
paſſion, made perfite. For herin he ioyneth & putteth to gydre the
hyghe & inenarrable ſwetenes that he feleth in the conſideracion
& beholdyng of that infinite goodnes of god / that it wolde pleaſe
hym to ſuffre ſo vyle a dethe for vs, with that ineſtimable bytternes
that he felte or feleth in hauynge compaſſion of the paynes &
ſorowes of his lorde Ieſu crucified. And note here that that bytternes
of compaſſion of Chriſtes paſſion, doeth gader in & vnyt
the mynde of man. And thadmiracion or wonderful conſideracion
of the great goodnes of god in the ſame paſſion: doeth eleuate
& lyft vp the mynd ſo vnit and gadred in, & offre it holly vnto god.
And for aſmoche as therin is founde & perceyued an vnſpekable

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
bytternes with an vnſpekable ſwetenes: therfore the mynd of the
perſon that beholdeth & conſidereth this, wondereth at it / & ſo is
alienated from hym ſelfe, & rauiſſhed aboue hym ſelfe / & lyke as yf
he were all drunke, he falleth vnto his lorde god / where than the
ſoule melted with loue / thrughe the beholdynge of thineſtimable
charitie & loue of god, is made as mooſt pure golde, purified in
the hore furneys. And in the conſideracion of ye moſt excellent benignitie
& goodnes of god, the ſoule is anointed & made fat with
the mooſt pleaſant oyle of grace. It alſo obumbrate & ſhadowed
with that 
                        〈◊〉
                      of iuſtice: is made mooſt ſhynynge. The ſoule
alſo clenſed and gadred in with that great bytternes: is abſtract
& withdrawē from all bytternes & ſorow. That ſoule beholden &
receyued of god all good: is made all godly / & ſo at laſt, it is abſorpt
and rauyſſhed with an vnſpekable ioye & meruelouſe ſwetenes.
And the ſpouſeſſe doeth reſte ſwetely with hyr ſpouſe / and amonges
thoſe pleaſaunte and ſwete enbracynges, ſhe may than
ſucke and drynke of the fountaynes of our ſauiour, the lyuely waters
and true wyſdome. And here note that it perteyneth to this
gyfte of wyſdom, nat onely to beholde & conſyder godly & heuenly
thynges: but alſo to rule and order the actes and operacions of
man. In the whiche direction and order, fyrſt it aperteyneth to auoyde
all euyll & vyce / that be contrary vnto trew wyſdome. And
therfore the feare of god is called the begynnyng of wyſdom: for
aſmuche as it cauſeth a man to auoyde all euyll and ſynne. The
laſt thynge perteynynge to wyſdom, or the ende of wyſdom: is
to reduce all thynges to a due order and ende / and this perteyneth
to peace.Li. 19. de ciuitate dei. capit. 13. For as ſaynte Auſtyn ſayeth: Peace is a tranquilitie of
order / that is, whan all thynges ben brought to a quyet & due order.
And therfore conueniently correſpondeth to this gyft of wyſdom
the .vii. beatitude that Chriſte ſpeaketh of,Mat. 5. A. ſayenge: Beati
pacifici: quoniam filii dei vocabūtur. Bleſſed be the peacefull that
make peace: for they ſhall be called the chylderen of god. And
ſaynt Auſtyn ſayeth,Li. 1. de ſer. d
                           •
                        i in monte. C. wyſdome is agreynge and acordynge to the
peacefull. In whom is no contrary mouyng or rebellyng / but his
mouinges ben ſubdued & obedient to reaſon. Sapientia is called
a ſauory ſciēce / & ſo he hath his name a ſapore of ye ſapour / ſauour
or taſte / as whan the mynde is touched with the taſte of inwarde
ſwetenes: he doeth gader in, hym ſelfe all hole, by deſyre to reſt
therin / leſſe yf ye mynde ſhuld wandre in ye cōſideraciō of outward
thingꝭ, it ſhuld ſhortly be diſſolued by inordinat pleſure of ye body
or of ye world / & therfore he gadreth hym ſelf all inward / for within

he hath that thynge in whome is all his delectacion and pleaſure.
And therefore the ſpyryte of wyſdom, whan he toucheth the herte
with his ſwetenes, he tempereth outwardly the feruour & hete of
concupiſcence / & ſo the concupiſcence ſubdued: he maketh peace
inwardly / to thintent that the mynd of man ſo hoolly gadred into
that inwarde ioye: myght fully and perfitely be refourmed vnto
thymage of god.Mat. 5, A. And therfore it is wryten: Bleſſed be the peacefull:
for they ſhall be called the chylderen of god. And that, for as
muche as they haue the ſimilitude of the naturall and onely ſonne
of god.Rom. 8. F. As ſaint Paule ſayth: Quos preſciuit conformes fieri imaginis
filii ſui. Our lorde hath predeſtinate and knowen before, his
chyldren here in erthe, to be cōforme or made lyke vnto thymage
of his naturall ſonne / whiche is called Sapientia generata. The
eternally begotten wyſdome of the father. And ſo herby ye may
perceyue that thoſe perſons whiche receyue the gyfte of wyſdom
by the deuout and continuall meditacion of Chriſtes paſſion: attayne
to be the chyldren of god.Capitul. 2. huius part. And this is it that we ſayd before,
that the great charitie of god that apered in the paſſion of Chriſt,
ſhulde kyndle the fyre of loue to wardes god & theyr neighbours,
in the hertes of all them that deuoutly remembre the ſame paſſiō / 
that thereby they myght be made apte vnto the reparacion of the
order of aungelles called Seraphin.
               
               
                  ¶Here foloweth an example of this ſpirite of
wyſdom. The .xix. Chapytre.
                  
                     EXample of this ſpyryte or gyfte of wyſdome we rede
in the hyſtoryes of Vincente / whiche wrytynge the
lyfe of the ofte named Maris de Ogines,Li. 31. ca. 43 ſayeth in
this maner. Hyr herte (thrughe the remembraunce
of Chriſtes paſſion) was inwardely fulfylled with
the ſpyryte of wyſdome / whereby hyr wordes were very ſwete &
confortable / and all hyr werkes were made fatte or pleaſant with
a meruelouſe ſwetenes of the ſpirituall vnction or ointement.
                  She was meke in herte, mylde in hyr countenaunce, ſwete in
hyr wordes, pleaſaunt in all hyr werkes, and drunken in charitie.
One tyme, whan ſhe had lyen thre days cōtinually in hyr bed,
there reſtynge mooſte ſwetely with hyr ſpouſe Ieſus Chriſte:
hyr ioye and ſweatenes was ſo vehemente, that ſhe knewe nat
how the tyme paſſed / and ſo ſhe ſuppoſed that ſhe had ſcarcely lyen
the tenthe parte of one quarter of an houre.
                  
                     
She had many me
                        •
                     uelouſe and dyuers affections vnto our lord.
Sumtyme ſhe was very hungery for god / and ſumtyme meruelouſe
thyrſty and drye for god. And the more ſhe had hym or felte
hym: the more her deſyre dyd encreaſe. And whan he wolde departe
from hyr: than ſhe was ſorowfull / than ſhe cryed and deſyred
hym to remayne and continue with hyr / & ſumtyme ſhe wolde
enbrace and hold hym faſt in her armes, that he ſhuld nat departe
from her / and with many teares beſeched hym that he wolde ſhew
hym ſelfe more ofte tymes to hyr. Sumtyme by thre days or more
(as it was ſene to hyr) he appered to hyr as a lytle chylde lyenge
betwyxt hyr breſtys / whom ſhe enbraced and halſed / and hyd hym
that he ſhulde nat be ſene of other perſons / and ſo ſhe lay kyſſyng
and playenge with hym as with a chylde. Sumtyme he appered
as a mylde lambe / layeng his hed in her lappe. Sumtyme our ſauioure
appered to hyr as a dowue to conforte hyr. Sumtyme ſhe
ſe hym as a ſhepe or a wedder with a bright ſterre in his forehed / 
goynge about the chyrche to vyſyte and conforte his ſeruauntes / 
as ſhe thought. And in dyuerſe ſolempne feſtes of our lorde he appered
in dyuerſe maners, accordyngly vnto the feeſt. As on Chriſtēmaſſe
day, he appered to hyr as a chyld, ſuckyng his mothers
breſtes / or lyenge in ye cradell / and than hyr affections was ordered
to hym as to a chylde / and ſo accordynge to dyuers apparicions,
ſhe had dyuerſe affections / and ſo thrughout all the feſtes of
the yere. In the feeſte of the Purificacion of our lady, comonly
called Candylmas day: ſhe ſe our blyſſed lady offre hyr ſonne in
the Temple / and how Simeon toke hym in his armes. And in
this viſion ſhe had no leſſe ioye than yf ſhe had ben preſent at the
ſayd oblacion whan it was actually don in the Temple of Ieruſalem.
And in the proceſſion of this ſame feeſt, whan hyr candell
was extyncte and without lyght by a long ſpace of tyme: ſodeynly
there cam a great and moſt clere lyght from heuen, & dyd light
hyr taper or candell. On good fryday he appered to hyr as crucifyed
and hangynge vpon the croſſe / but very ſeldome he appered
to hyr on this maner, bicauſe ſhe coulde nat beholde it / hyr ſorow
was ſo great:Capit. 44. that ſhe was ofte thereby in peryll of dethe. And
whan any ſolempne feeſt by the courſe of the yere drew nygh: ſū
                     tyme.
viii. dayes before that feeſt, ſhe felt in hyr ſoule a great ioy.
And ſo ſhe had diuerſities of affections, accordynge to the diuerſitie
of feeſtes after the courſe of the yere.Capit. 45. She ſe alſo ſumtyme
as it were bryght beames cummynge from thymage of the crucifixe
dyrectly vnto hyr / and ſo entred into hyr hert. And in all theſe

thyngꝭ ſhe had great delectacion & pleaſure / & hyr ſpirit was meruelouſly
cōforted therwith.Capi. 46. This bleſſed woman alſo was moche
wery of this miſerable life / & alſo was in a maner cōtinually ſicke
for ye feruēt loue that ſhe had to god, & cōtinuall deſire to be in his
preſence, with him in eternall felicitie. But yet in al theſe deſires,
werynes of this exyle or worlde: ſhe had one ſinguler & ſpeciall
confort & remedie to refreſſh hyr in this vale of miſery, vnto ſuche
tyme ſhe might cum vnto that ſhe mooſt deſyred / that is, ſhe had
the heuenly Manna / aungels food / the ſacrament of the auter / the
very body & blood of hyr dere beloued ſpouſe Ieſu Chriſte. This
was hyr continuall confort in all hyr troubles. She lerned by experience
in this worlde that whiche Chriſte ſayd in his goſpell:
Niſi manducaueritis carnem filii hominis et biberitis eius ſaguinē:
                     Iohā. 6. F.
                     non habebitis vitam in vobis. That is, Except yt ye eat the fleſſh
of the ſonne of a vyrgyn, & drynke his blood: ye ſhal nat haue lyfe
in you. Nor this ſayenge was ſene to hyr very harde or vnreaſonable,
as it was to the Iues: but rather very ſwete & pleaſaunt.
For in this holy Māna ſhe founde all pleaſure & all delectable ſauour
& taſt by ye receyuyng therof / nat onely in hyr ſoule: but alſo
it was to hyr mouthe as ſwete as hony. And nat only ſhe had this
great confort in the receyuyng of this moſt blyſſed ſacramēt: but
alſo in the ſyght therof. And therfore, after the tyme that ye preeſt
had ſayd ma
                        •
                     ſe: ſhe deſyred hym to leue the chaleys bare & vncouered
vpon the auter / to thintent that ſhe, ſeynge it: myght haue
more perfyte mynde of the blood and paſſion of Chriſte. Many
other exāples ye may ſe in the forſayd boke of this bleſſed womā.
               
            
            
               ¶The .vi. particle. Of the ſettynge of our lorde vpon
the aſſe, and vpon hyr foole or colte
               
                  MAny miſteries & prophecies were ſpoken & writen by the
holy prophetes which were fulfylled by our ſauiour Ieſu
Chriſte. One of them we ſhall ſhewe vnto you in this
chapitre / & how it was fulfylled in Chriſt. Whan ye tyme
drew nigh that our ſauiour Ieſus had determyned to redeme the
worlde with his precyouſe bloode: that was the feaſt of Paſche / 
at whiche feaſte the Paſchall lambe ſhulde be offered accordynge
to thordinaūce of god: our ſauiour Ieſu as the very true lambe,
ſignified by the other lābe, wold alſo voluntarily approche & cum
nigh vnto ye place of his paſſion, where as he wolde be offred for
the redemption of man. In that dede ſhewynge that he was
mooſt redy to obey vnto the wyll of his father, and to meke hym

to the moſt ſhamefull & mooſt painefull dethe for our ſaluacion.
And what tyme it pleaſed his goodnes to take this iourney: we
may mekely byleue, that our lady moued of hyr motherly affection:
wold haue withdrawen hym & reteyned hym from that iourney.
And in lyke maner his diſciples (as we may ſuppoſe) perſuaded
hym to the ſame / but he had other wyſe diſpoſed for all our ſaluacion.Mat. 21. A.
Wherfore in goyng towardꝭ Hieruſalem, he went by the
mount of Oliuet / to ſignifie yt onely of pitie & mercy, & nat of neceſſitie,Suꝑ Mat. 26.
he cam to his paſſiō. This mount (as ſaint Hierom ſayeth)
is called the moūt of Oliuet: for aſmoche as there dyd grow
many Oliues / of the which is made bothe creme & oile / & by yt oile
ye light of ye lampe is noriſſhed. And ſo it may be called ye mount of
oile, creme, & of light / & that to ſignifie the .iii. effectes of Chriſtes
paſſiō / ye is. In ye oile, is ſignified mercy & forgyuenes. In creme
is ſignified ye vnction of grace. And by the light, is noted ye lyght
of eternall glory. And theſe effectes we haue by ye merites of Chriſtes
paſſion. Frō this mount he ſent .ii. of his apoſtles, ſignifieng
the .ii. generall cōmaūdementes of loue, wherby all mankynde is
abſolued from ſyn / yt is, thou ſhalt loue thy lorde god with all thy
herte. &c. The ſeconde is, yu ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe.
By theſe .ii. preceptes, yf they bē truely kept: all ſyn is expelled / &
all iuſtice is performed. And he ſayd vnto his .ii. apoſtles, go vnto
yt caſtell that is againſt you / that is before your face at ye fote of
ye mount of Sion. He ſayd yt that caſtell was againſt them or contrary
to thē / & that was true / for there they ſuffred moche cōtradiction
& many rebukes & alſo betynges / as it is wryten in thactes of
thapoſtles.Act. 5. D. G. And there ye ſhall fynde an aſſe tyed, & hyr foole or colt
with hyr / the which colt was neuer ryden / lawſe thē, & bryng thē
to me. Spiritually, this caſtell ſignifieth ye world. The diſciples
ſignifieth the preachers. For the worlde is euer contrary to ye prechers.
The worlde loueth & foloweth ryches, honours, & vayne
pleaſures. Cōtrary, the prechers do preche pouerty, abiection, &
penaūce. The aſſe for hir foliſſhnes, ſignifieth ye people of ye Iues.
And ye colte yt was wilde & wanton, ſignifieth ye gentiles for theyr
ꝓnitie to ſyn & cuſtom of ye ſame. The aſſe is a beeſt vnclene, rude,
folyſſh, & weike in hyr former partꝭ / though ſhe be ſtrong behynd.
Theſe beſtes were boūde. So was all mankynde before ye cummynge
of Chriſt, bounde in the euyll cuſtom of ſyn / whiche bonde
is mooſte ſtronge of all other. For where as other bondes whan
they be olde: they putrifie and ſo cum to noughte / but this bonde
of ſynne / the longer it continueth: the ſtronger it is.
               
                  
There was neuer man that ſat vppon this colte / for the gentyles
were neuer ſubdued to any reaſonable law gyuen by god. Lawſe
them by your godlye and heuenly doctrine, from theyr errours &
ſynnes: and brynge them to me / enformed in true faythe & vertuouſe
maners / that they, lawſed from the bondes of theyr ſynnes:
myght folow me in godly lyuynge. And whan our lorde ſhuld
haue rydden vpon this aſſe or hyr colte: his diſciples caſt or put
theyr garmentes vpon theſe beeſtes / ſignifienge that our ſauiour
Ieſu wolde nat reſte or ſytte vppon the naked ſoule: excepte it
fyrſte be clad and coueryd with the doctryne and vertuouſe maners
of thexapoſles. Morally by this aſſe may be ſignified our
body / whiche is dull or rude, folyſſhe, vnclene, weake before / yt
is to ſpirituall and heuenly thynges / and ſtronge behynde / that
is, to temporall and vayne thynges. And by the colte, may be
ſignified our carnall affection and vayn deſyre. And theſe beſtes
ben tyed with inordinate pleaſures. But we muſt lawſe them by
the feare of god / and prepare them with morall vertues and worthy
fruites of penaunce:Pſalm. 72. that our lorde may reſt & ſyt vpon them / 
ſo that eche one of vs myght ſay with the Prophete: Vt iumentū
factus ſum apud te. I am made as a beeſt vnto the, redy to bere ye / 
therefore lay vppon vs what bourden it ſhall pleaſe the: and we
ſhall bere it. And contrary wyſe, let vs here what ſaynte Paule
ſayth to vs:1. Cor. 6. D. 
                  Empti eſtis precio magno, portate Chriſtum in corpore
veſtro. Ye be bought with a great and dere pryce / therefore bere
Chriſte in 
                     〈◊〉
                   bodies, paciently ſufferynge his viſitacion in authynges.
By thoſe that brought this aſſe & hyr colt vnto Chriſt:
may be ſignified thoſe penitentes whiche do offre & brynge theyr
bodies to god by due mortificacion / and theyr ſoules by true contricion.
As the bodye is ſignified by the aſſe: ſo may the ſynfull
ſoule be ſignified by the colte. Our lorde and ſauiour Ieſu, for
to declare and ſhew his myldenes and mekenes, wolde nat ryde
vpon a proude and highe horſe: but as he was mylde and meke:
ſo wolde he ryde vpon a mylde and homely beeſt, vppon an aſſe / 
to ſignifie alſo that he wyll nat reſt in proude and wrathefull ſoules:Mat. 21. A.
but in the meke and quyete ſoules. All this was done (as
the Euangelyſt ſayeth) to fulfyll the Prophecy of Zacharie / that
is to ſay / by this acte of our lorde, nat onely he ſhewed his mekenes:Zacha. 9. B
but alſo the prophecy of Zachary was fulfilled / which ſayd:
Dicite filie ſion, exulta ſatis filia ſion. &c. Say ye to the doughter
of Syon / that is, to men dwellynge in Hieruſalem / which is the
doughter of Syon: Be nat afrayd: but rather be glad & ioyfull.

Here he excludeth all feare of man, and ſeruyle feare / and gyueth
to them a ſurety of ioye. Beholde (ſayeth the Prophet Zachary)
thy kyng (Chriſte) cummeth to the, mylde and gentyll, ſyttynge
vpon an aſſe & vpon the colte of the aſſe. He cummeth nat
with great pompe and pryde in chariottes or high horſes, nor yet
with his armed men or yomen of his garde aboute hym: but in
mooſt mekenes and lowlynes that myght be, to gyue vnto vs all
an example / that yf we deſyre to folow Chriſte: we muſt auoyde
all pryde, & ſhew mekenes alſo in our outwards actes. Our lorde
and ſauiour Ieſu wolde be honoured before his paſſion / nat onely
to ſhew how that he was that ſelfe perſon of whome the Prophetes
dyd ſpeke: but alſo to declare hym ſelfe to be very god,
whiche myght chaunge and turne the hertes of men, his creatures,
at his wyll and pleaſure. For though the Iues had a mynde
to ſlee hym, as they dyd ſhortly after: yet at this tyme he moued
theyr hertes to laude and prayſe hym. The Iues ſhewed them
ſelfe moche contrary in this act & in his paſſion. On Palme ſondaye
they cryed and ſange:Mat. 21. A. Bleſſed be he that is cum to vs in the
name of god.Ioh. 19. C. On good frydaye they cryed: Tolle tolle crucifige

                        •
                     um. Away with hym / hence with hym / crucifie hym. On Palme
ſonday, they called hym the kyng of Iſrahell: But on good fryday
they ſayd, We haue no kyng, but the Emperour. On Palme
ſonday, they caſt grene leuys, floures, and theyr garmentes in
the way before hym for great honoure: But on good fryday they
prepared to hym a great and heuy croſſe / and made hym bere it / 
and afterwarde nayled hym theron. For the floures: they crowned
hym with thornes. And at laſt they toke all his araymēt and
clothes from hym. Here was a meruelouſe contrarietie in
the Iues.
               
                  ¶Here foloweth a prayer.
                  
                     O Lorde Ieſu Chriſte, whiche freely and with thyne owne
wyll cam vnto thy paſſion: cum alſo to me a wretche, by
thy grace in to my herte and ſoule. And thou that than dyd repare
me by thy deathe on the croſſe: repare me agayne that am
fallen to ſynne. Repare me (I ſaye) by the merytes of that ſame
mooſt bleſſyd paſſion. Graunte to me (lorde) that in all thynges
I myght kepe myldenes and mekenes / and to ſubdue my fleſſhe
& my ſpyryt hoolly vnto the / & that I may be made as a beeſt vnto
the / yt thou ſyttyng vpon me, & ruelyng me as thy beeſt: may lede

me now vnto ye taſte of inwarde peace, & deſyre of heuenly peace / 
and at laſt may brynge me into the vyſyon and ſyght of the ſame
eternall peace, Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶The .vii particle. Of theiection and caſtynge out
of the byers and ſellers in the Temple.
               
                  AFter that our lorde Ieſus was thus gloryouſly receiued
of the Iues: furthwith he went into the temple / 
teachynge vnto vs a forme and maner of good
religion, that we all ſhulde folow / that is, to what ſo
euer towne or place we go: fyrſte, whan we be cum
thyder: let vs go vnto the chyrch or other place of prayer, if there
be any there / and ſo commendynge our ſelfe by deuoute prayers
vnto our lordes mercy: go and do ſuch buſynes as we cam to do.
Our lorde entred into the temple, and caſt out from thens the byers
and ſellers / ſignifienge thereby that the preeſtes of the Iues,
as vnworthy miniſters of god: ſhulde be eiecte and caſt out of ye
temple.O
                        •
                     elia. 54. ſuper Ioh. And note here as Criſoſtome ſayeth: A man to be pacient
in his owne iniuries or wronges done agaynſte hym ſelfe, is
moche laudable. But it is a great ſynne and moche reprouable, to
diſſemble or leue vncorrecte the offences & iniuries done agaynſt
god. And therefore Chriſte ſuffred paciently his owne iniuries / 
but the iniuries of his father, he wold in no meanes dyſſemble or
leue vnpunyſſhed. Morally for our inſtruction, The feeſt of
Paſce of the Iues (that is, of them that confeſſe the name of god,
or els mekely confeſſe theyr ſynnes) drawynge nygh: oure lorde
Ieſus aſcended vnto Hieruſalem / that is, vnto the holy and deuoute
ſoule of man, eleuate or lyfte vp by grace. Hieruſalem
was builded vpon a mount / and therfore it is wryten that Chriſt
dyd aſcende vnto Hieruſalem.Mat. 20. B The temple in Hieruſalem was
builded in the hygheſt part of the citie / and it ſignifieth the mooſt
excellente and hygheſt parte of the ſoule / that is,Luce. 19. C the ſuperior or
hygher part of reaſon / whoſe office is to onely conſydre god and
eternall thynges. Vnto this temple our lorde doeth aſcende by
the effecte of his ſacramentes / ſo viſitynge it with his ſpirituall
preſence. And take good hede that there be foure thynges ſpecially / 
whiche our lorde Ieſus wyll nat ſuffre to be in this his temple / 
ſignified by foure thinges that he foūde in the materiall temple / 
that is, the money of the chaungers / oxen / ſhepe, & dow
                     •
                  es / 
the whiche he wolde nat ſuff
                     •
                  e to be in the temple. And alſo by

theſe ſame foure, be ſignified foure vyces that comonly be foūde
nowe in theſe dayes amonges many religiouſe perſones. The
fyrſt is, ouermoche ſolicitude or buſy ſtudy in gettynge & kepyng
of temporall goodes / and this is noted by the mony that our lord
caſt abroode in the temple. The onely ſtudy or buſynes of temporall
goodes is nat forbydden: but ouer moche ſtudy, & that it be
nat in the temple / that is in the ſuperior part of our reaſon / which
onely ought to intende to god and eternall thynges. Wherefore
whan ſo euer any temporall buſynes is exercyſed in that temple:
it is a greate ſynne & dyſorder. For the creature is put in the place
of god / and temporall thynges, in the place of eternall thynges.
               The ſeconde is, the inordinate vſe of temporall goodes, & thin-circumſpecte
conſideracion, or the wante of a due warenes to auoyde
peryls and daūgers. And this is noted by the oxen / for the
oxe doeth very gredely fede of the herbys or graſſe of the groūde / 
and therfore ſumtyme for his gredynes or haſtynes, he deuoureth
and ſwaloweth vp that thynge that is noyſum and hurtefull vnto
hym / whiche lyrketh and is hyd amonge the herbes. So oftymes
it happeneth that whan men wyll vſe theſe temporall goodes inordinately,
and vnwyſely or gredyly / though he wolde take that
is neceſſary: yet ſumtyme he taketh that is noyſum to hym. For
ſuperfluitie and alſo corporall pleaſure, is oftymes lyrkyng and
hyd vnder neceſſitie. The thyrde vyce or defaute is a dulnes and
ſlouthefulnes to do good and vertuouſe werkes / and this is ſignified
by the dowue / whiche before ſhe taketh hyr flyght: ſhe hath
great deliberacion and taryeng / turnyng hyr hed on euery ſyde &
lokyng rou
                     •
                  de about to cōſydre whether ſhe ſhal flye / but oftymes
in ye meane tyme ſhe is ſmytten with a byrdbolt / or els taken with
the hawke. So it fortunyth oftymes vnto ydle & ſlouthful or dull
perſones. The fourthe is, a folyſſhe and inordinate feare / that
is ſignified by the ſhepe / which is more folyſſh than other beſtes.
In ſo moche that yf in the tyme of thunderynge ſhe be lefte alone
from the flocke, and be greate with lambe: for folyſſhe feare ſhe
wyll caſte vp hyr lambe. So folyſſhe fearefull men, for feare
of hurtyng of the body, or for feare of diſpleaſure of ſum perſons:
wyl caſte vppe the fruyte of ſpyrytuall profyte / that is, leue vndone
vertuouſe and merytoryouſe werkes. Where as Chriſte
entreth into the temple: all ſuche vyces ben expelled / and that on
this maner. He maketh a ſcourge or a whyppe of thre cordes.
The fyrſte, is corporall ſyckenes. The ſeconde, is trouble of
mynde. And the thyrde, is ſpyrytuall admonicion, by the inſtyncte

and mocyon of the hooly gooſte. With this whyppe
oure lorde doeth caſte out all theyſe foure vyces from oure ſoules.
And more ouer he tourneth ouer theyre chayres or ſtooles,
and alſo all theyr bordes or tables wheron they dyd reſt / for that
they ſhoulde nat lyghtely or eaſely cum there in agayne. So
our lorde caſte oute of the ſoule all the helpe and mouers vnto
ſynne.Eſay. 56. 
                        •
                     . And oure lorde ſayde vnto theym whom he droue oute
of the Temple. It is wrytten by the Prophete Eſaye: Domus
mea, domus orationis vocabitur. &c. My houſe / that is dedycate
vnto my honour and name: ſhall be called the houſe of prayer / 
and nat the houſe of rape or thefte / nor of marchaundyſe / 
vayne ſpeache, or vayne beholdynge. Hereof is gyuen vnto
vs a greate confydence or truſt that oure prayers ſhall be herde.
Wherefore elles wolde he moue vs to pray in his temple: excopte
he wolde there here oure prayers?Hier. 7. B. It foloweth: Vos 
                        •
                     eciſt
                        •
                     s
illam ſpelumcam latronum.
                  Mat. 21. B But ye haue made my Temple a
denne of theuys. The theuys haue none other ſorow or care:
but onely to gette temporall goodes / and howe ſo euer they may
haue or gette theym: they regarde ne care nat / ſo that they may
haue theym. And therefore they hyde theym ſelfes in pryuye caues
or dennys, bycauſe that they wolde nat be taken or perceyuyd.Mat. 21. B
It foloweth: Et acceſſerunt ad eum ceci et claudi in
templum, et ſanauit eos. After this acte or dede done: there
came vnto oure ſauyoure Ieſus Chriſte into the Temple many
blynde men and la
                     •
                  e men / and incontinently he cured and healed
theym. And ſo they were as wytneſſes of the voyce and prayſynge
of the chylderen that with loude voyce cryed in the Temple,
and ſayde vnto oure ſauyoure Chriſte Ieſu: Hoſhiah
                     ••
                  .
That is as moche to ſaye: Saue vs, or make vs ſafe nowe.
               And oure ſauyoure Ieſus aunſwered vnto theym / nat by wordes:
but by his deedes / in curynge and gyuynge helthe vnto the
blynde and the lame men. As yf he ſhulde ſay, ye call me a ſauyour / 
and deſyre helthe of me. Loo, I as a very ſauyoure, gyue
vnto you helthe. The prynces of the preeſtes and the ſcrybes that
is, the lerned men in the lawe of god / ſeynge theſe great myracles
and meruayles / and hearyng the chylderen tryenge / in the Temple / 
& prayſyng hym as god: they had great indignacion therat / 
and ſo were greatly moued againſt hym with enuy, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and
malice. For comonly euyll and enuyouſe men can nat pacyently
here the prayſe of good men. And where as they durſt nat lay vyolent
handes vppon hym for feare of the people that than fauoured

hym, nor yet impugne his manifeſt and open myracles: yet
they rebuked hym for yt he ſuffred the people ſo to reioice in hym / 
and the chylderen alſo to praiſe and laude hym as god ſo openly
in the tēple.Ibidem. And ſo they ſayd vnto hym: Audis quid iſti dicuntur?
Doeſt thou here & perceyue what theſe people do ſay? As yf they
ſayd, thou ſhulde nat ſuffre ſuche laude and prayſe to be gyuen
to the, whiche is onely due to god / therfore yf thou were an holy,
iuſt, and good man: thou woldeſt refuſe or declyne frome ſuche
glory and prayſe. And Ieſus aunſwered, ſayenge: Vti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     . I here
theyr prayſynges, and ought to here them / for this prayſyng was
preordinate of god longe before this tyme to be gyuen vnto me / 
for ſo it is wrytten by the Prophete Dauid:Pſalmo. 8. 
                  Ex ore infantium et
lactentium perfeciſti laudem. That is, Thou good lorde haſt perfourmed
the prayſyng (that thou ordred for thy ſon) to be fulfylled
by the mouth or voice of infantes & yonge ſuckynge chyldren.
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  O Lorde, thou made a generall ſigne or token of thy terrible
iudgement whan thou caſt out of the temple all byers and
ſellers with a whyppe made of thre cordes / ſhewynge in thy face
or iyen the flame of thy diuinitie: I pray and beſeche the lorde to
graunt me to remembre & ſo to conſydre thy terryble preſence, yt
I myghte feare the with an holye feare. For thy iudgementes be
great and nat to be ſerched / whiche whan I conſydre: all my bones
quake for feare / for there is no man lyuynge vpon the erthe / 
that is ſure of thy glory / but all thynges be reſerued as vncerteyn
vnto the tyme hereafter to cum / that we ſhulde euer ſerue the deuoutly
& vertuouſly in feare / & alſo ioye in the with drede. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶The .viii. particle. Of the dolorouſe or ſorowfull departyng
of our ſauiour Ieſu from his mother Mary.
               
                  ALthough theuangelyſtes wryte lytle or no thynge of
the heuy departynge of our ſauioure Ieſus from his
mother: yet dyuers holy doctours, moued of the holy
gooſt, haue ſhewed the ſame. And in eſpeciall theſe
ſayntes. Auſtyn, Bernarde, Anſelme, and Iohānes
de Capiſtrano. And that in this maner. The wednyſdaye, after
that Iudas had made promyſe to the Iues that he wolde betraye
Chriſte, and delyuer hym into theyr handes: he cam into Bethany,
where as Ieſus was with his diſciples. Chriſte knew very
well that Iudas had ſolde hym / and that nat withſtandynge, he

toke Iudas in his armes & kyſſed hym, whan he cam to Bethany / 
thereby ſecretely mouynge hym to forſake and leue his maliciouſe
mynde. Alſo our lady the vyrgyn Mary, louyngely and
frendely bad hym welcom / and aſked of hym, what he herde of hyr
ſonne. And Iudas ſayd, euery man ſpeketh good by hym. Mary
moche louyd Iudas, bycauſe ſhe knewe that he was knowen
and in fauour with the prynces of the preſtes. But yf ſhe had knowen
what he had done: I ſuppoſe hyr virginall hert wolde haue
broken for ſorow. But bycauſe ſhe knew it nat: they wēt quietly
to ſupper. At the whiche ſupper Iudas ſet hym bytwyxte Ieſus
and his mother Mary, for a token or ſygne that ſhortely by his
treaſon: he wold diuide them a ſunder. And at this ſupper, Chriſt
declared ordinately the miſteries of his paſſion. And in his preachynge,
whan he beholdynge Iudas remembred his falſnes and
dampnacion:2. 2. queſti. 136. queſt. 1. Chriſte waxed very pale. For as ſaynte Thomas
ſayeth: Amonges all the paſſions of the ſoule: heuynes doeth
mooſt noy and hurte the body, and altre the body. And whan ſupper
was done: the vyrgyn Mary ſayd to hyr ſonne Ieſus: My
ſwete ſonne, I wolde ſpeke with the ſecretely. And than ſhe ſayd,
O my confort and my lyght / ſay to me the trouth, why waſt thou
ſo pale at ſupper / & what ment thy wepyng and depe ſyghynges?
My herte was almooſt broken thereby. And than Ieſus ſayd to
his mother, O my bleſſed mother / thou remēbreſt for what cauſe
I was incarnate and made man in thy wombe / therfore ſith thou
woldeſt knowe the cauſe of my heuynes: this is it. The tyme is
cum and the houre is at hande, that I ſhall be departed from the
by my mooſt bytter paſſion that I ſhall ſuffre for the redemption
of man. Therfore whan I actually remēbre this: it cauſeth ſuche
heuynes in me. Than whan the vyrgyn Mary herd for a certeinty
that the deathe of hyr ſonne was ſo nyghe at hande: Ah good
lorde, how moche dyd ſhe ſorow? What wepynges, ſobbynges,
and ſyghynges had ſhe? Euery motherly hert may imagyn. And
than after hyr wepynges, ſhe wyllyng to moue hyr ſonne to ſum
other maner & way of redemption for the ſaluacion of man: ſaid.
My dere ſonne, I knowe that thy heuenly father hathe decreed
with his mercy to redeme mankynde / but all thynges be poſſible
to thy father and to the. Wherfore yf it wolde pleaſe thy father &
the: thou myght redeme mankynde by an other way, than by thy
paſſion. Sithe therfore thou maiſt ſo do: I beſeche the it may ſo
be. Hereunto Ieſus aunſwered, O my mooſt ſwete mother,
I knowe thy loue and charitie towardes me / but (good mother)

I muſt nedes more obey to god my father, of whome I haue my
godhed: than to the, of whome onely I haue my manhoode.
               This ſame wednyſday Mary Magdalene ſent a meſſanger vnto
Hieruſalem, to here and knowe what was there ſpoken of Ieſu.
And this meſſanger ſayde that it was decreed by the councell
of the Phariſeis, that Ieſus ſhulde dye / and how that they wold
crucifie hym. And than the virgyn Mary, with Mary Magdalene
and Martha, cam vnto Ieſu and ſayd, O mooſt pitiouſe
confortour, go nat into Hieruſalem: for they haue concluded agaynſte
the / they wyll ſlee the. Abyde here / we ſhall prepare the
Paſchall lambe for the. Hereunto Ieſus ſayde, O my deare
mother, O Magdalene, O Martha, The tyme determyned by
my father, is cum, that I ſhulde redeme mankynde. It is neceſſary
that my fathers wyll be fulfyllyd. Than the virgyn Mary
ſayd to hym, O my mooſt dere belouyd ſonne, O my lyfe & light
of myne iyen / yf thou wylte nedes go into Hieruſalem, and dye:
ſuffre me to dye with the, or els before the. Ieſus aunſwered &
ſayd, O my mooſt kynde mother, all my diſciples ſhall forſake
me, and the faythe ſhall peryſſhe and ceaſe in them for the tyme of
my paſſion / therfore it is neceſſarye that thou abyde with theym / 
bothe to confyrme them in faythe, and alſo to conforte them. O
my ſwete mother, I thanke the with all my herte for all thy benefytes
and kyndenes that thou haſte done to me. Here frendes,
loke vppon hyr motherly herte, and conſydre what heuynes and
ſorow ſhe had, herynge theſe wordes of hyr dere ſonne Ieſus.
               Erly on the thurſday in the mornyng, they bothe kneled downe / 
and kyſſynge to gyther: toke theyr leue with many teares & wepynges.
And as ſaynt Auſten ſayeth, Libro de verbis domini:
Whan they went to gyther: the virgyn mary ſayd: O my mooſt
ſwete ſonne, I ſhall no more here the. O ioy, full of the pleaſure
of paradyſe. I ſhal no more touche the. O thou conſolacion of the
worlde. I wyll neuer leue the. Yf thou go: I wyll go. Yf thou
ſtande: I wyll ſtande. And than Ieſus aunſwered with a wepynge
and mournynge voice. O my dere mother, why doeſt thou
trouble me with thy wepynge: ſithe the heuynes that I haue for
my paſſion is ſufficient for me? So ofte doeth the ſwerde of ſorow
perce my herte: as ofte as I ſe the wepe, or any teare fall frō
thyne iyen. Wherefore I beſeche the mooſt naturall and louynge
mother to go with my welbelouyd Magdalene into hyr houſe / to
whō I commende the / and ſo with great ſorow departed. And at
this mooſt heuy departynge, ſhe ſayd vnto Iudas, O Iudas, I

commende my mooſt dere beloued ſon vnto the. Yf thou here any
thynge contrary to hym: ſhew hym of it, that he may be the more
ware. And herof ſayeth ſaynt Bernarde, O blyſſed vyrgyn Mary,
thou dyd nat know that thou commended thy mooſt innocent
ſonne to a foxe mooſt falſe and ſubtile. Thy mooſt mekeſt lambe,
to a wolfe. Thy ſonne, very truthe: to a crafty lyer. And ſo the
ſorowfull mother departed from hyr ſonne / ſeynge that it wolde
be non otherwyſe. O, what (ſuppoſe you) ſayd than Magdalene,
Martha, and other women there preſente, vnto our lady?
Let euery man thynke as his deuocion ſeruyth hym. I thynke
they myght ſay,Cāti. 5. D. as it is wryten in the Canticles, O mooſt goodly
of all women / whyther is thy mooſt dere beloued gone? Where
hathe he hyd hym ſelfe? We wyll go ſerche hym with the. And
the ſorowfull vyrgyn myghte aunſwere, My conforte, my lyfe,
my ſonne doeth go in a ſtrayt and harde way / byſet rounde about
with his enemies. &c.
            
            
               ¶The .ix. particle. Of the ſupper or maundie of our lorde.
               
                  WHan the tyme of the miſeracions and mercies of our
lorde was cum, in the whiche he had diſpoſed to ſaue
his people: & to redeme theym / nat with corruptyble
golde or ſyluer: but with his owne preciouſe blood,
before he ſhoulde departe frome his diſciples by his
corporall dethe: he wolde make vnto them a ſupper, for a ſigne &
memoriall of thynges paſt, and alſo to fulfyll the miſteries that
were to be fulfylled. Therefore our lorde Ieſus, required of his
diſciples, where and in what place he wolde haue the Paſchall
lambe prepared for hym and them:
                     
                        •
                     uce. 2
                        •
                     . A. He ſente Peter and Iohn̄ to
one of his louers in the mounte of Syon, where as was a goodly
and a great chambre ſtrewed and made redy for hym / and there
they prepared the Paſchall lambe for hym. By Peter is ſignified
good operacion or actyue lyfe. And by Iohn̄ is noted deuoute
contemplacion. Theſe .ii. prepare the Paſcall lambe / that is, they
diſpoſe a man duely and reuerētly to receyue the holy body of our
lorde, ſignified by the Paſchall lambe. They prepare this ſpirituall
lambe in a greate lofte or chamber / that is, in the ſoule of
man, eleuate and lyfte vp by feruent deuocion / and great by longanimitie / 
broode, by the brede of charitie / and ſtrawed by the diuerſitie
of vertues. And whan all thynges were prepared in this
chambre: Ieſus dyd entre with his diſciples / to whom the Paſcall

lambe roſted, was brought furthe. And grace ſayde, or blyſſyng
made by our lorde: they eat it with the iuſe of wylde letu
                     •
                  e.
And note that in this ſolēpnitie of Paſce, there were toure thynges / 
that is, the Paſcall lambe, pure wheat brede without leuyn / 
wyne, and the iuſe of wylde letuſe / to ſignifie that no man might
cum worthely to eat of the true lambe, the body of Chriſte: without
bytternes and compunction of herte for theyr ſynnes. This
refection alſo doeth ſignifie theternall refection of glory that ſhal
be in the ende of the worlde. Than Ieſus ryſynge from ſupper / 
his diſciples ſyttynge and eatynge: he ſayd, I haue with a great
deſyre deſyred to eat this Paſcall lambe with you before my paſſion.
This worde deſyre, twyſe ſpoken: doeth ſignifie a mynde
of two deſyres. One was, yt the olde teſtament ſhuld be finiſhed:
and the new ſhuld be begun. And this was mooſt his deſyre. For
all the dayes of his lyfe he ranne after vs with a mooſt feruent deſyre
of our helthe. And we▪ yf we can nat at ſumtyme haue good
myndes and deſires: at the leeſt let vs haue a wyl to haue yt good
deſyre,Pſal. 118. D accordynge to the ſayenge of Dauid: Concupiuit anima
mea deſide rare iuſtificationes tuas. My ſoule hath couetyd or deſyred
to deſyre thy iuſtificacions. After this, Chriſte toke bread
and wyne / and gyuynge thankes to god: blyſſed them / and ſo conuerted
the bread into his owne body / & the wyne into his bloode / 
and gaue it vnto them / ſayenge, take and eat / this is my bodye / &
drynke of my bloode. And here he ſhewed his great deſyre yt was
to cum / that is, to ſhede his bloode for our redemption / that after
the immolacion & offeryng of the figuratiue and Paſcall lambe:
ſhulde folow the oblacion of the very true lambe Ieſus Chriſte.
And ſo the olde figures ceaſſed / and all thynges were made new:
whan that Chriſt conuertyd and turned bread and wyne into his
precyouſe body and bloode.Exod. 12. B And here note that in the boke called
Exodus, there were determined many thynges that were requyred
to the eatynge of the figuratiue & Paſcall lambe / whiche
alſo ſpiritually be requyred to theatynge of the verye true lambe
 our ſauiour Ieſus. Fyrſt it ſhulde be eaten onely of them that be
circumcidyd: ſo ſhulde we be circumcidyd by the cuttynge away
 of our olde ſynfull conuerſacion and lyfe. Secondely, it ſhulde
be eaten with the iuſe of wylde letuſe / ſignifienge that we ſhulde
 haue bytter contricion for our ſynnes. Thyrdly, with pure whete
breade without leuyn, betokenynge the puritie of our conſcience
 without leuyn of fynne. Fourthly, theyr clothes ſhulde be gyrded
 vp: ſignifienge oure chaſtitie of body & ſoule. Fyftely, they

ſhulde haue ſhoes vppon theyr fete / betokenynge that our affections
ſhulde be ſeparate from all erthely thynges. In a ſigne alſo
or token herof, our lord fyrſt waſſhed the fete of his diſciples, before
that he gaue to them his body and blood. Sixtely, they ſhuld 
haue ſtaues in theyr handes / notynge therby that we ſhulde diligently
kepe our ſelfe. Theſe ſyxe foreſayd condicions ben requyred
in vs, as concernynge the auoidaunce of vyce and ſynne.
And in lyke maner, ſyxe thynges ben requyred in vs yf we wyll
worthely receyue the ſacrament of the aulter, as concernynge the
operacion of good werkes and gettynge of vertues. Fyrſt, that 
it be eaten in one houſe / that is, in the vnitie of the chyrche / that
we be nat diuided from the chyrche by any ſciſme or hereſye.
               Secondly, that we take or eat it with our neighbours, as many 
as ſhall be ſufficient to eate it / ſignifienge the loue and concorde
with our neighbours. Thyrdely, that it be nat eaten raw / that 
is, withoute the fyre of loue / ne yet ſodden with water of carnall
pleaſures; but roſted with the fyre of feruent deuocion.
               Fourthly, it ſhulde be eaten haſtely: betokenyng our feruent deſyre 
and delectacion folowynge. Fyftely, it ſhulde be eaten all 
hole / bothe hed, fete, and the inwarde partes / ſignifieng that we
ſhulde be incorporate vnto Chriſte with a hole and true fayth / beleuynge
the diuinitie of Chriſte: whiche is the hed / alſo his humanitie,
body, & fleſſhe / whiche is as the fote / and alſo his ſoule,
whiche is as the inwarde parte. Syxtely, they ſhulde breke no 
bone of the Paſchall lambe / ſignifienge the ſymple veneracion &
worſhyppynge of this ſacrament / nat dyuydyng the godhed from
the manhode / nor the fleſſhe from the blood / for vnder euery parte
of the hooſte conſecrate, there is hole Chriſte, bothe god & man / 
ſoule, body, and blood. Wherfore who ſo euer receiueth the ſacramēt
of the aulter vnder the forme of bread only: he receyueth hole
Chriſte god and man / ſoule, fleſſhe, and blood.
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Lorde Ieſu Chriſte, whiche in the euyn tyde made thy laſt
ſupper with thy diſciples in a greate and large chaumbre
ſtrawed and made redye for the / and there fedde theym with thy
mooſt ſacrate body and bloode: make my herte (I beſeche the) a
great & large chambre prepared for the. Enlarge in it trew fayth,
hope, and charitie. Magnifie or make it great, with longanimitie,
pacience, & mekenes / and ſtraw it with all maner of vertues.

Graunt me lorde that my herte contrite and thus prepared: may
take and receyue the after my pore maner / whom heuyn and erthe
are nat able to take and conteyne: that by thy grace inhabytance
in me, I may thynke and performe in dede all thynges pleaſyng
to the / and declyne or auoyde all vyce and ſynne by perfyte hace
of them / and ſo continuynge vnto the ende: I may worthely receiue
thy preciouſe body and blood in the ſacrament of the aulter.
AMEN.
               
            
            
               ¶The .x. and laſt particle of this fyrſt parte. Of
the waſſhynge of his diſciples fete.
               
                  WHan this ſupper was done, and the Paſchall lambe
eaten, and whan the deuyll had put into the herte &
wyll of Iudas to betraye Chriſte, nat dyrec
                     •
                  y mouynge
his wyll, as the ſoule moueth the bodye: but
onely indyrectly by ſuggeſtion mouynge and perſwadynge
hym to betray Chriſte / and he conſented thereunto.
And here note that the deuyll can nat put euyll thoughtes into
ye hert of man: but onely offre them vnto man / which yf the man
receyue theym / and that appere to the deuyll by ſum outewarde
ſygne or token: than the deuyll bloweth at this coole to kyn
                     ••
                  e
and make the fyre burne / that is, he ceaſſeth nat to perſwade and
moue that man to conſent vnto that ſynne. And ſo it apperech
that the deuyll can nat caſt a man downe and ouercum hym: except
the man caſt hym ſelfe fyrſte downe, and rendre his armour
vnto his enemy / that is, excepte he conſent to the ſuggeſtyon and
mocion of the deuyll.Ioh. 13. A. This ſupper (I ſaye) done, and the
Paſchall lambe eaten / whan the deuyll had moued Iudas to betraye
Chriſte, and he conſented to the ſame: than Ieſus knowynge
as god, that his father had gyuen and taken into his handes
and power all thynges / alſo his enemy and traytour Iudas,
and the Iues his perſuers: yet to ſhew and declare his great pytie / 
& to leue to vs an example of his perfyte mekenes: he wolde
nat fulfyll or take vppon hym the power or myghte of god, or
offyce of a lorde, but rather the offyce and roume of a ſeruaunte.
He dyd meke hym ſelfe to be a ſeruaunt / for he cam to do ſeruice:
and nat to receyue the ſeruyce of other. And therefore he aroſe
frome his ſupper of the Paſchall lambe, wyllynge than to waſſhe
the fete of his dyſcyples there beynge / and ſo cauſyng water to be
brought vnto hym: he put of his outwarde garmentes / & gyrdyd

hym ſelfe with a lynen clothe. Than he put the water into a baſen
with his owne handes / and ſo charitably, ſo honeſtly, and ſo ſeruiceably
prepared: he cam to waſſhe his diſciples fete that were
defoiled with the claye and durte of the erthe / for they wente bare
fo
                     •
                  ed. And ſo he waſſhed theyr fete, & wyped them with the clothe
wherwith he was gyrte: and thus he fulfylled the office of mekenes.
And whan he came to Petre / he wolde nat ſuffre hym to
waſſhe his fete, but ſayd / thou 
                     •
                  hal
                     •
                  e neuer waſſhe my fete. And
Ieſus ſayde, Yf I waſſhe nat thy fete: thou ſhalte haue no parte
of my blyſſe with me. Than Petre, fearynge this ſentence: ſayd▪
Waſſhe (good lorde) nat onely my fete: but alſo my handes and
my hed. And Ieſus ſayd: He that is waſſhed, he nedeth no more
to waſſhe but his fete / for than he is all clene. What this ſignifieth:
ye ſhall know afterwarde.Ioh. 13. B. It foloweth in the goſpell of
Iohn: Ye be now clene, for I haue waſſhed you / but ye all be nat
clene. This he ſpake for Iudas, that ſhuld betray hym that ſame
nyghte / and therefore he was nat clene. There be two thynges
ſpecially, whereby a man is made clene from ſynne / that is, almoſe
dede, and charitie. Iudas had nat the fyrſt: for he was a
thefe, and toke vnto his owne vſe ſuche thynges as ſhulde haue
be gyuen to the pore. Alſo he betrayed his innocent maiſter, contrarye
vnto charitie / and ſo Iudas was nat clene. O thou
chryſtyan / conſyder here dylygentely euery poynte of this waſſhynge:
for they be full of mekenes and loue. Beholde what is
done: for it is very deuoute. Here the hyghe maieſtie of god,
and mekenes of the maiſter, dyd enclyne & bow hym ſelfe downe
to the fete of pore fyſſhers. He knelyd on his knees, and bowed
his hede before his diſciples ſyttynge / and ſo waſſhed theyr fete
with his owne handes / dyd alſo drye them and kyſſe them all.
               Beholde here the exemplar of all myldenes and mekenes, the creatoure
and maker of all creatures, the fearefull iudge of bothe
quycke and deade: knelynge here before the fete, nat onely of his
louynge diſciples: but alſo before the fete of the falſe traytoure
Iudas. O thou man / lerne here of thy lorde / for he is bothe meke
in herte, and gentyll in his conuerſacion. Be thou confounded
of thy hyghe mynde. Arte thou nat aſſhamed of thy pryde and
impacience? He that is ſyttynge aboue the high order of aūgels,
called Cherubyn, waſſheth the fete of his enemy & traytour: and
thou erthe & duſt, aſſhes & cley, exalteſt thy ſelfe, & thynkeſt great
thynges of thy ſelfe. Conſider diligently how our lorde inciteth &
moueth vs by his examples & alſo by his wordes vnto mekenes.

Therfore, after that he waſſhed his diſciples fete, ſhewyng there
                     ••
                  
to vs an example of great mekenes:Ioh. 13. B. he ſayd to vs: Exemp
                        •
                     um dedi
vobis vt quemadmodum ego feci vobis: ita et vos faciatis. I
haue gyuen to you an example, that as I haue done to you: ſo
ye ſhulde do.Mat. 11. D. And alſo he ſayde in an other place: Diſcite a me,
quia mitis ſum et humilis corde. Lerne of me / for I am mylde in
conuerſacion and meke in herte. And in this, he kept a conuenient
maner of teachynge. For as ſaynt Luke ſayeth: Cepit leſus
facere et docere. Ieſus began fyrſte to lyue and do well / and
after that,Act. 1. A. he dyd teache other to do the ſame. Spiritually, by
this outwarde waſſhynge of the fete, oure lorde dyd note the inwarde
clennes of our ſpirituall fete, which be our loue and a
                     ••
                  ections.
For theſe ſpirituall fete do bere vs where ſo euer we go frō
our ſelfe / or without vs. And as our bodyly fete hath ofte tymes
nede of waſſhynge: ſo oure ſpirituall fete. For thoughe we be
hoolly & clene waſſhed by the ſacrament of Baptym, in ſo moche
that yf we kepe that innocency and clennes that we by that ſacrament
receyue, vnto our dethe: we be ſure to go to heuyn without
any other waſſhyng: Yet, for aſmoche as there is very few or non
that kepe that puritie of theyr baptyſme after that they cum to the
yeres of diſcrecion, but yt oftymes they fall in one thyng or other
& that thrughe the fraile condicion of our mortall nature, ſo that
they defoile theyr fete with worldly, vayne, or carnall affectiōs:
therfore it is neceſſary yt they oft waſſh theyr fete with cōfeſſion &
teres of cōtricion. For who ſo euer after his baptym do fall to ſyn,
& be nat waſſhed with ye water of penaūce: he ſhall haue no parte
with Ieſu in his glory. By this waſſhyng of ye fete, our lord alſo
doeth note the clennes of our ſpirituall fete / whiche ſpecially is
required in the receiuing of the bleſſed body of our lord. And therfore
he dyd waſſhe the fete of his diſciples before he gaue to them
his gloriouſe body & blood: to ſignifie yt ſpirituall clennes is requyred
in the due receyuynge of the ſacrament of the aulter.
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Mylde Ieſu, and the exemplar of very mekenes / whiche
waſſhed the fete of thy diſciples / I aſke and alſo beſeche
the lorde, purge & clenſe thou myne affections / that I ſo purified
in bothe fete, & kyndled with a double charitie / that is, with the
loue of god and of my neighboure, I might ſurely cum to the my
puryfyer and clenſer. Kepe me clene good lorde vnto the ende
of my dayes / and clenſe me frome all ſpottes of ſynnes, that all
my negligencys and alſo ſynnes forgotten: myne enemyes, confounded

and rebuked, might go fro me at the houre of my dethe / 
whiche ſpecially wyll lye in awayte of me at that houre. Directe
and order my fete lorde in to the waye of peace / that I delyuered
from the handes and power of all myne enemies: myght bleſſe &
prayſe the with all they electe ſeruantes world without ende.
                  AMEN.
               
            
            ¶Here endeth the Proheme or fyrſte
part of this treatyſe. And here begynneth the
ſeconde parte, called the execucion.
         
         
            
               THexecucion of this glaſſe, ſhalbe aſentenciouſe
declaracion of our lordes paſſion, approbate &
taken of many holy doctours. As of ſaynte Hierom,
ſayntes Auguſtine, Bernarde, Simon
de Caſſia, Reynarde de Laudenburg / and for
the more part, taken of Ludolphe carthuſience.
And we ſhall folowe the proceſſe of the goſpell / 
begynnyng this declaracion of the paſſion, where as ſaynt Iohn
theuāgeliſt begynneth the paſſion of Chriſt / that is, in the .xviii.
chapitre of his euangely. And we ſhall diuide this part into .lxv.
articles. And euery article ſhall ſhew ſum notable poynt or payn
that Chriſt ſuffred. And to euery article ſhal we adde a document
or leſſon with a prayer / which prayers may ſerue vnto vs for two
purpoſes or cauſes. Fyrſt, it is as a ſummary and breue or ſhort
recollection or declarynge of all that was wryten in tharticle and
alſo document goynge before. Secondly, to kyndle the deuocion
of the reders / whiche deuocion, that it may be more encreaſed:
all thoo thynges that Chriſte dyd than ſuffre, ſhulde be ſo moche
imprynted in our herte, and ſo pleaſaunt to vs: as yf he had only
ſuffred them for vs, and our onely ſaluacion. And for this cauſe
alſo, all the prayers be fourmed and made in the ſingular nombre / 
to the intent that we may applye them to our ſelfe. As it ſhall
appere hereafter in the ſame prayers.
            
               
               ¶The fyrſt artycle. Of the feare and heuynes of Chriſte.
               
                  THe fyrſte artycle of our lordes paſſion, is the
voluntary takynge of feare and heuynes. For
as the euangelyſt ſayeth: Hymno dicto: exierunt
in montem Oliueti.
                  Mat. 26. C. For ſhortly after that
the ſupper was ended, and the deuout ſermon
the whiche he ſpake, was done: than he ſayd
grace / and ſo they wente vnto the mounte of
Oliuete. This ſermon is wrytten by the
Euangelyſt Iohn̄. And immediately after that ſermon: it foloweth
in the begynnynge of the .xviii. Chapytre. Hec cum dixiſſet
Ieſus: Egreſſus eſt cum diſcipulis ſuis trans torrentem Cedron.
               
               Whan Ieſus had ſpoken that longe and deuout ſermon:Capitul. 13. D. 14. 15. 16. et. 17. he went
from that houſe where as he made his ſupper / nat taryenge or abydynge
there for Iudas, whiche was gone to get a great company
of the Iues, for to take his maiſter Chriſte. Our lorde (I
ſay) wolde nat abyde the cummyng of Iudas in his hoſte houſe / 
leſſe paraduenture his hoſte, or ſum of his familie or ſeruauntes
ſhulde haue ben euyll entreated by the cruell Iues or theyr miniſters
and ſeruauntes / and therefore he wente thence ouer the ryuer
of Cedron. To ſignifie alſo to vs, that no man may attayne
and cum to the pleaſures and ioye of heuenly paradiſe: except he,
fyrſte paſſe ouer the ryuer and water of penaunce. And ſo, he
paſſyng ouer that ryuer of Cedron: cam vnto a lytle vyllage that
was at the fore of the moūt of Oliuet, called Gethſemany / where
as was a garden or orcharde / into the whiche he entred with his
diſciples. Gethſemani is as moche to ſay by interpretacion as
Villa pinguedinis. The towne of fatnes / ſignifienge thereby that
by the mekenes of his paſſion, he wold replenyſſh vs with the fatnes
of grace and vnction of the holy gooſt. And that he went into
the gardeyn: doeth ſignifie that he wolde by his paſſyon induce
vs and brynge vs into the orcharde of vertues and ſpirituall rycheſſe.
And alſo that the maner of our curacion and redemption
ſhulde correſponde and reaunſwere vnto the maner of oure
fyrſte tranſgreſſion and perdition, whiche toke begynnynge of
the ſynne of oure fyrſte father Adam in the orcharde of Paradyſe:
ſo in lyke maner our reparacion that ſhulde be made by the
paſſion of Chriſte, ſhulde haue his begynnynge alſo in the orcharde.

And whan they were in this orcharde or garden: our
lorde ſayd to his diſciples:Mat. 26. 
                        •
                     . 
                  Sedete hic donec vadam illuc et orem,
orate
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ne intretis in temptationem.
                  Luce. 2
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   Sy
                     •
                   here vnto the tyme I
go and praye / and praye you that ye be nat ouercum by temptacion.
It foloweth:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  Et aſſumpſit ſecum Petrum, Iacobum, et Iohannem.
And he toke with hym Peter,Libro. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Iames, and Iohn̄.
               And here noteth Simon de Caſſia / that a perſone, put in greate
agonyes or troubles, hathe neede to haue a certeyne trynytye
of vertues / withoute the whiche trynytye, he fyghteth in vayne / 
his prayer is fruſtrate / and his contemplacion of lytle profyte.
Fyrſte, he muſt haue a knowlege of thoſe thynges that he ought
to do / that is, the lyghte of true faythe / whereby he knoweth
all thynges neceſſarye for his ſaluacion. The ſeconde, is
a debellacyon and trewe ſupplantynge or ſubduynge of vyces.
The thyrde, is the aſſyſtante grace of the hooly gooſte▪
This trynytie of vertues is noted by theſe thre appoſtles, Petre,
Iames, and Iohn̄. And that appereth by the interpretacion
of theyr names. For Petre is as moche to ſaye (by interpretacion)
as knowynge / and ſo ſignifieth the ſtable knowledge
of the faythe. Iames is interpreted a ſupplantoure or a
ſubduer. And by Iohn̄ is ſygnyfyed the grace of god. And
withoute this trinitie of vertues, all oure laboure is in a maner
but loſte.Mat. 26. D It foloweth in the goſpell: Cepit Ieſus contriſtar
                        •
                     
et meſt
                        ••
                      eſſe. Ieſus began to be heuye and ſadde. Marke
ſayeth:Marc. 14. D. 
                  Cepit pauere et tedere. He began to feare and to be yrkeſom
or heuye. And here is the fyrſte poynte or artycle of the
paſſion of our lorde / that is, feare and heuynes / whiche he voluntaryly
toke for vs / and that in the mooſte intenſe and hygheſt degree / 
and this is to be vnderſtonde in lyke maner of all other artycles.
And note here the wordes of the Euangelyſtes / whiche
ſayeth: Cepit Ieſus contriſta
                        ••
                     , &c. Ieſus began to be heuye.
They ſay
                     •
                   nat that he was heuye / for than that paſſion of feare
or heuyneſſe, ſhulde haue had dominion in his ſoule. Whiche
was nat trewe / for he tooke that feare or heuyneſſe of his owne
voluntarye wyll / and that for many cauſes. As for the ruyne
or fall of his dyſcyples. For the blyndenes, enuye, and perdycyon
of the Iues. For the deſperacyon and dampnacion of Iudas.
For the diſtruction of the citie and temple of Ieruſalem.
And alſo for the bytternes of his greuouſe paines / and of the moſt
ſhamefull dethe / that by the vertue of his godhed, he knewe before,
that he ſhulde ſuffre it afterwarde. And therefore he ſayde:

                  Triſtis eſt anima mea vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad mortem.
                  Mat. 26. D My ſoule is heuye vnto the
dethe / that is. My heuynes is ſo intenſe and ſo greate, that yf it
were any more: dethe ſhuld folow. Or els, My heuines is ſuch,
that it ſhall nat cea
                     •
                  ſe or leue me vnto the dethe. And note how he
ſayeth, vnto the dethe / and nat thus, My ſoule is heuye for my
dethe. For he toke this ſorowe and heuynes wylfully for thobedience
of his father,Libro. 13. and ſaluacion of mankynde. And here Simon
de Caſſia noteth a good leſſon / that it is moche profitable to
preuent heuynes by heuynes / that is, eternall payn and heuines,
by temporall heuynes. This heuynes in Chriſte dyd excede all
the ſorowes and heuyneſſes of all the men of this worlde / for he
ſuffred for all the ſynnes of all mankynde.Pſalm. 21. And therfore he ſayeth
by the prophete: My god, my god, why haſt thou forſaken me?
This is the cauſe. The wordes of my ſynnes hathe put me tarre
from my helthe and conforte.De Geueſ
                        •
                      ad litterā .li. 4. ca. 9. Heuynes is than (for a truthe) a
laudable & commendable paſſion (as ſaynt Auſtyn ſayeth) whan
it procedeth of a ryght loue or good cauſe. As whan a man is heuy
for his owne ſynnes, or for the ſynnes of other perſones.
               Alſo heuynes is taken profitably,2. Cor. 7. C whan it is taken for the ſatiſfaction
of our ſynnes. And therefore ſaynt Paule ſayeth: Que ſecundum
deum eſt triſtitia: penitētiam in ſalutem ſtabilem operatur.
That heuynes whiche is accordynge to the wyll of god: doeth
worke penaunce into our ſtable and ſure helthe. And therefore
Chriſte, to do ſatiſfaction for the ſynnes of all men: toke vppon
hym the mooſt heuynes that might be / and yet it excedyd nat the
order and rule of ryght reaſon. Alſo he ſuffered payne in his body
for the ſynnes of all mankynde. Whiche payne and ſorow excedyd
the ſorowes of euery perſon contrite. And no maruell that his
ſorow was ſo greate / for it procedyd of a more depe or inwarde
knowledge and wyſdom / and alſo of a more perfyte charitie and
loue, than the ſorowe of any otherman. And theſe be the cauſes
whereby the ſorow of contricion is encreaſed. Alſo he ſuffered &
ſorowed for all our ſynnes / as the prophete ſayeth: Vere dolores
noſtros ipſe portauit.
                  Eſay. 53. B Truely he bare oure ſorowes, and ſuffered
for vs. Alſo Chriſte toke all the cauſes of our heuines / and therfore
his heuynes and ſorow was the mooſt. It foloweth in the
texte:Mat. 26. D 
                  Vigilate et orate ne intretis in temptationem. He ſayd vnto
his thre diſciples whom he founde ſlepynge, watche and praye:
that ye be nat ouercum by temptacion. He watcheth, that doeth
good werkes, and that kepeth hym ſelfe diligently that he fall nat
into any hereſy or derke and erroniouſe opinion. Spirius quidē
                     
promptus eſt, caro autem infirma. The ſpyryte is prompte and redy
to do well and to promiſe great thynges / but the fleſſhe is infyrme
& fraile to do good, or to ſuffre payne. And Chriſte ſpake
this for the proude folyſſhe perſons whiche thynke that they may
do what ſo euer they wyll.Suꝑ Ma
                        •
                     . 26. And hereunto ſaynte Hierom ſayeth:
As moche as we truſt of the feruour and redynes of our mynde &
ſpyryte: ſo moche we ſhulde feare of the infirmitie and frailtie of
our fleſſhe.Luce. 22. 
                        •
                     
                   It foloweth: Et poſitis genibus orabat dicens: Pater
ſi vis: tranſfer calicem iſtum a me. Ieſus knelynge, prayed to his
father / ſayenge: Father, yf thou wylte: thou may take this payn
and paſſion from me. Our lorde here prayed after his ſenſuall
wyll, to that that the reaſon of Chriſt dyd here expreſſe the affect
and deſyre of his ſenſualitie as the aduocate of ſenſualitie for this
tyme. And therefore whan he added in his prayer: Verumtamen
non mea voluntas, ſed tua fiat. This nat withſtandyng, thy wyll
be fulfylled / and nat myne: He dyd expreſſe that this affection in
hym was ſubdued to ryght reaſon / that is, to his reaſonable and
godly wyll / by the whiche he wolde the ſame thynge that god his
father wolde / from whom by this wyll, he was nat diuided.
               It foloweth:Luce. 22. 
                        •
                     
                   
                  Et cum ſurrexiſſet ab oratione et veniſſet ad diſcipulos
ſuos: inuenit eos dormientes. And whan he roſe from his prayer
and cam to his diſciples: he founde them ſlepynge. This corporall
ſlepe was a fygure & ſygne of the ſlepe of infidelitie / wherwith
they ſhulde be ſhortely greued and oppreſſed. Peraduenture
ſum perſon may maruell how that they myght ſlepe, heryng
of the dethe of theyr maiſter Chriſte? We may anſwere thus.
               They were very heuy for his dethe / and heuines wyll induce and
moue a man to ſlepe. Alſo it was than well forwarde in ye night.
And thoughe they all dyd ſlepe: yet he blamed Petre rather than
the other. Fyrſt, for bycauſe he booſted and ſayde, Though all
other forſake the: I wyl neuer forſake the. Therfore he was worthy
more to be rebuked. Alſo bycauſe he was the capitayne and
chefe of thapoſtles / and therfore Chriſt rebuked hym for them all / 
ſaynge to Peter thus:Mat. 26. D 
                  Sic? non potuiſti vna hora vigilare mecum?
What Petre? mayſt thou nat watche one houre with me? As yf
he had ſayd, How wylt thou dye with me, that canſt nat watche
one houre with me? And in that that he ſayeth, one hour: he ſignifieth
to vs, that the burden and tyme of temptacion, is very
ſhorte in the reſpecte of the remuneracion or rewarde in glory.
               And note, how that Chriſte dyd pray thre tymes one and the ſame
prayer / and after euery tyme he cam to his diſciples, and founde

them ſlepynge. He dyd thryſe pray the ſame prayer: to ſignifie to
vs (as ſaynt Bernarde ſayeth) that we ſhulde dyrect all our prayers
to the father, to the ſonne, & to the holy gooſt, that we might
haue ſpirituall ſtrength of the father, wyſdom of the ſonne, and a
good wyll, of the holy gooſt. Or therefore he prayed thryſe,
that we ſhuld excerciſe the thre powers of our ſoule in prayer / that
is, that our reaſonable power ſhulde be diligent in meditacion / 
our affection and concupiſcible power, ſhulde be feruent in deſyrynge / 
and our wrathfull power ſhulde be ſtronge in auoydynge
all euyll. Chriſte alſo, after euery tyme of his prayer, cam to his
diſciples, and founde them ſlepynge. At the fyrſt tyme, he rebuked
them, as we ſayd before. At the ſeconde tyme, he ſuffred thē.
And at the thyrde tyme, he commaunded them to ſlepe / ſayenge:
Dormite iam, et requieſcite. Slepe now, & reſt. And this was
to ſignifie thre maner of ſlepys. And that the fyrſte, whiche is the
ſlepe of ſynne, correſpondynge to the fyrſt ſlepe of the diſciples:
is to be reproued. The ſeconde, that is naturall ſlepe: is tollerable,
and to be ſuffered. And the thyrde, whiche is the ſlepe of
contemplacion and glory: is to be deſyred of all people.
               
                  ¶Here foloweth a leſſon or inſtruction.
                  
                     OF this artycle we may take this leſſon / that whan
we wolde pray deuoutly: that we ſhuld go to ſum
ſecret place from the noiſe or cumpany of men. Alſo
that we commyt all our tribulacions, heuynes,
paynes, and infirmities vnto the wyll of god, as
Chriſte dyd after his prayer / thoughe it ſo be yt we
praye and deſyre to be delyuered from theym, as Chriſte dyd: yet
let vs ſubmyt our wyll to the wyll of god. Alſo let vs put all our
tribulacions and paynes, as it were into the herte of Chriſte: deſyrynge
and prayenge hym that he wolde performe and make our
pacience perfite in the vnion of his paſſion / and ſo offer them to ye
laude and glorye of his father. For hereby oure tribulacions and
paynes ſhall be greately dignified. For as the paſſion of Chriſte
brought great fruite and conforte bothe in heuyn and in erthe: ſo
our paynes and tribulacions, what ſo euer they be, yf they be in
the foreſayde maner commytted and commendyd in the vnion of
Chriſtes paſſion: they ſhall be ſo frutyfull, that they ſhall bryng
ioye, to the aungels in heuyn / meryte, to the good perſones lyuynge
in erthe / forgyuenes, to the ſynners / and great refreſſhyng

and conforte, to the ſoules in purgatorye. And this is bycauſe
Chriſte reputeth and accompteth all thynges done to any of his
ſeruauntes, whether it be good or euyll: as done to hym ſelfe.
                  And therefore he ſayeth in the goſpell:Mat. 25. D 
                     Quod vni ex minimis meis
feciſtis: mihi feciſtis. What ſo euer ye haue done to one of the leeſt
of myne: ye haue done it to me. And in an other place he ſayd to
his diſciples:Mat. 10. D & Luc. 10. C 
                     Qui vos recipit: me recipit, et qui vos ſpernit: me
ſpernit. He that receiueth you: receiueth me / and he that diſpiſeth
you: diſpiſeth me. And ſo our ſauiour Chriſt taketh all our paines
and tribulacions committed to hym (as I ſayd before) as his
owne / and o
                        ••
                     rech them to his father as his owne with lyke effect
and fruite, as is ſayd before. Therefore euery good and faythfull
perſon ought moche to ioye in his tribulacions and paynes.
For what ſo euer he ſuffre: Chriſte doeth confeſſe that he ſuffreth
the ſame in hym and with hym.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, ſonne of the lyuynge god,
whiche at mydnyght thy paſſion drawynge nygh,
wolde take vpon the, feare & heuynes for me mooſt
wretchyd ſynner: graunt me continually & faythfully
to referre all my tribubulacions, heuynes, &
paines vnto the, the god of my hert / & yt thou wolde
voucheſafe to bere them with me in the vnion of thy paſſion and
heuynes. That ſo by the merites of thy mooſt holy paſſion, they
myght be made to me fruitfull and profitable. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the blody ſwet of Chriſte. The ſeconde article.
               
                  THe ſeconde artycle is the flowynge of the bloode of
Chriſte into the erthe by the maner of ſwet, or of the
blody ſwet of Chriſte, flowynge from his bodye into
the erthe. For the ſeconde tyme that Chriſt prayed: for
anguyſſhe he ſwet blood / and the aungell, deſcendynge from heuyn:
a
                     ••
                  ered to hym and conforted hym. It foloweth therfore
in th
                     •
                   goſpell:Luc
                        •
                     . 22. 
                        •
                     
                   
                  Factus in agonia prolixius orabat et factus eſt ſudor
eius ſicut gutte ſanguinis decurrentis in terram. Chriſte was in a
great agony / and therfore he prolonged his prayer. And in this
prayer for his great agony: his ſwet was as droppes of bloode
runnynge downe from his body into the erthe. Here do our doctours

ſay, that whan our lorde Ieſus Chriſte dyd ſo prolong his
prayer: his moſt holy hert was greatly enflamed / & ſo cōſequently
all his hole body moſt holy & moſt innocent. In ſo moche, that
thrughe that greate feruour of prayer, and his exceſſyue loue and
mooſt feruent deſyre that he had to ſuffre and to dye for our helth.
And of the other parte, thrugh the vehement angwyſſh and agony
that he had in his manhode in the remembraunce of his mooſt
greuouſe paynes and ſhamefull dethe that he ſhulde ſuffre / and
thrugh the ſtronge reluctacion and ſtryuynge of ſenſualitie, naturally
abhorrynge that dethe, and therfore myghtely fyghtynge
agaynſt it: for theſe cauſes (I ſay) the poorys of his body were
open, and ſo flowed out the blood for his ſwet. That vehement
angwyſſhe and exceſſyue loue conſtreyned the bloode to cum out
of the vaynes agaynſt nature (as Bede ſayeth) in ſo moche that
many droppes of blood ranne downe by his clothes and fell vpon
the erthe.Suꝑ Lucā li. 6. ca. 89. The loue of god in the herte of Chriſte, dyd ouercum
in that agony his natural feare and the feare of his manhode / and
ſo the bloode of Chriſte ſo quyckened and conforted by this loue:
was ſtyrred and moued, as yf it wolde haue cum all furthe of the
body at that tyme, thrugh that exceſſyue loue / as yf he wolde nat
or might nat haue abyden the tyme of his dethe appointed whan
all that blood ſhulde be vtterly ſheddyd. And ſo (I ſay) thrughe
this vehement loue: the droppes of blood dyd iſſue and fall from
the vaynes of his body. And as the inwarde cauſe of ſwet (after
naturall phiſiciens) is the naturall hete, diſſoluynge that is hote
and moyſt in the bodye: ſo the ſupernaturall cauſe of this bloody
ſwet myght be the feruent hete and burnynge of his exceſſyue loue
redowndyng from the herte of Chriſte into al his hole body there
diſſoluynge the vaporouſe moiſture. Phiſiciens alſo ſay, that
it is poſſible that a man may ſwet naturally thrugh the vehemēce
of loue. In lyke maner, as our doctours ſay, Chriſte ſwet blood
aboue nature thrugh his vehement feruour of charitie / for thā the
more he approched to his dethe: the more he burned in loue for
the feruente deſyre of our helthe. O, how bytter and paynefull
was this dethe of Chriſte in it ſelfe: ſythe the onely imaginacion
therof dyd ſo greatly chaunge thorder of nature: for it drew from
all the partes of his bodye, droppes of bloode: as yf he had ſwet / 
whiche blody ſwet ſhulde ſignifie and note to vs the helthe of his
miſticall body / that is, the catholicall chyrch. Hereto ſayth ſaint
Bernarde: By the erthe moiſted with the bloody ſwet of Chriſt:
is ſignified that erthely men ſhulde be redemyd by the bloode of

Chriſte. By the whiche blood alſo he ſhulde reduce vnto lyfe, all
the worlde ded in ſynne. Woo be to that wretchyd hert, that wyll
nat be moiſted and made ſofte with this blood or ſwet. Beholde
thou wretche the great tribulacion of this moſt mylde, gentyll, &
louynge herte, in what angwyſſh it was: whan all his bodye on
euery parte ſwet blood. O thou my ſtony herte, quake and tremble,
and breke in pecys, and moyſt thyne iyen with blody teres / 
for as thou mayſt ſe, thy creatour and maker is all wet in bloode
for the / and that with ſuche plenty: that it ranne downe vpon the
erthe. And ſurely, his body outwardly wolde neuer haue bene ſo
wet with bloode: yf his herte inwardly had nat ben broken with
ſorowe and heuyneſſe. Therefore the prophete ſayeth in the
perſone of Chriſte:Pſal. 37. It Hier. 23. B. 
                  Contritum eſt cor meum in meipſo. My herte
is broken within me. The herte of our mooſte louynge Ieſus
thus inwardly broken or cut: the outwarde ſkynne alſo was broken / 
ſo that his blood myght abundantly flow out vpon the erthe.
And this bloody ſwette was very naturall and true bloode of the
mooſt pureſt body of Chriſte. But as we ſayd before, it was nat
ſhed naturally / for it is agaynſt nature, to ſwet blood.
(⸪) (⸫)
               
                  ¶Doctrines or holſom leſſons.
                  
                     IN this artycle we may take thre holſum and profytable
leſſons. Fyrſte, by the apparicion of the aungell.
&c. We be enfourmed that the holy aungelles
of god do aſſyſt vs and alſo conforte vs in our prayers.Pſalm. 67.
Hereunto ſayeth the prophete Dauyd: Preuenerunt
principes coniuncti pſallentibus. The prynces or holy
aungelles do preuent them that prayſe god or praye to hym with
theyr helpe, and alſo be ioyned vnto them in theyr prayſynges.
                  And in an other place he ſayeth:Pſal. 137. 
                     In conſpectu angelorum pſallam
tibi. I ſhall ſynge to the, or prayſe the lorde, in the ſyghte or cumpaignie
of aungelles. The ſeconde leſſon. In that that oure
lorde in his age went vnto prayer, & alſo continued longer tyme
in the ſame: we be inſtructe in all oure trouble or neceſſytye: to
runne vnto prayer. And the more that oure neceſſytye is: the
more to continue our prayer. The thyrde doctrine, is taken of
this pryncypall article / & is this / that in our prayer we ſhuld be ſo

feruent and intent thereunto, that thrugh the vehemence of our
intencion and feruour of our deuocion: we ſhuld ſwet as it were
bloode, by conformynge our ſelfe to the paſſion of Chriſte, & by
the feruour of our loue vnto god.Gloſa ordina
                           •
                        ia. Hereunto ſayeth the gloſe, Ad
Romanos. 8. That that charitie whiche is in vs by the grace of
the holy gooſt: that ſame doeth mourne / that ſame charitie doeth
pray for vs. And agaynſt this charitie, he that gaue it: can nat
ſhyt his eares. Moreouer that charitie doeth mourne and pray,
vnto it droppe blood. And that is, whan deuocion is ſo feruently
kyndeled in the herte: that for the loue of god (yf nede requyred)
he wolde nat be afrayd to ſhed his blood. And therefore pray ye
deuoutly and hertely in the maner folowyng / or in any other lyke
maner after your deuocion.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  O Lorde Ieſu Chriſte, ſonne of the lyuynge god, whiche
in thy long prayer wolde be conforted of the aungell / and
in thy agony ſwet meruelouſly droppes of blood: graūt
to me by the vertue of thy prayer, that thy hooly aungell myghte
euer aſſyſt me in my prayer, and conforte me / that I reſtynge in
the ſwete remembraunce of thy mooſt bytter paſſion: myght deuoutly
ſwet the droppes of teares for thy bloode in thy ſyghte and
knowledge. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the vendition or ſellynge of our lorde.
The thyrde article. ❧
               
               
                  THe thyrde article is the ſellynge of our lorde. Whiche
ſellynge, though it began and was promyſed before
the other two articles that we haue ſpoken of: as whā
Iudas went to the prynces of the preeſtes / ſayenge to
them: What wyll ye giue to me, and I ſhal gyue hym
in to your handes? Whiche was done vpon the wednyſday as we
ſayd before in the fyrſt part of this boke.Particle. 8. At whiche tyme this contracte
was than begun & promyſed.Luce. 22. A. As ſaynt Luke ſayeth: Pacti
ſunt ei pecuniam dare, et ipſe Iudas ſpopondit. The Iues dyd
couenaunde and promiſe to gyue hym money / and Iudas promiſed
to fulfyll his ſayenge. Though (I ſay) this ſellynge was begun
vppon the wednyſdaye: yet it was nat perfourmed vnto the
tyme that Iudas went from our lorde and his apoſtles after ſupper
vppon the thurſeday in the night, vnto the prynces of the Iues,
and there receyued his money / that is, thyrty pennys of ſyluer / 

and ſo was that ſellynge perfourmed / and this article appered
in effecte. And it is conuenient that this ſellynge be numbred
amonges the poyntes of Chriſtes paſſion: for therby he ſuffered
great diſpiſynge. What is nat a great rebuke & diſpiſynge
to Chriſte, that he whiche is mooſt noble and good, and of infinite
goodnes, in whom be all treaſures of wyſdom & knowledge
hyd / whiche is alſo lorde of all lordes, and kynge aboue all kynges:
to be eſtemed and ſolde for ſo vyle a pryce? Alſo the ſorow
of Chriſte was moche encreaſed, in that that he was ſolde ſo vilely
of his owne diſciple / of one of thoſe twelue whom he dyd choſe
ſingulerly amonges all the world to be his apoſtels and meſſangers.
And of this the prophet greatly complaineth in the perſon
of Chriſte,Pſalm. 54. ſayenge: Si inimicus meus maledixiſſet mihi: ſuſtinuiſſem
vti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     . Yf myne enemye had dyſpyſed me: I ſhulde quietely
haue ſuffered and borne it.Pſalm. 40. And in an other pſalme: Etenim homo
pacis mee in quo ſperaui qui edebat panes meos magnificauit ſuper
me ſupplantationem. O, or truely the man of my peace (that
pretendyd loue and peace to me) in whom I truſted / (for he kept
all the mony that we had for the neceſſities of me & myn apoſtles / 
and alſo for to releue the pore people) whiche eat my bread & meat
(ſat at the meat with me) This man (and pretenſe frende I ſay)
hathe magnyfyed agaynſte me his ſupplantacion / his pryuye
and mooſte craftye treaſon. He craftely and deceytefully hathe
trayterouſly betrayed me and ſolde me. O vnwyſe and mooſt
wretchyd and vnhappy marchaunt / who hath lerned or taughte
the ſuche marchaundyſe: that thou ſhouldeſt put the pryce of thy
marchaundyſe to the wyll of the byers / that the byer ſhulde make
the pryce thereof. Whan a thynge is folde (yf it be thoughte
precyouſe, or of any greate valoure: the marchaunte that ſellyth
it, wyll nat put the pryce of the ſame in the arbytremente or wyll
of the byer, that he ſhulde make the pryce at his pleaſure. But
yf the ſeller or marchaunt ſet lytle or nought by the thyng that he
ſelleth: than he regardeth nat yf the byer make the pryce. And ſo
dyd Iudas, whan he ſolde our ſauioure Ieſu Chriſte. For he
ſayd to the Iues: Quid vultis mihi dare, et ego eum vobis tradam?
What wyll ye gyue to me, and I ſhall betray hym and gyue hym
into your handes and power. As yf he ſayd: Make what pryce
ye wyll: and I ſhall fulfyll your wyll. O mooſt wycked crueltie.
O mooſt craftye wyckednes. The creature ſellyth his creatoure
and maker. The dyſcyple, his mayſter / the ſeruaunte, his
lorde / the famylyar, his mooſt dere frende. There be many

now a dayes lyke vnto Iudas / which wyl ſell & forſake iuſtice for
temporall lucre / & ſo they ſell god, that is very iuſtice. So do all
they that commyt ſymony / which ſell the grace of god, or ye ſacramentes
of the chyrche / or els ſpirituall thynges: for temporall
thinges. As thoo prelates & iudges that ſell the true & iuſt ſentēce / 
that is, whiche wyll nat gyue the iuſt & true ſentence without rewardes.
Alſo thoo religiouſe perſons & preſtes yt wyll nat pray,
ſay maſſe, or miniſtre the ſacramentes without money. All theſe
with ſuche other, be lyke vnto Iudas / & ſay with hym (though nat
in wordes, yet in dedes) what wyl ye gyue to me: & I ſhal betray
Chriſt & gyue hym to you?Micheas 3. D. Of theſe maner of perſons, it is wryten
by the Prophete Micheas: Principes eius in muneribus iudicabant,
et ſacerdotes eius in mercede docebant. The prynces and
iudges dyd iudge for gyftes / & the preſtes taught for rewardes.
               And note that the ſyn of ſimony is nat onely in the ſeller: but alſo
in the byer or receyuer. And ſo nat onely Iudas dyd ſynne in the
ſellyng of Chriſte: but alſo the Iues in byeng of hym. That perſon
doeth bye Chriſte of me, which gyuyng to me any temporall
thyng: taketh Chriſt frō me. As yf a flaterer wold falſly cōmende
& praiſe me, where as I am nat worthy / by the whiche laude and
prayſe, my hert is exalted in pryde: he taketh Chriſt fro me / & I,
conſentynge to yt praiſe: do ſell & betray Chriſte for a lytle vayne
glory or prayſe. In lyke maner, a man gyuynge to me money or
any other thynge ſo mouyng me to mortall ſynne: he wolde take
Chriſte from me. And I conſentynge to the ſame: do betray & ſell
Chriſte. And yet neither he by his byenge may reteyne and kepe
Chriſte / neither I with my ſellynge, may kepe Chriſte with my
ſelfe, nor with the byer. And ſo neither Iudas nor the Iues had
Chriſte to theyr ſaluacion / but by that bargayne he was purchaſed
and gotten to vs chriſtians that truely ſerue Chriſte. Many
people in the remembraūce of this ſellyng, that was made on the
wedniſday: do faſt or abſteyn frō fleſſhe for the loue of Chriſte.
               
                  ¶Two doctrynes or holſom leſſons.
                  
                     THe fyrſt leſſon is, that we ſhulde be well ware that
we neuer commytt ſo abhomynable ſyn / that is, to
ſell our lorde / as to bere falſe wytnes for rewardes
or gyftes / or in iudgement to denye the truthe / that
is, to ſelle Chriſte, whiche is verye Iuſtice and
truthe. And generally to ſpeke: that we neuer ſell

ſpirituall thynges for temporall lucre. The ſeconde doctrine
is, that we paciently ſuffre to be ſolde, diſpiſed and ſet at nought
for the loue and laude of god / ſayenge with the prophete.Pſalm. 68. 
                     Quoniam
propter te ſuſtinui obprobrium. I haue ſuffered & borne rebuke
for the good lorde. In conſyderynge this article: let a man remembre
his owne vylenes / and whether he hathe ſolde Chriſte,
omyttynge or brekyng his commaundementes for any temporall
thynge or vayne loue. Remembre alſo how that whan he hath
ſolde Chriſte: he hathe recouered and gotten hym agayne freely
of the mere goodnes of god. Remembre furthermore, yt Chriſte
is yet to be boughte / and that is with charitie or good werkes.
                  Therfore bye thou hym with almes. And yf thou haue no money
or goodes to gyue: gyue to hym than thy hert / for yt is the thynge
whiche he loueth and deſyreth aboue all the thynges in the world / 
and therfore he ſayeth by the wyſe man:Prouerb. 23. C. 
                     Fili prebe mihi cor tuum.
Son, gyue to me thy hert / and yf thou loue me: I wyll loue the.
And than pray thus as foloweth.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  O Ieſu, whiche woldeſt be ſet at nought, and ſolde of one of
thy diſciples for a vyle pryce: graunte to me that I neuer
chaunge the my god and creatour for any tranſitory thynges / and
alſo that I may paciently bere al rebukes and diſpiſynges for the
glory of thy holy name. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the betrayenge of our lorde. The .iiii. article.
               
                  THe .iiii. article is, of the treaſon of Iudas / how
trayterouſly he betrayed our lorde. Whan the
vendition or ſellyng was conſumate and put in
effect. In the mean tyme our lorde beynge in his
prayers, and than thryſe cummynge to his diſciples:Mat. 26. E
at the laſt tyme he ſaid to them: Surgite,
eamus, ecce appropinquauit qui me tradet. Ariſe,
go we / he that ſhall betray me, is nigh at hande. In theſe fewe
wordes, our lord doeth fyrſt enfourme vs to ſpede vs to ſpirituall
battell or temptacion, in this worde aryſe. Secondly he moueth
vs to profyte in good werkes, in this worde, go we. Thyrdely,
in the other wordes folowynge: he moueth vs to awayte at all
tymes and houres for temptacion / for our enemies be euer redye
to tempte vs.Mat. 26. E It foloweth in the goſpell: Et adhuc eo loquente.

Ecce Iudas vnus de duodecim cum accepiſſet cohortem venit. &c.
                  Ioh. 18. A.
Our ſauyour Chriſte, yet ſpekynge to his diſciples: Loo, Iudas,
one of the .xii. apoſtles of Chriſt, after that he had taken his
money and a great cumpany of ſouldiers (to the numbre of fyue
hundreth, as Papias ſayeth) he cam, & with hym a great numbre
of people with lanternes and burnynge brondes / with armour,
ſwerdes, battes, and clubbes, ſent from the prynces of the preſtes
and phariſies from the ſcrybes and the ſeignours of the people.
               Wherof ſaint Auſtin ſayeth:Marc. 14. E. What ſhulde ſuche a great people do
to ſeche one perſon? What ſhulde tho armed men do, to ſeche one
man without armour or weapon? What ſhulde they ſeche hym in
the nyghte, that was dayly teachynge, and that openly in theyr
temple?Cap. 24. A. This acte was fygured in the fyrſt boke of the kynges / 
where as Saule toke thre thouſande armed men to ſeche for Dauyd.Suꝑ. Ioh. 18.
And note here (as maiſter Lira ſayeth) that Iudas dyd
arme and defende hym ſelfe fyrſt with a great cumpany / ſtronge,
and of auctoritie / and that was agaynſte the multitude of the comon
people, that they ſhulde nat let hym in his purpoſe. Secondly,
he cam with great lyghtes / that Chriſte ſhulde nat eſcape
from hym in the darkenes of the nyght. And thyrdly, he defendyd
hym ſelfe with armour / that yf any body wolde reſyſt theym:
they wolde defende them ſelfe, & alſo put the other people a backe.
And Iudas that promyſed to betraye Chriſte: gaue to his cumpany
a pryuy token or ſygne / ſayenge: Quemcum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      oſculatus fuero,
                  Marc. 14. E.
                  ipſe eſt: tenete eum et ducite caute. Whom ſo euer I kiſſe: that
ſame is Chriſte. (This he ſpake, that they ſhuld nat take Iames
the leſſe for Chriſte / for he was very lyke in face vnto Chriſte).
And furthermore Iudas ſayd / whom I kyſſe: holde hym, and
lede hym warely. For ſum of theym thoughte that he wroughte
by nygromancie or wytchecrafte.Luce. 11. C. For they ſayd an other tyme of
hym / that he caſte oute deuylles in the power of Beelzebub, the
prynce of the deuylles.Ioh. 18. A. It foloweth in the goſpell of ſaynte
Iohn̄: Sciens Ieſus omnia que ventura erant ſuper eum proceſſit.
Ieſus knowynge all thynges and aduentures that ſhulde cum
vnto hym: wente towardes theym and met with theym, that all
men myght know that he was taken voluntarilie with his owne
wyll. And anon Iudas approchynge towardes hym, ſayde:
Aue rabi.
                  Mat. 26. E Hayle mayſter. Et appropinquauit vt oſcularetur eum.
Iudas drewe nygh,Luce. 22. E to the intente that he myght kyſſe Chriſte / 
and ſo he dyd. In this poynt there be thre thynges expreſſed:

that made this betrayenge moche paynefull or ſorowfull vnto
Chriſte. One is, that it was done by one of his owne diſciples.
The ſeconde is, that he ſo falſely and trayterouſely betrayed
Chriſte with the ſygne or token of peace,Suꝑ Lucā li. 10▪ ca. 95. and kyſſe of loue
or frendeſhyppe. Of the whiche ſaynt Ambroſe ſayeth: O Iudas,
thou woundeſt thy mayſter & lorde with the token or pledge
of loue / and thou bryngeſt hym to dethe with the kyſſe of familiaritie
and frendeſhyppe. The thyrde, was nat leſſe paynefull,
that the falſe traytoure with his ſtynkynge mouthe durſt touche
or kyſſe that mooſte louely and mellifluouſe mouthe of Chriſte,
the eterne ſonne of god. If it be paynefull to a man to kyſſe the
mouthe of hym that hathe a ſtynkynge brethe: how moche more
was it than paynefull to oure fauyour Chriſte, to take a kyſſe
of that mooſte ſynfull and ſtynkynge mouthe of Iudas / whoſe
herte was replenyſſhed with the deuyll and all wyckednes. And
than Ieſus ſayde vnto hym:Luc. 22. E. 
                  Iuda, oſculo filium hominis tradis▪
                  
Iudas, wylte thou betraye the ſonne of a vyrgyn, thy mayſter
vnto the dethe with a kyſſe or token of peace? All traytours vnto
truthe, feynynge the truthe: do vſe this ſame token of frendeſhyppe,
a kyſſe.Mat. 26. E Alſo Chriſte ſayde vnto Iudas: Amice, ad
quid veniſti? Frende, for what intente cummeſt thou? He
called Iudas frende, onely to rebuke hym for his falſe diſſimulacion.
I do nat remembre that this worde Amice in the vocatyfe
caſe: that is, O frende: is ſpoken to any one good perſone / 
but to euyll perſones, it is dyuerſe and many tymes ſpoken.
               As is ſayde in the goſpell of ſaynte Mathew:Mat. 22. B 
                  Amice, quomodo
huc intraſti?. &c. O frende, how dyddeſt thou entre vnto this
feaſte, nat hauynge a conuenient garment? And alſo in an
other place is ſayde thus:Mat. 20. B 
                  Amice, non facſo tibi iniuriam. O
frende, I do vnto the non iniurie or wronge. And here now at
this tyme. O frende, wherefore cummeſt thou? As he myghte
ſay: Thou kyſſeſt me, to the ende to betraye me vnto the dethe.
To gyue a kyſſe: it is a ſygne or token of a frende / but thou cummeſt
nat therefore, ne to that intente. And nat withſtandynge
that thou haſte done cruelly and trayterouſly agaynſte me: yet
retourne to me, and I ſhall gladly receyue the, as a frende to the.
And ſo wolde Chriſte haue don (after all doctours) yf he had retourned
and bene ſorye for his ſynne and wretchydnes. But he
was ſo indurate and ſo obſtinate of herte, that none of all theſe
thynges coulde call or reuoke hym agayne, or make hym to leue
his falſe and trayterouſe purpoſe / and ſo he kyſſed hym.
               
                  
A fygure herof we haue in ye ſeconde boke of kynges.Cap. 20. C. Where as ye
the falſe traytoure Ioab toke his coſyn Anaſa by the chynne / kyſſynge
hym, and ſayenge Salue mi frater. Haile my brother / and ſo
ſlew hym with that worde. Our lorde called Iudas by his propre
name, to the intent to prouoke hym to grace, and nat to myſchief / 
but he wolde nat receyue grace. O thou innocent lambe
Ieſu, what doeſt thou in cumpany with that wolfe Iudas, that
wyll deuoure the. Morally, Iudas betokeneth the worlde / 
whiche doeth ſmyle or laugh vpon vs: whan he gyueth to vs ryches
at our pleaſure. Than he kiſſeth vs: whan he gyueth to vs
ſolace and worldly pleaſure. But than doeth he halſe vs: whan he
gyueth to vs honours and dignities. And in all theſe he deceiueth
vs, and betrayeth vs into eternall dethe. As witneſſeth Iob, ſayenge:
Ducunt in bonis dies ſuos:
                  Iob. 21. B. 
                  et in pūcto ad inferna deſcēdunt.
Theſe worldly people lede theyr lyfe here in pleaſure: and in an
inſtant they deſcende downe to hell.
               
                  ¶Here foloweth two leſſons.
                  
                     THe fyrſt leſſon. Who ſo euer fayneth to loue his neighbour,
and ſecretly worketh euyll agaynſt hym: he betrayeth
his neighboure. Whiche falſe diſſimulacion:
our lorde taketh as done to hym ſelfe / for ſo he ſayeth:
What ſo euer ye do to one of my leeſt ſeruauntes:Mat. 25. D I
take it as done to my ſelfe. The ſeconde is, that we ſhulde nat hate
our aduerſaries: but louyngly and charitably correcte theym / as
Chriſte dyd Iudas.
               
               
                  ¶A Prayer.
                  O Ieſu that ſuffered thy ſelfe to be betrayed by a kyſſe of Iudas:
graunt to me that I neuer betray the in my ſelfe, nor
in my neighbour. And alſo, that I neuer deny to myne aduerſaries
thoffice of loue / that is, charitie / to loue them, and to correct
them with charitie. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the takynge of Chriſte. The .v. article.
               
                  THe .v. article, is the takyng of Chriſte. Which was
done in this maner. What tyme the wycked Iudas
had kyſſed our lorde / Ieſus knowynge what ſhuld
cum vppon hym ſelf: went vnto the cumpanye of
the ſouldiers & of the Iues that cam with Iudas,
& ſayd vnto them:Ioh. 18. A. 
                  Quem queritis?. &c. Whom ſeche

you? And they ſayd, Ieſus of Nazareth. And Ieſus ſayd to thē,
I am. At whiche worde, they went backewarde, and ſo fell vnto
the grounde backewarde. And here note that they that fall backewarde:
do nat ſe where they fall. Signifienge thereby, that they
fall from grace,Suꝑ. Ioh. tra
                        ••
                     . 112. B. into ſynne / from god, vnto the deuyll / from heuym,
into hell. And here alſo ſaynte Auſtyn ſayeth: Yf he that
cam to be iudged, caſte his aduerſaries downe with one worde:
what ſhall he do whan he ſhall cum to iudge all the worlde? Yf he
dyd thus whan he came to dye: what ſhall he doo to his enemies
whan he ſhall cum with great power & maieſtie to reigne in glory
for euer? Surely he ſhall than caſt his enemies backeward into
euerlaſtynge paynes with this terryble worde:Mat. 25. D Go ye curſed
in to euerlaſtynge fyre. And whan his aduerſaries the Iues
were ryſen agayne, Ieſus ſayd / agayne vnto them: whom ſeche
you? whom wolde ye haue? And they aunſwered, Ieſus of Nazareth.
Here was a meruelouſe thynge / they knewe hym nat / nor
yet his owne diſciple Iudas whiche cam to betray hym. And this
is as great a ſigne or token that may be: that he was nat taken,
but at his owne wyll / and therefore he gaue theym licence to take
hym,Ioh. 18. B. whā he ſayd: Si ergo me queritis: ſinite hos abire. Yf ye ſeche
me, or wolde haue me: ſuffre theſe that be with me, to departe
without hurte or trouble. Our lord was diligent to helpe his diſciples,
that they ſhulde nat be taken / that his wordes whiche he
ſayd the ſame nyght after ſupper:Ioh. 17. B. ſhuld be true / that is: Quos dediſti
mihi:
                  Ioh. 18. B. 
                  non perdidi ex eis quem
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     . Father, I haue nat loſt any
of them, whom thou haſte gyuen to me. And ſo his diſciples eſcaped
thrugh the goodnes and power of Chriſte / that afterwarde by
them myght be ſhewed the worde of helth, the goſpell of Chriſte,
thrughout the hole worlde. The diſciples of Chriſte, ſeynge and
perceyuyng what was lyke to cum to theyr maiſter Chriſte, ſayd
vnto Chriſte:Luce. 22. E 
                  Domine ſi percutimus gladio. Maiſter, ſhall we
ſmyte with the ſwerde?Ioh. 18. B. Petre beynge haſty, and nat abydynge
the aunſwere of our lorde: drew out his ſwerde, and ſmote at one
of the byſſhop ſeruauntes called Malchus / and cut of his ryghte
eare.Suꝑ Mat. To ſignifie (as Origene ſayeth) that thoughe it be ſene or
thought that they here the law of god:
                     Omel. 35. that is onely with the lefte
eare / for they onely here the ſhadow and the lettre of the law: and
nat the truthe and miſterie therof. Alſo Petre that cut of this
right eare: may ſignifie to vs the faithfull people of the gentiles / 
the whiche in that that they beleuyd in Chriſte: were the cauſe by
occaſion, that the ryght herynge of the Iues was cut away. But

yet that ſame ryght eare was reſtored agayne by the goodnes of
god,Luce. 22. F. vnto thoſe Iues that beleuyd in Chriſte / and therefore he
touched the eare of that ſeruant: and cured hym / ſhewynge there
in dede,Mat. 5. G. that whiche he taught before / ſayenge: Bene facite his qui
oderunt vos. Do good to them that hate you. And this he dyd as
well for the conuerſion of the people that were there preſente, or
that ſhulde here thereof: as for our inſtruction. He cured hym,
that ſhortely after ſhulde buffet hym and ſmyte hym / for oure example / 
that we ſhulde do good agaynſt euyll.Suꝑ Lucā. And hereof ſayeth
Bede:Capitu. 89. Our mercifull lorde wyll neuer forget his pitie / which
alſo wolde nat ſuffre his enemies to be wounded. And therefore
he ſayd to Petre and his diſciples:Luce. 22. F. 
                  Sinite vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      adhuc. Suffre yet.
As yf he had ſayd: Suffre the Iues to cum and take me. Who ſo
euer taketh the ſwerde and ſmyteth without auctoritie: they ſhal
peryſſh with the ſwerde. In theſe wordes alſo he thretened & moniſſhed
the people / whiche had no auctoritie to ſlee hym. He ſayd
furthermore to Petre:Mat. 26. E 
                  An putas quia non poſſum rogare patrē meum,
&c. Thynkeſt thou that I may nat deſyre my father for helpe
yf I wold / & he wolde ſende to my helpe aboue .xii. legions of aū
                  gelles.Ioh. 18. B.
Euery legion conteineth .vi.M.vi.C.lx.vi. Wyl nat thou
that I ſhuld be obedient to my father, & drynke of the cuppe / that
is, to ſuffre payne & dethe / the which my father wyll that I ſhuld
drynke or ſuffre / Yf nat, how ſhall the ſcriptures be fulfylled,
that ſayeth, that theſe thynges muſt be done? Therefore now ſet
all vengeaunce a parte / and let vs be pacient. And than our lorde
ſayd to the people that cam to take hym:Mat. 26. F 
                  Tan
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      ad latronem exiſtis
cum gladiis et fuſtibus comprehendere me. Ye cum with ſwordes &
clubbes, to take me as yf I were a thefe. As yf he ſayde: Why do
ye nat cum to take me quyetly and without ſuche violence / for I
was dayly in your temple amonges you teachynge. Yf ye wolde
haue had me: ye myght than haue taken me quietly at your pleaſure.
But this is your hour and tyme graunted vnto you to take
me. This is the power of the prynce of darkenes, that hath ſtyrred
you to do thus. O what myldenes was in our ſauioure Ieſu
Chriſte / that ſo gentylly ſpake vnto his aduerſaries / and ſo louyngely
rebuked theym, to ſwage theyr malyce and iniquitie / 
and alſo to moue vs to folowe his benignitie and gentylnes.
               This nat withſtandynge, the ſouldyers and the mynyſters of
the Iues layd vyolent handes vppon our lorde Ieſu, and ſo toke
hym. And though he was taken of his owne free wyll: yet that
captiuitie and takynge was moche paynefull to hym.
               
                  
For ſythe it is paynfull to euery man that is put in captiuitie / for
as moche as thereby his libertie is taken from hym, and he put in
to thraldome / his libertie (I ſay) is taken from hym / as well the
libertie of condicion, as of operacion and werkynge. The libertie
of condicion is taken from hym. For after the Ciuile law:
he is in bondage and thraldome. Alſo his libertie of operacion is
taken from hym. For he that is ſo taken, can nat werke & do what
he wyll: but as it ſhall pleaſe hym that hath hym in captiuitie.
               For theſe cauſes (as ye may perceyue) it is moche paynefull for a
man to be put in captiuitie: moche more than it was paynefull to
our lord Ieſu (whiche is the lorde and maker of heuyn and erth / 
and whom heuyn or erth can nat comprehende nor take) to be taken
and holden in captiuitie with the violent handes of ſo cruell
perſones. And in this acte was verified the ſayenge of Dauyd / 
whiche ſaid of Chriſte many yeres before:Pſalm. 58. 
                  Ecce ceperunt animam
meam, irruerunt in me fortes. Beholde (ſayeth Chriſte by the prophete)
ſtronge and cruell perſons hath fallen vpon me, and they
haue taken me.Pſalm. 93. And in an other pſalme: Captabunt in animam
iuſti, et ſanguinem innocentem condemnabunt, They ſhall take into
captiuitie the rightuouſe perſon / and they ſhall condempne the
innocent blood.Tren̄. 3. F. Alſo the prophet Hieremie ſayeth: Venatione ceperunt
me quaſi auem inimici me
                        •
                     . Myne enemies hath taken me
with theyr huntynge, as a byrde in a ſnare or with an hawke.
               Thus our true Ioſeph (Ieſus Chriſte) was taken of his bretheren
and led into Egipte / that is, into angwyſſh and tribulacion.
And ſo I ſay they toke hym and bounde hym / as we ſhall declare
in the next article.
               
                  ¶A leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take a moral leſſon / that as Chriſt
for our loue dyd ſuffre hym ſelfe wylfully to be taken of
the Iues: ſo we for his loue ſhulde ſubdue our ſelfe and
all our ſencys vnto the obſequye and ſeruyce of Chriſte:
accordynge to the ſayenge of the apoſtle / ſubduynge our wyt and
reaſon to the fayth and ſeruice of Chriſte.2. Cor. x. B
                  
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu Chriſte, the ſonne of the lyuyng god, which wolde
be wylfully taken and holden of the Iues: graunt to me
that I may continually ſubdue all my ſencys and vnderſtandynge

vnto thy ſeruyce / that by thy infinite goodnes, I may
be delyuered from eternall dethe and captiuitie. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the byndynge of our lorde. The .vi. article.
               
                  THe ſyxt article, is the byndynge of our lorde. For the
Iues, after that they had taken Chriſte: they bounde
hym ſo harde and ſtrayte: that (after ſaynt Anſelme)
the bloode ſprange out of euery fynger ende vnder the
nayles. They boūde his bleſſyd handes behynd hym / 
they caſt hym downe vppon the erthe, as he before had caſt them
downe by his godly power. Moreouer they dyd trede vpon his
breſt / and ſpued or ſpytted in his face. Alſo they ſo harde boūde
hym by the necke and throte: that he was nygh ſtrangled, yf god
had nat preſerued hym for a tyme, that he ſhulde ſuffre more and
greater paynes after this tyme. They bounde hym for thre cauſes.
Fyrſte, that he ſhulde nat eſcape theyr handes. For Iudas
bad them holde hym faſt, and lede hym warely. Secondely,
for they intendyd to ſley hym. For it was a cuſtome amonges the
Iues, that whom they iudged worthy dethe: he ſhulde be boūde
and ſo preſented to the preſident and iudge. Thyrdly, he wold
be bounde for a miſterie, for bycauſe he cam to lawſe and delyuer
them that were bounde with the bondes of ſynne, and alſo thoſe
that were bounde as pryſoners in Limbo patrum: therefore he
wolde be wylfully bounde as a thefe, thoughe he were all innocent
and without ſpot of ſynne. Our fyrſt father Adam dyd commyt
theft, what tyme he ate of thapple that was forbydden hym / 
for whoſe ſyn all mankynde was taken and holden by the deuyll
as theuys. For whoſe ſatiſfaction Ieſus Chriſt wolde be taken
as a thefe / though in hym ſelfe he be incomprehenſible. Alſo he
wolde be bounde: whiche cam to lawſe them that were bounde.
               And they bounde hym with thre ropes or bondes. One about his
handes. The ſeconde, about his necke. And ſum do ſay that that
was a chayne of yron. And the thyrde, about his myddell. And
theſe bē repreſented in the ornamentes of the preeſt at his maſſe.
               The fyrſte, by the maniple vpon his arme. The ſeconde, by the
ſtole in his necke. And the thyrde by the gyrdell. O my mooſt
dere beloued Ieſu, the very true vyne. Who is he that doeth nat
ſe and conſyder the bondes wherewith this oure vyne tree was
bounde? He was bounde with ſeuen bondes. The fyrſte (ſayeth
ſaynt Bernarde) I trow, was his obedience, whereby he was

obedient to his father, vnto the death of the croſſe. He dyd alſo obey
to his mother Marie, and to his father putatiue Ioſeph. As
ſaynt Luke ſayth:Luce. 2. G. 
                  Venit Nazareth: et erat ſubditus illis. Ieſus
came to Nazareth with mary and Ioſeph, and was obedient to
them. He was alſo obedient vnto the emperour, paynge tribute
vnto hym.Mat. 17. D & 22. C. The ſecond bonde was the wombe of the virgyn Marie.
Hereunto the churche ſyngeth of our lady in a certen reſpond,
whom the heuens coulde nat take: thou virgyn hath conteyned
hym in thy wombe.Luc. 2. The thyrde bonde was his cradell bondes
or the cryb, wherin he was layde / as ſaynt Luke ſayth. The .iiii.
bonde was this bonde, wherwith he was bounde whan he was
taken. O howe rughe and harde were theſe bondes of theſe moſte
cruell Iues, wherwith they bonde that moſt mylde lambe Ieſus
Chriſte. O good Ieſu, I conſidre and ſe with the eyen of my
ſoule, the ſwete lorde bounde with mooſt harde ropes and drawen
as a thefe, to the houſe of the prynce of preeſtes. I ſe this good
lorde, and I abhorre it, and alſo moche meruayle thereat, and
ſo meruaylynge / I ſhulde faynte and alſo dye for ſorowe, but that
manifeſtly I knowe that thou was fyrſte bounde in thy herte
with the bondes of loue and charitie, whiche louyngly dyd drawe
the to ſuffer gladely theſe outwarde bondes. The fyrſte bonde
was that wherwith he was faſtyned to the pyllar whan he was
ſcourged, of the whiche we ſhall ſpeake hereafter. The ſyxte
bonde, was the crowne of thornes wherewith his heed was faſte
bounde, as we ſhall declare hereafter. The ſeuenthe bonde
were the nayles that nayled his handes and feete faſte vnto the
croſſe.Li. 1. ca. 10. G. & Li. 4. cap
                        •
                     . 70. B. Or elles we may ſaye after ſaynte Birgitte in her reuelations,
that this ſeuenthe bonde, was that corde and rope wherwith
they drewe his arme and his feete, ſo that all the ioyntes of
his body were diſſolued,Ancelmꝰ in dialogo paſſionis. M. for fyrſte they nayled his ryghte hande
and then they drewe the left hand with a rope vnto the hoole that
was made before for that hande. And in lyke maner they drewe
his feete, ſo that al his veynes and ſynewes braſt, and all his ioyntes
looſed, ſo that a man myght nombre all his bones, as the prophet
Dauid ſayth.Pſal. 21. And this payne was ſo great & greuous that
the lyfe myght nat continue with it in any other man, but Chriſte
preſerued his lyfe vnto ſuche tyme it pleaſed hym to yelde vp his
ſpirit into ye handes of his father,Iohā. 10 D. & therfore he ſaid: Poteſtatē habeo
ponēdi āam meā & nemo tollit eā a me. I haue power to gyue
vp my ſoule at my pleaſure. Alſo no man may take my life frō me,
but I ſhall forſake it at my wyll, and at my wyll take it agayne.

Our ſauyour Ieſu thus taken and bounden, al his diſciples forſakynge
hym for feare fledde from hym, as we ſhall declare in the
nexte article.
               
                  ¶Here foloweth .iii. leſſons.
                  
                     THe firſt leſſon is our lord wolde be bounde, bycauſe
that he wold looſe the bōdes of our ſynnes. Secondly
he wold be bounde, for that he wolde bynde vs to
hym with the bonde of charite. He is the ſame bonde
of charitie wherwith our ſoule is bounden to god.
He is ſignifyed by the reed coorde or lyne, whiche Raab tyed in
the wyndowe of hyr houſe for a ſure ſigne or token that ſhe and al
hyrs, ſhulde be ſaued at the deſtruction of Hiericho. So ſurely
euery faythfull ſoule corrupte by the olde ſynne of Adam, and ſo
ſignifyed by Raab that is comonly noted for a comen woman,Ioſue. 2. C. 
                           •
                        . 6. D. yf
this ſoule be regenerate by the fayth of Chriſt, and haue this reed
corde tyed in the wyndowe of hyr inwarde houſe, by the whiche
the lyght of god entrethe in to hyr ſoule, without doubte ſuche a
ſoule hath a ſure token of hyr health, for ſuche a ſoule is ſo tyed vnto
god, and god vnto hyr: that ſhe can nat lyghtly be ſeparat from
god. This is alſo the corde or rope wherwith our lord was tyed
vnto the pillar, whiche without doubte was reed, for it was made
reed with the holy blode of Chriſt.Rom. 8. B. This is alſo that lyne or corde
wherwith Paule was ſo ſurely faſtened to Chriſte, that nothyng
myght depart hym from Chriſt. Nother tribulation / ne anguiſh
nor hungre / nor nakednes / perſecution nor ſwerde / and ſhortly to
ſpeake, no creature myght departe hym from the charite of Chriſt
The thyrde leſſon is that we ſhuld ſo bynde all our membres, and
ſpecyally our tonge / with the cordes of the preceptes of god, that
ſhe ſhulde nat be looſed vnto any thynge contrarie to the wyll of
god or his commaundementes.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  O Ieſu whiche wold be bounde with the handes of wycked
men. I beſeche the looſe the bondes of my ſynnes, and ſo
bynde me to the with the bondes of thy preceptes, that neuer
the membres of my body, nor the powers of my ſoule be looſed
and at lybertie to do any thynge contrarie to thy wyll. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               ¶Of the fleynge or departynge away of
the diſciples of Chriſte.
The .vii. article.
               
                  THe .vii. article is of the departyng awaye or fleyng of
the diſciples of Chriſte. Of the whiche it is wryten in
the goſpel thus:Mat. 26. F 
                  Tunc omnes relicto eo fugerunt. Whan
Ieſus was taken, then all his diſciples lefte hym and
fled from hym. This fleynge and departyng was no
lytell payne to Chriſte. And therfore this article is nombred with
the other articles of his paſſion, for ſpecyally he was ſory for this
maner of departynge. And of this departynge ſpeaketh Iob in
the perſon of Chriſt ſayenge.Iob. 19. B. 
                  Fratres mei elongauerunt a me et no
ti mei quaſi aliem receſſerunt a me. My bretherne haue gone farre
from me and myne aquayntance or knowen diſciples as ſtraungers
hath forſaken me. And in a token or remembraunce of this
forſakyng: the aulters on ſhire thurſday be bared, for all theyr ornamentes
be taken awaye, and the aulter lefte naked and bare.
Chriſt is this aulter. and the apoſtles be the ornamentes, whiche
fled from Chriſt, and left hym alone in the hādes of his enemies.
Our lorde was heuy and ſory of this departyng of his diſcyples,
nat for hym ſelfe: but for them, that they were ſo ſclaundered in
hym. Of this ſorowe ſaynt Ierome ſaythe: It is nat to be beleued
that this departynge was without greate anguyſſhe and heuynes
of the herte of Chriſte, and alſo it was nat without greate
mornynge and wepynge of the apoſtles. For I can nat thynke
that after they ſe that cruell compeigney take and bynde our ſauiour
Ieſu theyr moſt louynge maiſter: but that they wept and ſaid
with greate ſorowe. O mooſt benygne mayſtre / more ſwete or
pleaſaunte than all hoony. It is moche ſorowfull to vs to ſe the
ſo cruelly entreated of the malycyous Iues. Alas, we wretches,
what ſhall we do, leauynge ſo gracyouſe a father, we forſake all
our goodes and folowe the, and nowe we perceyue for a ſuerty
that we ſhalbe pryued of thy preſence / and wante thy confortable
wordes and dedes, for we be aſſured nowe that the Pharyſeys
wyll ſley the. O howe ofte (ſuppoſe you) dyd they looke backe
towardes theyr mooſt mercyfull mayſter, ſeynge and beholdyng
with bytter ſorowe theyr lorde ſo cruelly ledde of the malicyouſe
Iues, as we ſhall declare in the next article.
               
                  
                  ¶Here foloweth .vi. cauſes of the fleyng or
departynge of Chriſtes diſciples.
                  
                     OF theſe diſciples:Pſal. 21. the prophet ſpeaketh in the perſon
of our lorde ſayenge: Diſperſa ſunt omnia oſſa mea.
All my boones are diſperpled or deuyded, that is
all my apoſtles, whiche / as bonys in a mannes bodye
ſhulde haue ben moſt ſtronge, and yet they are
 fled and fallen. And that for .vi. cauſes. The fyrſt
cauſe was that the doctrine of Chriſte god and man, was forgoten
then of them,Pſalm. 21. and therfore the prophet Dauid ſayth: Factum
eſt cor meum tan
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         cera liqueſcens ſo medio ventris mei, My herte
is made as wax meltynge in the mydle of my body, that is. My
doctrine is vanyſſhed throughe the heete and fyer of my paſſyon,
and that in the myddle of my bely, that is, in my apoſtles that be
 mooſt nyghe vnto me. The ſeconde cauſe, was the ceaſynge of
myracles. Of the whiche, alſo it folowethe in the forſayde .xxi.
pſalme: Aruit tan
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         teſta virtus mea. My vertue and power is as
drye as a ſhell. And that was bycauſe he ſuffred hym ſelfe to be
taken, and ſo put to moſt cruell and ſhamefull deathe, and wolde
nat helpe hym ſelfe and ſhewe his power as he had done dyuerſe
tymes before. But nowe he wold nat ſo do / & therfore his power
of in ſhewynge of myracles ſemed to be conſumed and dryed by
the heete and fyere of hys paſſyon, and hereunto ſpeakethe the
prophet,Abacuch. 3. A. ſaynge: Ibi abſcondita eſt fortitudo eius. There was
hyd his power or ſtrength that is in his croſſe or paſſyon. And
note / that the ſayde not, his power was loſt, but his ſtrength was
hyd in his paſſyon, as we ſhall declare in the thyrde parte of this
 treatyſe in the .iiii. fruyte. The thyrde cauſe was the ſilence of
Chriſte, for at his paſſyon he wolde nat ſpeke for hym ſelfe. Therfore
ſaith the prophet:Pſal. 21. 
                     Adheſit lingua mea faucibus meis. My tong
cleuyd faſte to my iawes or chekes, for he wolde nat ſpeake to his
owne excuſe, and therfore the prophet Eſay long before this tyme
ſayd of hym:Cap. 53. C. 
                     Quaſi agnus coram tondente ſe obmuteſcet et non ape
riet os ſuum. He ſhalbe as domme as a lambe whan he is ſhorne,
and he ſhall nat open his mouthe. And this prophycie was verifyed
in Chriſte as it is playnly wryten in the goſpell:Mat. 17. B 
                     Et non
reſpondit e
                           •
                         ad vllum verbum, ita vt miraretur preſes. Chriſte anſwered
nat one worde vnto Pylate, whiche meruayled moche
 therof. The .iiii. cauſe was that they were in a maner ſure of the
deth of Chriſt, but they were in a diſpeyre or miſtruſt of his reſurrectiō.
And therfore the ꝓphet Dauid ſaith in ye perſon of Chriſt.

                     Et in puluerem mortis deduxiſti me.
                     Pſal. 21. Thou haſt brought me in to
aſſhes, or in to the duſt of deth. And this he ſpake after the opinyon
of the Iues.Pſalm. 87. As it appereth in an other pſalme: Eſtimatus
ſum cum deſcendentibus in lacum. I am eſtemed and accompted
by the Iues with them that deſcende in to the lake and pytte of
eternall perdition, and neuer to retourne agayne. The .v. cauſe 
was the crueltie of the Iues, and therfore the prophet ſaythe in
the perſone of Chriſte:Pſalmo. 21. 
                     Circumdederunt me canes multi. Many
dogges haue compaſſed me, that is the Iues barkynge and bytynge
by detraction as dogges. The .vi. cauſe was the congregation 
of euyll perſones / and therfore it foloweth in the pſalme:
Conſilium malignantium obfedit me.
                     Pſal. 21. The congregation and counſayle
of euyll perſones haue obſeſſed and beſeaged me. and that
very obſtinately and fro wardely vnto my deathe. Of this compeigney
and counſayle ſpeaketh the prophet Dauid in an other
pſalme ſayenge:Pſal. 2. 
                     Aſtiterunt reges terre et principes conuenerunt
in vnum aduerſus dominum et aduerſus Chriſtum eius. Rewlers of
the worlde and princes ben cume to gyther in counſayle agaynſte
our lorde and agaynſt his ſonne Chriſte. And for theſe cauſes
the apoſtles flodde and forſoke our lorde. Whereat wonderynge
and meruaylynge the prophet Hieremy ſaythe:Tren̄. 4. A. 
                     Quomodo diſper
ſi ſunt lapides fanctuarij: Howe is this / that the holy ſtoones ben
diſperpled? that is the apoſtles of Chriſt whiche ſhulde haue ben
as holy ſtones ſtrong / ſtable & firme in the faith & loue of Chriſte,
but they fled.Zach. 13. C. 
                     Percutiam paſto
rem et diſpergentur oues gregis.
                     Mat. 26. C I ſhall ſmyte or take the herdeman,
and the ſhepe of the flocke ſhalbe diſperpled abrode.
               
               
                  Here folowethe .ii. leſſons.
                  
                     THe fyrſte leſſon is that we ſhulde be well ware that we 
neuer flye from Chriſte. He flyeth from Chriſte, that
for any feare of man / or by the temptation of the deule
or by any paſſyon or corrupte affection forſaketh the
truthe or iuſtice, for Chriſte is truth and alſo iuſtice.
And generally, in euery mortal or deedly ſynne, a man flieth from
god. The ſeconde leſſon is this / that thoughe theſe perſones 
that ſeame to be our frendes or neyghbours and louers, flye from
vs in the tyme of our aduerſytie and neceſſitye, yet lette vs beare
it patiently / remembrynge that the apoſtles fled from our ſauyour
Chriſte in his aduerſitie and trouble.
               
               
                  
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu that dyd ſuffre all thyne electe and choſen diſciples
to flye from the: receyue thou me thy fugitiue ſeruaunt
for thy greate vertue and omnipotent power. And ſuffre
me nat to wandre from the, thorughe the libertie of my frowarde
wi
                        ••
                     . Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the leadynge of Chriſte. The .viii. article.
               
                  THe .viii. article, is of his leadynge. For after that
they had taken and bounde hym, and after that
his diſciples fledde: the Iues led Chriſt towardes
the houſe of Annas.Capi. 18. E. As it is in the goſpell of Iohn̄.
And this ledynge was moche laborouſe and paynefull
to Chriſte. Alſo it was rebukefull and violent.
It was violent: for he was led with a great cumpanye of armed
men and theyr captayne with them. It was alſo rebukefull to
Chriſte, for he was led with his handes bounde as a thefe or an
euyll perſone.Ioh. 18. C. And ſo the Iues ſayde to Pilate: Yf this perſone
(that is Chriſte) were nat a malifactour or an euyll doer & a myſlyuer:
we wolde nat haue delyuered hym to thy handes and power.
This ledynge was alſo laborouſe, paynfull, and ſorowfull
to hym. And that bothe to the herte inwardely, and alſo to the
bodye outwardely. Fyrſte, it was ſorowfull inwardely. For
where euer herde you of any man, that wolde nat be heuy in hert,
and inwardly ſory, to be lad with the handes of his enemies, ſo
cruelly, with ſo great a cumpany of armed men, with ſuche and
ſo many rebukes and reprouynges, bothe in worde and in dede,
as thoſe mooſte cruell Iues dyd vnto Chriſte at that tyme & ledynge.
That ledyng was alſo paynfull to his body. For though
he wente wylfully with them: yet they drewe hym with a rope,
they thruſt hym & droue hym forwarde / and oft tymes they thruſt
hym downe and ranne ouer hym / and ſo drewe hym thorughe the
vale of Ioſaphat, from the flood or ryuer of Cedron, vp towardes
Hieruſalem / ledynge hym with great haſte and violence, he
goynge bare foted / and therefore they greuouſly hurted & wounded
his mooſt holy fete in that ſtony and mooſt harde waye. In
ſo moche, that the ſteppys of his mooſt hooly fete were dyed and
wet with blood. For cruelly thoſe Iues (whoſe fete were ſwyfte
& redy to ſhed the innocent blood) thoſe Iues (I ſay) mooſt cruelly
thruſted hym from the one parte of the waye, vnto the other
parte or ſyde. But wherfore dyd Chriſte ſuffre all theſe paynes

and rebukes, but onely to cure the woundes of our fete, whiche
haue gone to do many a ſynfull dede / and ſpecially the woundes
of our ſpirituall fete and inordinate affections.Cātic. 3. A. 5. C Chriſte ranne
thrugh thornes and breres, ſechynge for his ſhepe that was loſt.
He ſought hym by the brood ſtretys and narow lanes / and ſo the
watchemen of the citie founde hym / they ſmote hym, they wounded
hym and toke from hym his pall and garmentes. So that it
may be well verified of Chriſt, that is wryten in the fyrſt boke of
Paralipomenon:Cap. 21. B. 
                  Ex omni parte anguſtie me premunt. Anguyſſh,
troubles, & paynes oppreſſe me on euery part. Sum doctours
don ſay, that what tyme the Iues led Chriſte towardes Hieruſalem:
thy came by the ryuer & water of Cedron, the miniſtres
and the people went ouer the brydge / but they drew Chriſte boū
                  den
thrugh the water, ſo that the watre entred into his mouthe &
body. At whiche tyme, what for the coldnes of the water, and alſo
for his longe prayenge in the garden or orcharde: all his body
was ſo colde, that all his tethe dyd quyuer and ſhake in his hed
for colde.Pſalm. 68. Herein were fulfylled the ſayenges of Dauid: Saluum
me fac deus quoniam intrauerunt aque vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad animam meam.
Saue me my lorde god / for the waters haue entred into me.
               And in an other Pſalme:Pſal. 109. 
                  De torrente in via bibet propterea exaltabit
caput. He ſhall drynke of the ryuer in the way, and therfore
he ſhall exalte his hed. And whan they cam to Hieruſalem, they
dyd nat brynge hym in by the ſame gate that he wente furthe at,
whan he went to Bethany: but by an other gate, called the golden
gate. And it was ſo called: bycauſe all the golde that was
gyuen to Salomon, was brought in by that gate and all other
thynges yt were of great valour. By this gate alſo was brought
in all ſuche ſacrifices as were offered in the temple. And for as
moche as Chriſt, whan he entred into this worlde, he cam in by
the golden gate / that is by the virgyns wombe: it was conuenient
that whan he ſhulde departe from this worlde vnto his father
by his dethe and paſſion: that he ſhulde goo to his dethe by this
golden gate. And the Iues brought hym in by this gate: bicauſe
there ſat at that tyme many Scribes and Phariſeis, for the more
ſuretie that the comon people ſhulde nat take Chriſte from them.
And one doctoure ſayeth,Britſch. in 40. lib. Alphabet. 44. B. that in that golden gate were grauen &
painted the ymages of Patriarches & Prophetes in ſtone werke.
And at the entryng of Chriſte by this gate: all thoo ymages dyd
reuerently inclyne to Chriſte, as to theyr creatour and maker.
               Alſo this ſame doctoure ſayeth, that the multitude of the preſtes

and ſcribes went with a great compaigney vnto the forſayd gate
cryenge and ſayenge: Beholde the theſe is taken, the deuliſſhe
perſon, the deceyuer of the people, the breaker of the lawe, and
ſo they caſt durte and clay agaynſt hym. Alſo it is ſayd / that from
the place where as they toke and bounde hym, vnto the houſe or
palace of Annas, ware .iii. M. paſſys ſaue .xv. And here note,
that Chriſt this day in the proceſſe of his paſſyon, was .ix. tymes
led from place to place, as we may playnly ſe in the goſpelles.
Fyrſte as ſoone as he was taken and bounde,Ioh. 18. C. he was led vnto the
houſe of Annas.
                     Ibid. D. Secondly from Annas, vnto Caiphas, Thirdly
from Caiphas,
                     Ibid. C. vnto Pylate. Fourthly from pilate, vnto Herode.
Fyftly from Herode,Lu. 23. A. b. vnto pylate agayne. Sextly the ſoudiours
led him in to the courte of the comen haulle,Mar. 15. B motehaule or
iudgement houſe, where as they mocked hym and put a crowne
of thornes vpon his heed.Ioh. 19. A. Seuenthly Pilate led hym from that
place out vnto the Iues, cladde in an olde purpure garment, and
the crowne of thornes vpon his heed.Ioh. 19. C. Eyghtly / Pilate led hym
from the motehaule vnto a place called Lichoſtratos, where as
he iudged hym to be crucified.Iohā. 19 D. Neyntly / they led hym from thenſe
vnto the mownte of Caluarie where as they dyd crucifie Chriſte.
               
                  ¶Here foloweth a leſſon.
                  IN diuers contreis it is a laudable cuſtome amonges faith
full chriſtianes, that on good frydaye they go aboute from
the mornynge vnto the .ix. houre of the day, that is from .vi. of the
clocke vnto .iii. of the clocke at after noone, and viſyte .ix. churches,
in the remembraunce that Chriſte that day was .ix. tymes
led from place to place as we ſayd before. And nowe for a leſſon / 
they that ſo viſite .ix. churches / I wolde they remembred what
Chriſte ſuffred in euery place. Fyrſte what he ſuffred whan he
was ledde to the houſe of Annas / and alſo what he ſuffred there.
Secondly what he ſuffred in Caiphas houſe and ſo furth of al other,
as ye ſhall ſe declared herafter in diuerſes articles. And alſo
that a man myght conforme hym ſelfe to this article, he ſhulde remembre
how obprobriouſly and ſhamefully Chriſte was led lyke
a thefe and a rober, and in this conſideration: he ſhulde haue a
full purpoſe, that he wyll, with the helpe and grace of god, be applyable
to all vertue / and alſo to ſuffre / or to do all thynges that
ſhalbe to the wyll and pleaſure of god. And let hym pray as foloweth / 
or in lyke maner,Pſal. 14. 2. 
                     Spiritus tuus bonus deducet me in terram
rectam. Thy good ſpirite ſhall guyde and lede me in to a ryghtful

contrey.Pſal. 118. Or thus: Deduc me domine in ſemita mandatorum
tuorum. Leade me good lorde in the pathe of thy cōmaundmentes
or any other prayer as god ſhal put in to your mynde.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche bounde as a thefe and an euyl doer, wolde
be led by the armed handes of wicked men from place to
place with great rebuke and ſhame: graunt to me that
grace / that I neuer be led vnto any ſynne, throughe the perſuaſion
of the deule / or counſaile of any wicked perſon, but that I
may be leade by the holy ſpirite vnto all thynges that ſhalbe pleaſaunt
vnto the. Amen.
               
            
            
               How Chriſt was preſented vnto Annas.
The .ix. article.
               
                  THe .ix. article is of the preſentynge of Chriſte vnto Annas.
For after they had brought Chriſt vnto the golden
gate of Hieruſalem, nat without his great payne, for
one drewe hym by his garmēt / another by the necke and
the thirde by the heire of his heed / they brought him fyrſte vnto
Annas bycauſe his houſe was in the way, and they thought that
they ſhulde haue ben rebuked: if they had ouerpaſſed hym, for as
moche as he was father in lawe vnto Caiphas, whiche was the
high biſſhop for that yere. And therfore they firſt preſented Chriſt
vnto Annas / willyng therby to honore Annas, and alſo to reioyſe
of that great acte whiche they had done in takyng of Chriſte,Prouer. 2. C. for
as the wiſe man ſaith, Letantur impij cum malefecerint. &c. Wicked
men be glad whan they do euyl, and they reioyſe in their moſt
miſcheuouſ dedes. Alſo they firſt preſēted Chriſt vnto Annas, bycauſe
that leſſe defaut ſhulde be founde and put in Caiphas for
the condempnation of Chriſt ſeinge that Chriſt was alſo condēpned
of ſuche a wiſe / ſage and alſo high biſſhop as Annas was. In
this houſe of Annas, our lorde ſuffred .iii. thynges moche paynfull
to hym. The fyrſte was the horrible denyenge of Petre. The
ſeconde was the indiſcrete queſtion of the biſſhop. And the thirde
was the myghty ſtroke that the ſeruaunte gaue to hym vpon hys
face. Firſt he ſuffred the denyenge of Petre, whiche was horrible
and alſo paynful to Chriſt for .vi. cauſes, that is for the multitude
of people that were preſent at that denyenge, ſecond was bycauſe
Petre was ſo ſlacke to folowe his maiſter. &c. theſe cauſes and
the other .iiii. ſhalbe declared in the next article.
               
                  
                  ¶Here foloweth a leſſon.
                  
                     IN this article we may take this leſſon, that we ſhuld
not be moche afrayed to be preſented before a ſeculer
iudge for the loue and fayth of Chriſte, and to 
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     re
for Chriſte, for therby cometh greate grace to man.
Therfore our lorde ſayd to his diſciples: Whan your
enemyes ſhal betray you and preſent you vnto ye great iudges of
the worlde,Mat. 10. C. be nat afrayed / nor to ſtudiouſe what ye ſhall ſaye,
it ſhalbe gyuen to you at that tyme by the ſpirite of god what ye
ſhall ſaye. And this is noted in this article, in that that Annas
is as moche to ſay by interpretation: as deuotion. Not that Annas
nor any temporall iudge may gyue to that perſon whome he
iudgethe any grace or deuotion: but for as moche as thoſe holye
perſones ſuffre greate wronges of ſuche iudges: the goodnes of
god gyueth to thoſe that paciently ſuffre iniuryes: his grace, for
all grace is of god.
                        Eccl. 32. B. And hereunto the wyſe man ſayth: Audi tacens,
et pro reuerentia accidet tibi bona gratia. Here thou & obey
patiently, and for thy reuerence, good grace ſhal come to the. And
that a man myght conforme hym ſelfe vnto this article: he ſhulde
remembre howe reuerently and paciently our lorde and ſauyour
Ieſus ſtode then before Annas & the Iues. And then pray thus.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  O Ieſu whiche wolde be firſt led and preſented vnto the byſſhop
Annas: graunt to me that I neuer feare to be ledde
or preſented for thy name and faythe, before any tiraunte
or ſeculer iudge of this worlde. And alſo that thy grace & ryght
reaſon haue euer the dominion in me, that I may lerne to preſent
all myne actes / willes and deſyres vnto the examination of right
reaſon before that I do them in dede, thy grace at all tymes beynge
aſſiſtant vnto me. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the denyenge of Petre. The .x. article.
               
                  THe .x. article is of ye denyeng of Petre, what tyme Ieſus
was led to the houſe of Annas, Petre folowed a farre of
to ſe the ende what they wolde do with Chriſt. There
folowed alſo Iohan whiche was well aquaynted with
the byſſhopes ſeruauntes, and knowen to the byſſhop, and therfore
he entred in with the other Iues into the byſſhopes palace,

but Petre abode without. And then Iohn̄ ſpake to the maide that
kept the doore, to let Petre come in. And whan ſhe ſe Petre: ſhe
ſayd to hym:Ioh. 18. C. 
                  Nū quid et tu ex diſcipulis es hominibꝰ iſtius? Art thou
nat of the diſciples of this man? that is of Chriſte. And Petre
ſayd: I am nat. The wordes of this mayden myght ſeme more to
be ſpoken for compaſſyon of Chriſte, and to admonyſſhe Petre to
bewarre of ſuche compeigney as was then within in the courte,
rather then to betraye Petre, for ſhe ſe hym verye fearfull, he was
ſo afrayed that he denyed Chriſt to be his maiſter. The miniſtres
and ſeruauntes ſtode at the coolys or fyre and warmed themſelf,
and Peter ſtode amonges them. And then a nother mayden ſaid:
This felawe was with Ieſu, and the compeigney that was there
ſayd / truely he is one of them,Mat. 26. G for he is a Galilee, that is a man of
the contreth of Galilee. Then Petre denyed it with an othe, and
ſayd:Luce. 22. F. I knowe nat that man. After that by the ſpace of one houre
the compeigney ſayd to Petre agayne: veryly / thou arte one of
them,Ioh. 19. E. and ſpecyally one perſone coſen to Malchus / whoſe eare
Petre ſmote of: ſayd to Petre: Dyd nat I ſe the in the garthen or
orcharde with Ieſu? And than Peter began to ſweare / to curſe
and banne and ſayd: I neuer knewe this man of whom ye ſpeake
and furthwith the cocke dyd ſynge or crawe.Luc. 22. G. And then our lorde
turned hym and behelde Petre. And Petre remembrynge the ſayenges
of Chriſte before, how that he ſhulde thryſe denye hym before
the cocke craw, he went furth of the biſſhopes palace or court
and wepte full bytterly.Suꝑ Mat 26. And here ſayth ſaynt Hierome: Petre
myght no longer abyde in derknes, for the lyght of the mercyes
of god dyd ſhyne vpon hym, and therfore he wepte. And Petre
after this had euer in vſe & cuſtome to ſtande in prayer and wepe
from the fyrſt cocke crawe: vnto the ſonne ryſynge, in the remembraunce
of his thryſe denyenge of Chriſte. Alſo he bare alwaye
with hym a ſudarie, to wype awaye the teares that continually
fell from his eyen for his ſynne. And for the ſame ſynne he wepte
ſo moche, that his face ſeamed to be aduſte and burned with the
teares. And therfore he deſerued to haue forgyuenes both of his
ſynne & of the payne due for his ſynne. This threfolde negation
of Petre, was no lytel payne vnto our ſauiour Ieſu, for it greued
hym very moche to heare & ſe howe his owne chefe apoſtle, whom
he had ordred to be called a ſtone, wherupon he wolde founde and
buylde his churche, to ſe hym (I ſay) ſo openly and ſo ſhamefully
thryſe to denye his own mayſter Chriſt, & that at the voyce of one
mayden or woman. And note here that as a woman was the firſt

mouer of man vnto ſynne, ſo a woman compelled the firſt prynce
and prelate of Chriſtes churche to denye Chriſte openly, ſo that
by this exemple the infirmite of Petre myght more clerely appere
to hym ſelfe. And this is it that we ſayde in the .ix. article, that
Chriſt ſuffred in the houſe of Annas, the denyeng of Petre which
was ſhamefull to Petre and moche paynfull to Chriſte, and that
for .vi. cauſes. Fyrſte for the multitude of people that were then
preſent, for he denyed Chriſte in the byſſhopes palace, where as
was at that tyme, moche people gathered, and therfore this ſynne
was moche more greuous, than if it had ben done in a pryuate
and ſecrete place. Secondly, it was the more ſhamefull to Petre / 
for his ſlaknes in folowynge Chriſte, for he folowed a farre of / 
thoughe before he had ſpoken and made his boſte that he wolde
rather dye then denye hym. The thyrde cauſe was the vylenes of
the perſone that moued the queſtion vnto Petre, for it was a woman,
nat a noble woman, but a ſeruaunt, and other vyle ſeruantꝭ,
which was ſo moche the more to ye rebuke of Petre, that he wolde
denye his lorde god, at theyr queſtions. Fourthly for Petre ſhortly
and lyghtly denyed Chriſt at one worde of a pore and vyle ſeruaunt.
The .v. cauſe is the periurie and curſynge of Petre, for
this made his ſynne moche greuous.Libro. 13. And therfore ſayth Symon
de Caſſia: Petre in his wordꝭ & his threfold negation, dyd greatly
rebuke Chriſte, whiche had choſen ſo inconſtant and vnkyn
                     •
                  e
a perſon to his diſciple and to his chefe apoſtle. &c. And ſextly the
greuouſnes of Petre ſynne dyd appere by his great and cōtinuall
wepyng, for a great ſynne requireth great cōtrition and penaūce
There be .iii. thynges in this goſpel that moued & induced Petre
vnto penaunce.Luc. 22. G. The fyrſte is ſyngynge or crawynge of the cocke.Luc. 22. G.
The ſeconde was ye reſpecte and beholdynge of Chriſte. And the
thyrde was ye remembraunce of the wordes that our lorde ſayde
to Petre at the ſupper the ſame nyght, that was that Petre ſhulde
denye Chriſt thryſe that nyght before the cocke crawe. Our lorde
ſuffred Petre to fall for our example, that no man ſhuld preſume
of hym ſelfe, ſeynge that the prynce of thapoſtles dyd fall. And
alſo that no man ſhuld diſpeyre, ſyth that Petre after ſo greuous
a ſyn, was made ye porter of heuyn. And thyrdly that Petre ſhuld
lerne to haue cōpaſſion of his ſubiectꝭ. For ſhortly after he was to
be made the chefe prelate of the churche. But where dyd Petre deny
his mayſter Chriſte? Not in ye mount, nor in the temple, nor
yet in his owne houſe, but in the byſſhopes palace ſtandyng and
warmyng hym ſelfe by the fyre with the miniſtres and ſeruauntꝭ

of the byſſhoppes. What ſignifyeth this palace or court of the biſſhoppe
but worldly couuerſacyon and maners. Theſe miniſters
ſignify deuylyſſhe perſons. The feare ſignifyeth carnall concupiſcence
and deſyre / who ſo euer abyde with theſe companyes:
he can not wepe and do penaunce for his ſynnes. And therfore it
is very daungerous and perilouſe to be conuerſant in the courtꝭ
of prynces, for Peter dyd but ones entre in to the palace of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
biſſhop / and anone he loſt the vertu and ſtrength of his ſoule / and
alſo denyed Chriſte. What ſuppoſe you wolde he haue done if he
had longe continued there? I feare that he wolde haue then ben
as our preeſtes be nowe in great mennes houſes, that is worſe
in al poyntes than lay men. But Peter went thens to do penaūs
for there he could do none. In lyke maner the ſterre that appered
to the .iii. kynges in the Eſt, whan they entred in to Hieruſalem
in to thepalace and court of Herode: the ſterre vaynyſſhed from
theyr ſyghte / and whan they were departed from thens: it appered
to them agayne.
               
                  ¶Here folowe .vi. leſſons.
                  
                     THe firſt leſſon is this / that the prelate of the churche 
ſhulde be ſuche a perſon as can haue compaſſyon of
the frayltyes and infirmities of his ſubiectes. The 
ſeconde is that no man ſhulde preſume of his owne
vertue. The thyrde is that we ſhulde reſiſt and with 
ſtande ſynne in the begynnynge / for one ſynne if it be not ſhortly
put a way by penaunce / it wyll drawe to it an other ſynne more
greuous. exemple herof we haue in Peter which at the firſt tyme
he onely denyed his mayſter without ony oth or other wordes.Math. 26. G.
And the ſeconde tyme / he denyed hym with an othe.Marci. 14. G. And at
the thyrde tyme he curſed / he ſware and alſo he denyed Chriſte.
Here ye may ſe howe one ſynne bryngeth in an other ſynne more
greuous than the firſt. The .iiii. leſſon is / that if we fall in to 
ony ſynne though it be but a ſmall ſynne to our thynkynge / and
alſo done of onely frayltye / yet for no cauſe we ſhulde perſeuer
and cotynue therin. For to perſeuer in ſynne (as the gloſe ſayth)
it gyuethe an encreaſynge to the ſynne.Eccl. 19. A. For as the wyſe man
alſo ſayth: He that diſpyſeth or lytyll regardeth ſmall ſynnes / by
lytyll and lytyll / he ſhall fall to moche more greuouſe ſynnes.

                      The .v. leſſon is that no man ſhulde diſpeyre of the mercye of god
what ſo euer ſynne he hath done, but let hym wepe & do penauns
 for his ſynnes. &c. The .vi. that we ſhulde neuer deny Chriſt,
who ſo euer committeth ony mortal ſynne: he denyeth Chriſt / for
he conſentynge to the deuyll: forſaketh Chryſte.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche ſuffred thy ſelfe to be denyed thrice of ye prince
of thy apoſtles, whom alſo thou mercyfully beholdynge / 
made hym to wepe bytterly for his ſynne: I beſeche the beholde
me with the eye of thy mercy that I maye worthelye wepe in thy
ſyght for my ſynnes / and that I neuer denye the my lord god neyther
in worde nor in dede. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe our lorde was ſmyten vpon the cheke.
The .xi. article.
               
                  THe .xi. article of the ſmytynge of our lorde, for in meane
tyme that Peter outward in the courte denyed our lord
iii. tymes our ſauyour Ieſu was in the houſe: preſent
before the byſſhop Annas, where as Annas moued vnto
Chriſt an vnwyſe and foliſſhe queſtion before and in the audience
of all the people that were there preſent that was of his diſcyples
and of his doctrine,Ioh. 18. C. and Ieſus anſwered not one worde of
his diſcyples, for as at that tyme he could ſpeake no good of thē
for they all had forſaken hym that nyght / teachynge vs therby,
that whan we can nat truely ſpeake ony good of our neyghbours
then we ſhuld kepe ſilence and ſpeake none euyll of them, though
we knowe it. But to the other queſtion of his doctrine Ieſus
anſwered ſhewynge that it was not euyll nor ſuſpecte: but good
and holye, and that he proueth by the place and the compeyney
where and amonge whome he ſpake it ſaynge:Ioh. 18. D. 
                  Ego palam locutꝰ
ſum mundo. &c. I ſpake openly to the people, I euer taught in
the ſinagoges and in the temple where as the Iues ben gathered
togyther / and I ſpaketh nothynge in priuye corners / therfore inquere
of them that harde me / for they can tell what I haue ſayde
and taught, and here our lorde dyd ſo moderate his anſwere that
nother he wolde hyde the treuthe nor yet be ſene to defende hym
ſelf / gyuynge to vs a fourme and a maner howe to anſwere moderately
vnto our aduerſaries, ſo that we nother hyde the treuth
nor yet prouoke or moue them agaynſt vs with our wordꝭ. Then
one of the mynyſters ſmote Chryſte vpon the cheke ſayenge.

                  Sic reſpondes pontifici?
                  Ibidem. Is this a good anſwere vnto the biſhop
This ſtroke was ſo myghtye and greate / that the ſownde therof
was herde ouer all the palace / and it was ſo ſtrongly gyuen that
the prynte of his fyngurs remayned in Chriſtes cheke, whiche
prynte we may well ſe and perceyue in the image of his face that
he gaue to the bleſſed woman called Veronica. This image was
lately in Rome, and it ſhulde ſeame that he myghte not gyue 
                     •
                  o
ſore a ſtroke with his bare hande, and therfore it is moche lykly
that he ſmote Chriſt with his gawntlette ſayng: Is this a good
anſwere vnto a biſſhop? this he ſpake with great arrogance and
prowdly without ony reuerence vnto Chriſt, and this he dyd to
pleaſe and flatter the byſſhop. Of this ſtroke ſaint Ambroſe ſaith
That it was ſo paynfull that it had ben ſufficyent for mannes redemption.
It was ſo vehement / that therby all his teeth in his
hed were moued or lowſed, and alſo his noſe and his mouth guſſhed
out of blode. Our lorde wolde abūdantly and plentuouſly
ſatiſfye for our ſynnes. And therfore he moſt hygh in noblenes / 
was ſmyten of a vyle wretche, god was ſmyten of a ſynner, the
lord of his ſeruant, the creature of his creature, the gouerner of
the hole worlde of a vyle porcyon of the ſame worlde, the moſte
mercyful redemer was ſmyten of hym whom he came to redeme,
if he wolde receyue it. This cōtumely with many other that foloweth
our lord ſuffred for vs with al paciēce & mildnes, ſo that
with great myldnes he anſwered to hym that ſmote hym:Ibidem. 
                  Si male
locutus ſum teſtimonium perhibe de malo. &c. If I haue ſpoken
euell beare witnes agaynſt me of that euyll. But if I haue anſwered
well / truly and conueniently / wherfore doſt thou ſmyte
me?Suꝑ Iohn̄ trac
                        •
                     . Cxiii This anſwere of Chriſt as ſaint Auſten ſayth / was not ſpoken
of any impacyence / but gentely and ſwetely he dyd reproue
that ſeruaunt / and called vnto his mynde his vnkyndnes. And
herunto ſaynt Barnarde ſayth. O merueylous greate vnkyndnes / 
this ſame Malchus whom our lorde but a lytyl byfore dyd
cure and heale his ryght heare the whiche Peter dyd ſmyte of.
He nowe was bolde to ſmyte ſo cruelly his lorde god and curer.
O good Ieſu in what compaigney arte thou nowe, howe moch
was thy pacyence. Howe great was theyr crueltye and inpacyence.
But wyll they / nyll they / thy pacyence ouercometh theyr
malyce / thy loue theyr enuy / and thy pitye / theyr crueltye. And
thus ye may ſe that this ſmytyng is cōueniently nōbred amongꝭ
the articles of Chriſtes paſſyon, alſo therin was fulfylled the ſayng
of ye ꝓphet:Tren̄. 3. D. 
                  Dabit ꝑcutiēti ſe maxillā: he ſhall offer his cheke

to the ſmyter.Mich. 5. A. And an other prophet ſaith: Percutient maxillam
iudicis Iſrael: they ſhall ſmyte the cheke of the iudge of Iſraell.
This ſtroke was fygured in Michea / whiche was ſmyten vpon
the cheke:Cap. vlt. D bycauſe he ſayde the treuthe vnto Achab the kynge of
Iſraell / as it is writen in the thyrde boke of the kynges.
               
                  ¶Here foloweth a leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this leſſon, ſythe that Chriſte
wolde be buffeted and ſmyten for vs: it is cōuenient that
we ſtoppe our mouthes that we ſpeake no thyng contrary
the honour of god, and alſo that we excite and moue our ſelfe to
ſpeake and do that is good. And in all iniuries and contumelies
done vnto vs: that we haue pacyence by the example of Chriſte,
whiche dyd vouchſafe to gyue vs ſpecyally in this poynte an example
of great pacyence. And alſo a man to conforme hym ſelfe
vnto this article: may to remember the great ſtroke of Chriſte,
gyfe hym ſelfe a moderate clappe or ſtroke for all his lyes / euyll
and vayne wordes, and then pray on this maner.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche wolde be ſmytten for me moſte vnworthy, of
the vyle miniſter and ſeruant of Annas: graūt to me I beſeche
the thy grace / that I may ſtoppe my mouthe from all euyll
and vayne ſpeache / and that I neuer ceaſe frome thy laude and
prayſynges. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Ieſus was preſented vnto Cayphas.
The .xii. article.
               
                  THe .xii. article of the preſentacyon of Chriſte vnto Cayphas / 
whan our lorde had taken that great ſtroke in the
houſe of Annas, ſhortly after / Annas ſent Chriſt bound
as gyltye and worthy death and therunto condempned
by hym, he ſent hym (I ſay) vnto Caiphas / gyuyng thankes vnto
the miniſtres that it wolde ſo pleaſe them to brynge Chriſte
firſt vnto hym.Ioh. 18. D. Annas (I ſay) ſent Chriſte to Cayphas, for he
was the chiefe biſhop for that yere, and ſo to him it apperteyneth
principally to entreat of the condemnacyon and death of Chriſt,
and for the ſame cauſe there were gathered a great companye of
preeſtes and ſcribes in the forſayde houſe of Cayphas to counſell
herin. In this houſe of Caiphas Chriſte dyd abyde vnto the
moornynge, at the whiche tyme he was ledde vnto Pylate.

And in this houſe he ſuffred .iii. thynges that were moche paynfull
to hym / that is: the falſe witneſhyng / the crafty adiuracyon
and the moſt diſpitefull confutacyon / as it ſhall appere in the articles
folowyng. And here note that this preſentacyon was more
greuous vnto Chriſt, than the firſt that was to Annas, for this
Cayphas was the cheyfe byſſhop for that yere. And alſo he was
more crafty and more malicyous than Annas / and that well appereth
by the interpretacyon of his name. Cayphas is as moche
to ſay by interpretacyon as a crafty or wyly ſearcher, for he more
craftely dyd ſearche for falſe witneſhes agaynſt Chriſte, & whan
he coulde fynde no conuenient teſtimonye agaynſt hym: then he
malicyouſly and craftely by hym ſelf toke occaſyon in our lordes
wordes of his dampnacyon as we ſhall declare hereafter in the
xiiii. article. O how payneful is it to a good man to be preſented
before ſuche a iudge / ſo craftie / ſo captious / ſo malicyous / 
and replete with all enuy. It is ſayd that from the houſe of Annas
vnto Cayphas houſe were an hundreth neynty & .iiii. paſſes
by the whiche ſpace about .xxx. tymes they condemned hym / and
ſpued or ſpyt vpon hym / biſydes many other tormētes & paynes.
               
                  ¶Here folowe .ii. leſſon.
                  OF this article we may note .ii. leſſons. The firſte that the
ſeruantes of god ſhuld not be moche afrayd to be preſented
before euyll and wicked iudges. For the more wicked the iudge
is / the more grace therby commeth to the ſeruauntes of god. Exemples
herof we haue in the glorious apoſtles Peter and Poule
whiche ſuffred deth vnder the moſte cruell Iudge Nero. Alſo in
ſaynte Laurence / whiche by the moſte wycked tyraunt Decyus
was put to deth, and ſo of many other holy ſayntes. The ſecond
leſſon is this / that we ſhulde depely remember al our euyllꝭ
that we haue done / and ſo preſent our conſcyence before the hye
Iudge Chriſt / and alſo before his vycar here in erth our curate
to be duely examyned / for our ſauyour Chriſte diſdeyned not to
be examined before the pryncys of the preeſtes / the ſcribes & the
ſeniours of the Iues. And pray as foloweth.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu which for me moſt vnkynd wretch wold be ſent from
Annas vnto Caiphas & alſo wold be examined before hym
graunt to me I beſeche the for ye loue of thy name that I feare not
the iudgement of euyll perſones / and alſo that I may appere in
thy ſyght with a good and pure conſcience. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               ¶Of the bryngynge furth of falſe teſtimonie
agaynſt Chriſte. The .xiii. article.
               
                  THe .xiii. article is of the ſaynges of .ii. fals witneſſes.
For whan Chriſte ſtode before Caiphas the hyghe
prince of preſtes, and all the counſaile there gathered
dyd ſerche to haue falſe teſtimony againſt Ieſus that
by ſome colour they myght put hym to death, and yet
they coulde fynde none conuenient wytnes, thoughe many falſe
witneſhes were brought forth,Libro. xiii. then at laſte there came two falſe
witneſhes / of the whiche Symon de caſſia ſayth: The counſell
of the Iues ſaughte for teſtimonie agaynſt Chryſt that vnder the
colour of iuſtyce they myght put hym to deth, whome they perſued
of pure enuy / but they laboured to cloke the crueltye and enuy
of theyr myndes with ye cloke of iuſtyce / and therfore they ſaught
for falſe witnes. And here note that it is to the hyghe laude and
prayſe of Chriſt that they could not fynd the leſte thynge that he
was culpable in / or to be reproued / and note wele that it is wryten:
Falſum teſtimonium. They ſaughte for falſe teſtimonie for
they myght neuer fynde true wytneſſe agaynſt hym.Marci. 14. F. But at laſt
two falſe wytnes came furth and ſayd: we herd hym ſay, I may
diſtroy this temple of god that is here made & in .iii. dayes buyld
an other temple. By this teſtimonie they intended to proue that
Chriſt wolde vſurpe vnto hym the power of god as if he were
god / but theſe two were falſe witneſhes for they chaunged the
wordes of Chriſte and alſo his ſenſe and vnderſtandynge. The
wordes of Chriſte were theſe:Iohn̄. 2. D. 
                  Soluite templum hoc: et in tribus
diebus excitabo illud /  That is / diſſolue this temple (that is kyll
or ſley this bodye of myne) and in thre dayes I ſhall rayſe it vp
agayne. He ment of the temple of his body and they ſpake of the
material temple in Hieruſalem / and therfore they added in theyr
teſtimony: Templum hoc manufactum: This temple made by the
hand of man / whiche wordes Chriſt ſpake not / and therfore they
bare falſe witneſhe agaynſt hym / and that dyd not a lytell hurte
or greue Chriſt.Pſal. Cxv. What man is he that wyl not be ſory to be falſly
accuſed / though he (as euery man is) be mutable and many thynges
do offende? Howe moche more then ſhulde Chriſte be ſorye
to be falſly accuſed / ſyth he in nothynge can offende, for he is the
eſſencyal treuth of god and the ſelfe god in ſubſtance. Here ſaint
Anſelme in his boke called Cur deus homo / merueylynge of the
miſcheuouſe mynde that the Iues had, ſo to procure the death of

Chriſt: anſwereh to hym ſelfe inſtructe by the ſpirite of god / and
ſayth: I thynke that there is none other cauſe of theyr malyce towardes
Chriſte, but that he continually and ſtably keapt truthe
and iuſtyce both in his dayly ſpeache / in his teachynge and alſo
in his lyuynge. And contrary wyſe / the Iues were euell / falſe / vniuſte
and craftye or diſceytefull, for the whiche Chriſte ſharplye
rebuked them, and therfore they procured his deth for they wold
haue none to lyue that ſhulde be better than they: leſſe that they
ſhulde then be reputed as ſynfull men / and ſo ſuffer great ſhame
and rebuke. This counſel was ſpoken of by the holy patriarche
Iacob ſainge:Geneſ. 49. A. 
                  Simeon et Leui fratres: vaſa iniquitatis bellantia.
&c. Symeon and Leny brretherne / armed or feyghtynge veſſelles
of iniquitie, I wolde that my ſoule or lyfe came not in to theyr
handes / power or counſell. And of this text the ordinerye gloſe
ſayth / that the byſſhoppes & preeſtes were of the tribue or ſtocke
of Leni, and the ſcribes for the more partie were of the ſtocke of
Symeon.
               
                  ¶Here folowe a leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this doctrine, that we ſhulde
hate and abhorre all falſe teſtimony / alſo all falſneſſe and
lyes / for Chriſte / by falſe teſtimonye and by lyes was condempned
to deth, and as ofte as we ſpeake falſe witnes agaynſt
our neyghbour we condempne Chriſte vnto the death / aſmoche
as is in vs.Libro. iii. And howe abhominable this ſynne is: Iſydore in
his boke De ſummo bono ſheweth ſaynge:Capi. lix. He that beareth falſe
witnes: offendeth agaynſt thre perſons, that is agaynſte god,
whome he contemneth by his ſwearynge and breakynge of his
commaundement. Alſo agaynſt the iudge, whome by his lyeng
he diſceyueth. And thyrdly agaynſt the innocent, whom he hurteth
by his falſe teſtimonie.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche wolde for me be blamed of the Iues / and by
theyr falſe teſtimonie accuſed: graunt to me that I neuer
blame or rebuke man for the, nor falſely that I accuſe any perſon
and alſo that I pacyently ſuffer all falſe accuſacyons for thy honour
and glorye. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the blaſphemy imputed to Chriſte.
The .xiiii. article.
               
                  
                  THe .xiiii. article is the falſe impoſicyon of blaſphemy
vnto Chriſte. Cayphas the cheyfe prynce of the preeſtꝭ
and the highe byſſhop for that yere, ſeyng that Chriſt
wold not ſpeake or anſwere to theyr falſe accuſacyons
And that ſuche teſtimonies as was ſpoken agaynſte hym / were
not ſufficyent for his condempnacyon: He was gretly troubled
bycauſe I ſay he coulde fynde no cauſe wherin he myghte accuſe
hym & iuſtly condempne hym, and then he ſo kyndled with wroth
in a great furye of mynd he aroſe vp with great inpacyence from
his ſeate of dignitie and ſayd vnto Ieſus:Math. 26. F. 
                  Nihil reſpondes ad eaque
iſti aduerſum te teſtificātur? Wyl thou not anſwere vnto ſuch
cauſes as theſe perſons lay agaynſt the? By the inordinate mouynge
of his bodye he made knowen the furye of his mynde / as
Bede ſayth where as temperance and grauitye beſeameth a prelate
and a iudge both in his wordes / dedes and geſture.Suꝑ Mat. 15. And as
Symon de Caſſia ſaythe:Libro. 13. Cayphas roſe vp for vnquyetenes of
mynde and ſo by his cruell mynde he was made higher then hym
ſelfe / for a man ſtandynge is hygher than whan he is ſyttyng, he
prouoked Chriſt to anſwere / nor for the intent that he wolde beleaue
his anſwere or take his excuſe: but hearynge his anſwere
he myght peruert it and take therof occaſyon to accuſe hym, but
Ieſus wold not anſwere / he held his ſpeach meakly / for he knewe
that Cayphas wolde take ſumme occaſion of his anſwere / wherby
he wold accuſe hym, therfore Ieſus wold not ſpeake, & that
was not of any diſpleaſure or feare: but for a miſterie, as knowynge
that he whiche moued hym to ſpeake: dyd it of a crafte
and fraude, and not to knowe the truthe. Alſo he kepte ſilence
to gyue vs example to contempne the falſe craftes and diſceytes
of our aduerſaries / and therfore he wolde rather ſtrongly keape
his ſilence than to defende his cauſe without ony profyte. And of
this ſilence was ſpoken longe before that tyme, by the prophet
Eſay:Eſaie. 53. C 
                  Quaſi agnus coram tondente ſe obmuteſcet. &c. He ſhalbe
as dumbe as a lambe whan he is ſhorne / and he ſhal not open his
mouth to gyue anſwere.Pſal. 37. And the prophet Dauid ſaith in the perſon
of Chriſt: I as a deafe man hard not: & I was as a dumbe
man not openynge his mouth. And the more that our ſauyoure
Ieſus kepte ſilence to them that were not worthy his anſwere:
the more Cayphas the biſſhop beynge in greate furye / prouoked
Chriſte to anſwere.Math. 26. F. And therfore with great indignacyon and
inpacyence he ſaid to Chriſt Adiuro te per deum viuum vt dicas no
bis ſi tu es Chriſtus filius dei: I adiure the by the lyuynge god / 

or charge and commaunde the by the vertue of the lyuynge god / 
that thou ſay vnto vs if thou be Chriſt the ſonne of god lyuynge.
This adiuracyon Cayphas ſpake of a falſe craftie and diſceytful
mynde and not for to knowe the truthe.Suꝑ Mat. 26. And therfore ſaynt Hierom
ſayth: Cayphas dyd adiure Chriſt by the lyuynge god, that
for the reuerence of the name of god: he ſhulde anſwere and ſpeke
vnto them not intendyng therby to knowe the truth, but to take
occaſion of his wordes to falſly accuſe Chriſte. O what madnes
and wickednes was this, fyrſt they ſent to take hym and ſo they
bounde hym as a thefe worthy deth. And now they examyn hym
not to knowe the truth / but rather to fynd ſome occaſion in hym
wherby they myghte accuſe hym vnto Pylate as worthy death.
And this adiuracyon was a greuous ſynne in Caiphas, for it perteyneth
not to the inferiour ſo to coniure the ſuperiour without
a reaſonable cauſe / to ſay the treuthe. This notwithſtandynge
Chriſte for the reuerence of the name of god wherwith he was
adiured: he anſwered and ſpake the truth fyrſte that they ſhulde
not excuſe theym ſelfe but that they herde hym ſaye the treuth,
and alſo that he wolde not be noted to contēpne the name of god,
for theſe cauſes Ieſus anſwered & ſayde:Math. 26. F. 
                  Tu dixiſti, ego ſum. &c.
Thou haſt ſayd the truthe, I am the ſonne of god notwithſtandynge,Marci. 14. G.
I ſay vnto you that from henſforth or herafter ye ſhall ſe
the ſonne of man, that is, ye ſhall ſe me, whome you nowe contempne
and ſhamefully entreate, ſyt on the ryght hand of the vertue
of god, that is in maieſtie and power equall / and one with
god the father and ye ſhall ſe me cume at the day of iudgement in
my manhode with great power and maieſtie in the clowdes of
heuen.Suꝑ Mar. Than Cayphas whiche before roſe vp in a greate furye
hearynge this anſwere was more mad,Libro. iiii. and ſo cut or rent his garmentes,Libro. 13.
for as Bede ſayth whome that furie made ryſe from his
ſeate: this madnes prouoked hym to cut and rent his veſtiment.
and as Symon de Caſſia ſayth, this cuttynge of his garment
doth ſhewe a folyſſhe diuiſyon in his maners / and alſo the want
of the bond of Charitie. And in this acte Cayphas dyd alſo prophicye / 
ſhewynge and ſignifyenge by the cuttynge of his garment,
that the Iues ſhuld ſhortly leſe theyr dignitye of preeſthod
which began in Aaron, for when he cut his garment or clothyng
he made that openly to be ſene, which before was ſecreat, and ſo
conſequently he cut and put from hym the couerynge of the lawe,
though he knewe it not: nor yet intended yt, for he onely cut his
clothynge: that he mygh: make his accuſacyon agaynſt Chriſte,

more greuous, and to ſhewe that thynge by his doynge: which
he ſpake in his wordes, for he ſayde that Chriſte dyd blaſpheme
god. It was a cuſtome and a maner amonges the Iues yt whan
they herde any blaſphemye ſpoken agaynſt god: they wolde cut
and rent theyr clothynge or garmentes in token of ſorowe and deteſtacyon
of ſo great a cryme. This greuous ſynne of blaſphemy
the prynce of preeſtes Cayphas dyd impute to Chriſte ſaynge:
Blaſphemauit: He hathe blaſphemed god attributynge and gyuynge
that thynge to hym ſelfe: whiche is onely propre to god.
What nede we of ony other witnes as he myght ſay we labour in
vayne to ſearche for wytneſſe agaynſte hym, for he hath ſpoken
openly and before al your preſence, ye haue hard hym ſpeake blaſphemye.
O wreche and prynce full of wyckedneſſe, he ſpake no
blaſphemye but the treuth thou doſt blaſpheme the ſonne of god,
for thou wyll not gyfe that thynge to god that apperteynethe to
god, thou reputeſt the eſſencyall ſonne of god to be a pure creature,
and therfore thy blaſphemye ſhalbe with the euermore to
thy eternall perdicyon and dampnacyon.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this leſſon, that we ſhulde be
pure and clene from all blaſphemye both in our ſelfe and alſo
to other perſons, in our ſelfes: that we nother do nor ſay any
thynge wherby the name of god ſhuld be blaſphemed in vs or by
vs. And alſo that we moue not ony other perſons to blaſpheme
god. And a man to conforme hym ſelfe to this article let hym in
a contrarie maner blyſſe or prayſe god in this or lyke maner. Sit
nomen domini benedictum. &c. Bleſſed be the name of god nowe
and euer. Amen. And alſo pray as foloweth. 
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche dyd ſuffer the abhominable ſynne of blaſphemy
to be put vpon the: kepe me that thy name be neuer blaſphemed
by me in worde nor in dede / and that neuer ony blaſphemie / 
or ony other euyl word be ſpoken or vttered with my mouth.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the Condempnacyon of Chriſte.
The .xv. article.
               
                  THe .xv. article is the condempnacyon of Chriſte vnto
the death. Whan Cayphas the prynce of preeſtes had
ſayde to his compaigney that were there gathered in
counſel, ye all haue nowe herd hym ſpeake blaſphemy,
he aſked of them what they thought, and then they al anſwering

ſayd:Math. 10. G. 
                  Reus eſt mortis: He is worthy death / he hath deſerued deth.
This they ſayd that theyr malice ſhuld be openly knowen, and
though they dyd not ſo intende: yet it was ſo done by the permiſſyon
and ſuffrance of god, as many other thynges here ſpoken
and done in theſe articles.Libro. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . And beholde here (ſayth Symon de
Caſſia) howe iuſtyce is oppreſſed / vertu put vnder foote / and
reaſon vtterly ſubdued to theyr malice, in ſo moche that all the
princes / wyſe men and ſeniours dyd agre in one ſentence to condemne
to deth the rightuous perſon. And there was not one that
wolde ſpeake for the innocent / that wolde defende hym / excuſe
hym / or requyre reſpyt of that he myght anſwere or defend hym
ſelfe / but all they condempned hym as worthy deth / where as
Chriſte ſpake onely the treuth.Marci. 14. G. And note here the merueylouſe
folyſſhenes or rather madnes of this biſſhop / howe he ſyttynge
in the place of a iudge / dyd peruerte the ordre of iuſtyce and of the
lawe. Fyrſt he gaue ſentence of blaſphemy agaynſt Chriſte / and
after that he aſked counſell of ſuche as ſatte in examinacyon with
hym ſayeng what thynke you in this cauſe, and they ſayd: Reus
eſt mortis: He is worthy death. Suche a iudge hath ſuche counſellers,
they were the accuſers of Chriſte, they diſcuſſed and examined
his cauſe and they alſo gaue ſentence and all contrarie to
the order of the lawe. They ſayd he is gyltye and worthy death.
It Chriſt had blaſphemed as they ſaid that he dyd:Leui
                        •
                     . 24. C. they had then
ſayd treuthe, for who ſo euer dyd blaſpheme the name of god, by
the lawe he ſhulde ſuffer death, for he ſhulde be ſtoned to death.
But for aſmoche as Chriſte dyd not ſo in dede as they ſayd: therfore
theyr ſentence was falſe and wycked. And therfore this condempnacion
of Chriſt vnto the death: is conueniently nombred
amonges the articles of Chriſtes paſſyon, for what man is there
that wyll not be heuy and ſory to be falſly condēpned vnto deth,
how moche then ſhulde Chriſte be ſory beynge moſte innocent,
and the lyfe of all lyuynge creatures, to be condempned vnto ſo
ſhameful a death of the croſſe / and that by thoſe perſons: whome
he came to ſaue and helpe.
               
                  ¶Here folowe, ii. leſſons.
                  OF this article we may take .ii. leſſons. Fyrſt that this voyce 
of the Iues: Reus eſt mortis: He is worthy death / whiche
was ſpoken of Chriſt moſt innocent, that this voyce (I ſay) neuer
reſt or be founde in our hertes and mouthes. Nor that it at
ony tyme be truely veryfyed in vs: as it may be of euery perſone

that committeth deedly ſynne, for of euery ſuche perſon it maye
 be truly ſpoken: He is worthy death, The ſeconde is that if at
any tyme we be perſued and alſo condempned to the deth falſely
innocently or without iuſtyce / and for the name of Chriſte: that
we be not troubled / but rather glad and ioyefull remembrynge
(as Chriſt ſayth) that our reward ſhalbe great and plentuous in
heuen / if we here paciently ſuffer for Chriſte / and than pray as
foloweth or in lyke maner.Math. 5. B
                  
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche feared not the Wycked voyce of the moſt cruell
Iues when they ſayd of the: Reus eſt mortis: He is worthy
deth, and pacyently dyd ſuffer the ſame for me moſt wretche:
kepe and preſerue me / that I neuer be founde worthye eternall
deth in thy ſyght. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the buffetynge or ſmytyng in the necke
of Chriſt. The .xvi. article.
               
                  THe .xvi. article is the beatynge or ſmytynge of chriſt
in the necke with theyr fyſtes / for whan Ieſus hadde
confeſſed hym ſelfe to be the ſonne of god / whiche the
Iues toke for the moſt blaſphemy that might be: then
all the compeyney that were preſent fel vpon hym lyke mad men
rebukynge and mockynge hym / ſome dyd ſpytte in his face and
ſome dyd ſmyte hym in the necke with theyr fyſtes as ſaynt Mathewe
ſayth:Math. 26. G. Comonly ſuche perſones as be taken for foolys or
vyle perſons and diſpyſed be ſo ſmyten in the necke. Therfore in
that / that the Iues bet Chriſt with theyr fyſtes in the necke there
is not ſo moche intended in this article / the payne that then he
ſuffred, as the cōtumely and diſpiſynge, for that, they that tyme
reputed hym as a foole and a vyle perſon, for therby he was mocked / 
ſcorned and blaſphemed / and therfore they alſo pinched / nipped
him and pulled hym by the chekes & by the heyre of his berde,
whiche all he ſuffred pacyently / and ſo was fulfylled the ſayenge
of the prophyt whiche ſayd in the perſon of Chriſt:Eſaie. l. C. 
                  Corpus meum
dedi percutientibus: et genas meas vellentibus: I offer my body
pacyently to them that ſmote it / and my chekes to them that pynched
them. And theſe laſte wordes ſome men expounde them / 
of the rentynge and tearynge of Chriſtes chekes with the ſharpe
nayles of the moſt cruell Iues,Lira ſuper. and ſome doctours declare them
of the pullynge of Chriſtes heyre out from his berde,Eſa. l. capi. & whether

of theſe be true or that both be true (whiche I rather ſuppoſe) I
may well ſe and ꝑceyue that the curſed handes of the moſt cruell
Iues were not ſaciate with ſmytyng / beatyng & ſpyttyng in that
moſt ſwete face of our ſauiour Ieſu, but alſo they rent his beautious
face with theyr nayles & pluckyng out the heyre frome hys
berde,Libro. xiii. and as Symon de Caſſia ſaith: This ſmytyng in ye neck
may ſignifye vnder a miſterie the obſtinate malice of the Iues,
wherby they cōtinually curſe our fayth / whiche ioyneth vs vnto
god, and alſo it ſignifieth the crueltie of the paganes which cōtinually
labored by theyr tyrannie to diſtroy & cut away our fayth.
For the pagans before yt they were cōuerted to the faith: they put
to deth as many faythfull people as they might get. Colaphus is
properly called a beetyng in the necke with ye fyſt. Nowe ſpūally
our faith is called the necke of the church for aſmoch as it ioyneth
the hed & the body togyther that is: chriſtians be ioyned to chriſt
by fayth / and this faith ſhulde be ſtrong as the necke / and therfore
in the canticles it is compared to the towre of Dauid which was
very ſtronge.Cant. 4. G. Our ſauiour Ieſus was ſmyten in the necke .xl.
tymes in the houſe of Cayphas, and there were gathered in this
counſell of the Iues agaynſte Chriſte. lxxvii. Iues.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  
                     IN this article we may take this leſſon / that we be well
ware that we neuer beate Chriſt in the necke: as ſaynte
Bede ſayth:Suꝑ Mar. cap. 14. All falſe chriſtians that confeſſe Chriſte in
worde and denye hym in theyr lyuyng: they beat Chriſt
in the necke / for Colaphus is that ſtroke that is gyuen byhynde
a man. They alſo do beate Chriſte in the necke: that prefer theyr
owne honor and glorie before the glory of Chriſte. And alſo they
that ſclaunder theyr neyghbour byhynde his backe. And a man
to conforme hym ſelfe to this article he may gyue hym ſelfe a clap
in the necke / in the remembraunce of all Chriſtes ſtrokes, and
then praye thus.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche wolde be ſmytten by the cruell Iues in the
necke for my loue: graunt to me that I may ſo confeſſe the
my lorde god with my mouthe: that I neuer do contrarye thy
preceptes in my dedes. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               ¶Of the ſpittyng in Chriſtes face. The .xvii. article.
               
                  THe .xvii. article is of ye ſpittyng in Chriſtꝭ face, whan
al the Iues had accuſed Chriſt as worthy to dye / then
they dyd ſpytte in his face / as in a perſone moſt vyle / 
abiecte and to be diſpyſed / a perſon curſed and reproued
of god,Mat. 15. G and therfore as the goſpell ſayth: Ceperunt quidam
conſpuere eum: Some be ganne to ſpytte vpon hym / and that in
his moſt amiable face as Mathewe ſayth:Mat. 26. G. This ſpyttynge was
done and ſuffred of Chriſte for many cauſes. Fyrſt to note theyr
great vnkyndnes:Libro. xiii. as Symon de Caſſia ſaythe: Our lorde dyd
ſpytte on the erth and made clay / and therwith anoynted the eyen
of hym that was borne blynde & ſo gaue to hym hys ſyght / which
he had not by nature.Ioh. 9. A. And nowe the Iues to ſhewe theyr vnkyndneſſe / 
dyd defoyle the face of our lorde with theyr ſoule ſpyttynges.
Secondely they ſpyte in his face to his great ſhame and deſpection,
for it was the propertie of the Iues to ſpytte in the face
of hym whom they diſpyſed and reputed as a vyle and abiect perſone.
O abhominable maner of the Iues whiche abhorred not
to defoyle that moſt amiable and louly face / the whiche angelles
haue great deſyre to beholde whichens ful of grace & fauour and
deſired of all good people for it is ye lyfe conforth & helth of al yt be
holdeth it / & not only they dyd ſpyt in his face / but alſo they coght
and retched & ſo caſt ye foule ſtynkyng flegme into his fayre face.
Therfore Mathew ſaith: Expuerūt, that is / they retching & coughyng / 
dyd ſpyt it into his face. And Marchus ſaith Conſpuerūt:
that is not only one ꝑſon but many togither dyd ſpue in his face,
in ſomoch that yt moſt bleſſed & amiable face was made ſo abhominable
to behold as if it had ben full of lepre / and yt was thorough
theyr ſpittyngꝭ / ſcratchyngꝭ & betayngꝭ▪ as we ſhall declare in the
next article. And ſo was fulfylled in chriſt ye ꝓphecie of Eſay ſayng
of chriſt:Eſa. liii. A. 
                  Non erat ei ſpecies. &c. There was nother beautye
nor fauour in his face, we ſe him & we might not ſe his face it was
ſo couered wt blode & ſpyttyngꝭ, we reputed hym as a lepre and
ſmyten of god as ye moſt wretched / but he was woūded for our iniquites
& oppreſſed for our ſinnes & not for his owne. And herunto
ſaint Barnard ſaith.In ſe
                        •
                     mōe de paſſione domini. O good Ieſu theſe moſte wretched & cruell
Iues haue wt theyr ſtynkyng ſpuyngꝭ defoyled thy face ſo beautious
& amiable yt angelles deſire to behold it which fulfylleth all
heuyns wt ioye & gladnes / which both rich & pore in ye worlde do
worſhip / & yet good lord thy wretched creatours dyd ſmyte ye and
diſpiſe ye as a vyle ſeruant / thou beyng the lorde of all creatours.
               
                  
                  ¶Here foloweth a leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this doctrine, that we oughte
diligently to be warre that we neuer ſpytte in the face of
god as the Iues dyd, which we do when we defoyle our
ſoule & cōſcyence with ony fylthy thoughtes or dedes, for Chriſt
doth reſt in the ſoule and conſcience in the whiche his face or ymage
is hole and perfyt. And therfore who ſo euer defoyleth his conſcience
with deedly ſynne: he ſpytteth in the face of Chriſt, ſaint
Hierom ſayth that our lorde Ieſus wolde ſuffer pacyently ſuche
ſpyttynges in his face:Suꝑ Ma
                           •
                        . 14. that therby he myght waſſhe our conſcyence
whiche is as the face of our ſoule. And that a man myghte
conforme hym ſelfe to this article, he ſhulde forme and ymagyne
in his mynde: Chriſte horribly in his face deformed and defoyled
with the ſpyttynges of the Iues, and then he ſhulde thanke hym
with all his herte for his great pacyence, and ſo glorifye Chriſt
for that rebuke and ſhame. Alſo we ſhulde remember howe ofte
we haue defoyled the moſt beautifull face of Chriſt in our conſcyence
by mortall ſynne. Alſo howe oftentymes we haue receyued
vnworthelye the bleſſed bodye of our lorde and defoyled it with
our fylthy ſpotyll, and then praye thus.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche wolde ſuffer thy moſt fayre and amyable face
to be defoyled for my loue wich the fylthy ſpyttynges of the
Iues: graunt to me that I neuer defyle the face of thy ymage in
my ſoule / by my ſynfull actes or fylthy cogitacyons. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the ſmytynge of Chriſte in the
face. The .xviii. article.
               
                  THe .xviii. article is the ſmytynge of Chriſte in the
face. Of the whiche ſaynte Mathewe ſayth thus:
Et palmes ei in faciem dederūt,
                  Math. 26. G. And they ſmote hym
in the face with the palme of theyr handes, as the
hande whan it is cloſed it is called the fyſte / ſo whan
it is open and ſpredde abrode it is called the palme.Iſydorus. As papias
and Iſydore ſaythe.Libro. xi. So nowe they ſmote Chriſte with theyr
open handes vppon the face.Ethicorum cap. 14. And this ſmytynge maketh a
ſpecyall article of the paſſyone of Chryſte / for aſmoche as a
manne dothe ſuffer more payne by ſuche ſmytynge in the face:Papias ſuper hāc dictionem palma.
                  
then by ſmytynge in the necke, for in the face of man ar all ye ſences
or wittes, and alſo the face is moche ten
                     •
                  er and ſoone hurte.
And therfore it is very lyke that by ſuche ſwytynge in the face the
blode ranne out from his nooſe and alſo from his mouth though
it be not writen by the euangeliſtes.Libro. xiii. For as Symon de Caſſya
ſayth: That the euangeliſtes dyd omitte many thynges declarynge
the bytternes of Chriſtes paſſyon, whiche yet we meakly
beleue, and that was bycauſe the euangeliſtes wrote onely for
the truthe of the hiſtorie to be had / and not pryncypally to excite
and moue the effecte of compaſſyon in vs. O what enorme and
greuous ſynne of the moſt wicked Iues was this, yt they wolde
ſo cruelly ſmyte ſo pleaſaunt a face?Snꝑ marc. 14. in fine. But as ſaynt Hierom ſaith:
He wolde pacyently ſuffer ſo to be ſmyten with theyr palmes:
that we with our handes and lyppes, that is with our workes
and wordes myght laude and prayſe hym. Alſo we may ſay that
he is ſmytten in the face: whiche is rebuked and reuyled to his
owne face. And in this maner alſo was Chriſt ſmyten in the face
for he ſuffred many rebukes / contumelies and diſpyſynges openly
to his owne face ſpoken.Eſaie. l. C. And of the prophet Eſay in the perſon
of Chriſte / Faciem meam non auerti▪ ab increpantibus et conſpuentibus
in me. I haue not turned my face frome theym that reuyled
and rebuked me and ſpytted vpon me, for the Iues dyd not onlye
ſmyte Chriſt vpon the face: but alſo they reuyled hym to hys
face with many opprobrious and blaſphemous wordes, which
all the euangeliſtes do not expreſſe. But yet Lucas touchethe
them in a generaltie ſayenge:Luc. 22. G. 
                  Et multa alia blaſphemantes: dicebant
in eum: The Iues blaſphemyng Chriſt: ſpake many other
opprobrious wordes to hym.
               
                  ¶Here foloweth .ii. leſſons.
                  
                     
                     THe firſte leſſon is that we ſhuld be ware that we ſmyte
not Chriſte in the face with our palmes, He ſmyteth
Chriſte in the face with his palme (as ſaynte Auſten
ſayeth: Whiche doethe hurtte and offende the integryty
and the perfeccyon of the ymage of god in his ſoule, and
therfore a man fallynge from grace by mortall ſynne doth ſmyte
Chriſte (as it were) in the face with his hande and euyll worke,
for therby he offendeth and hurteth ye integritie & ꝑfeccyon of the
 image of god in his ſoule. The .ii. is / as chriſt our god dyd neuer

auerte and turne away his face from ſuch rebukes / blaſphemies
diſpyſynges / perſecucyons and ſpyttynges, but rather gladlye
and pacyently dyd offer his face to them for our loue: ſo ſhulde
we in tyme conuenient not refuſe / but rather gladlye ſuffer lyke
thynges for the loue of Chriſte. And then let vs worſhyppe hym
and pray we as foloweth.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche wolde ſuffer for my loue thy moſt louely face
to be ſmyten with the handes of the moſte wycked Iues:
graunt to me that I may euer kepe the face of thyne ymage pure
and vndefoyled in my ſoule / that it neuer be ſpotted or hurte by
the ſynfull handes and workes of my iniquityes or ſinnes. Amē.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the couerynge and blyndfyldynge of
Chriſtes face. The .xix. article,
               
                  THe .xix.Marc. 14. G. article is the couerynge of Chriſtes face / for
as the Goſpel ſaith: Velauerunt faciem eius: They
couered his face, who ſo euer couereth the face of an
other perſon: he hydeth that face from hym, and ſo
the Iues hydd the face of god from them. And this
couerynge yet continueth vnto this daye vpon the hertes of the
Iues / for they wyll not ſe and knowe god as they ſhulde do. O
mad blyndnes and blynde madnes of theſe vnhappy Iues, that
moſt pleaſaunt face whiche the holye patriarches and prophetys
and theyr formar fathers greatly deſyred to come and with contynuall
and longe ſyghenges deſyred to ſe it, but theſe wycked Iues / 
when they had it preſent and myght haue ſene it / they wolde
not, but couered it and hyde it from them. Moyſes deſyred to ſe
this face whan he ſayd:Exod. 33. C. 
                  Oſtende mihi faciem tuam: Lorde ſhewe
to me thy face, Alſo Dauid ſayd: ſhewe to vs thy face and we / 
ſhalbe ſafe.Cant. 2. D. Pſal. lxxix. Alſo in the canticles it is writen / ſhewe
to me thy face for it is very fayre.Pſal. lxxix. All the fathers alſo in Limbo
patrum dyd crye and ſay: Come and ſhewe to vs thy face lorde
that ſytteſt aboue Cherubyn. And at laſte: He that was thus
deſyred of all good men: came and ſhewed his face to the Iues,
and they as moſt wretched couered his face,Suꝑ. Mar. 14. not for that he ſhuld
not ſe theyr ſynnes but to hyde hys face from them ſelfe as Bede
ſayethe:Exo. 34. D. for theyr ſoore and blynde ey ene myghte not beholde
the face of Moyſes: Excepte that it were fyrſte couered,
but this perſon Chryſte is moche more of dignity then Moyſes.

And therfore his face is moche more glorious and ſhinynge then
Moyſes face was, though Chriſtes glory were al inwardly and
outwardly couered with a clowde of a mortall bodye / yet there
was a lytyll ſparke of glorye ſhynynge in his face, that dyd ſo
glymer and beat in the eyes of the Iues: that they could or wold
not pacyently beholde his face / but couered it and hyd
                     •
                  d it from
them ſelfe, ſignifyenge therby (though they ſo dyd not intende)
that no infidele and ſynfull perſon turned from god: myghte ſe
and beholde the face of Chriſte, for it is hyd from them, A figure
of this couerynge and blyndfyldyng we may take in Sampſon
which for the loue he had vnto the ſynful woman Dalida:Iudi
                        •
                     . 16. E. F. he loſt
his ſtrength / he was taken of his enemyes / his eyen were putte
out / and alſo he was fatigate and weryed with manifolde illuſyons
and ſcornes. So our ſtronge Sampſon Chriſt Ieſus was
ſerued in lyke maner as it appereth in the articles of his paſſyon,
and al that was for ye loue of our ſynfull ſoule, to whom he ſpake
by the prophet,Hie
                        •
                     . 3. A. Thou haſt done fornicacyon with many ſtraūge
louers, yet returne & come agayne to me and I ſhal receyue the.
               
                  ¶A leſſon.
                  OF this article we may lerne this leſſon that we ought to be
wele ware that we neuer blyndfylde Chriſte or couer his
face. But alas many Chriſtyans nowe a dayes do couer Chriſtꝭ
face, whiche do ſynne priuily / thynkynge that god doth not ſe
them. Alſo they do couer Chriſtes face whiche ſeeth all thynges
that do chaunge / gyue or ſell craftelye / that thynge whiche ys euyll
or nought: for a good thynge. Alſo they couer Chriſtes face
which do derke or couer the Image of god in theyr ſoules with
the cloke of wylfull ignorans or ſynne. And therfore ſaynte Hierom
ſayth,Suꝑ Ma
                           •
                        . 14. that Chriſt wold haue his face couered, bycauſe that
he wolde take awaye the couer and cloke of ignorance and ſynne
from our hertes.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche dyd ſuffer for my loue thy moſt gracyous face
(the whiche angelles deſyre to behold) to be couered of the
wicked Iues to thy great rebuke: I beſeche the make thy face to
ſhyne vpon me thy moſt wretched ſeruant / that thy godly ymage
in me be neuer derked or couered and that mercyfully thou wold
take away the cloke of ſynne and the derknes of ignorance from
my herte with the lyghte of thy heuenlye grace. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               ¶Of the mockynge of Chriſt when they bad hym
prophicye, who is this that ſmyteth
the. The .xx. article.
               
                  THe .xx. article is the ſcornful queſtyon of the Iues vnto
Chriſt, For when they had couered his face: they ſmote
hym on the heed ſaynge: Arede or prophicye vnto vs
Chriſte, who is he that ſmyteth the nowe. But in what
parte they then dyd ſmyte hym: the euangeliſtes ſpake diuerſly.
For Marcus ſayth that then they ſmote hym with theyr fyſtes in
the necke.Math. 20. G. But Mathew and Luke ſay that they ſmote hym vppon
the face wyth the palmes of theyr handes.Luce. 22. G Therfore we may
ſay cōueniently, that after they had couered his face: euery man
ſmote hym as he wold, and ſo ſome ſmote hym in the necke / ſome
in the face and ſome on the chekes: and ſo ſmytynge they ſayde.
Arede or prophicye to vs thou Chriſt / who ſmote the nowe?Math. 26. G. And
this they ſpake to mocke and ſcorne hym as the gloſe ſayth,Gloſa ordinaria Ibid bycauſe
he wolde be taken as a prophet amonge his apoſtles and
comen people, and whom the people alſo toke for a great prophet
But the Iues nowe bycauſe he wolde not ſaye who ſmote hym:
they toke hym for a falſe prophet. Our ſauyour Ieſus wolde not
anſwere to theyr foliſſhe and mad queſtyon / bycauſe he knewe
that they mocked hym, and ſo ſurely it had ben but a folyſſhenes
to anſwere vnto theyr madnes. Saynt Hierom ſayth: that they
ware without mercy and full of crueltie / and therfore they dyd
all the euyll and deryſyon that they coulde do to hym. Some
ſmote hym of an euyll frowarde wyl, and ſome to pleaſe ye great
prynces, whiche were moſte cruell and full of malice. And as
ſaynt Hierome ſaith: this payne and paſſyon that he ſuffred that
nyght: ſhall neuer be manyfeſtly & hollye knowen vnto ye day of
iudgemēt, for frō the beginnyng of the nyght vnto the mornyng,
he was left in the handes & cuſtody of the vyle ſeruantes whiche
dyd then exercyſe and proue in hym all maner of tormentes and
paynes that they coulde ymagyne: Nowe drawynge hym by the
heyre of the heed nowe ſmytyng hym on the face, nowe ſpyttyng
in his face and mouthe, nowe pynchynge his chekes and ſo of other
paynes as we ſayd before and ſhall ſay more hereafter: they
vexed and greued our ſauyour Chriſte both in ſoule and in body.
               
                  ¶Of the Compaſſyon of
oure Ladye.
                  
                     
                     BVt where art thou nowe O thou bleſſed virgyn Marie
mother of Chriſt? Doyſt not thou knowe nowe
what thynges be done aboute thy dearbeloued ſonne
Ieſus? Some do ſay that Iohan the Euangeliſte,
leauynge Chriſt in the houſe of Cayphas / ranne to
Bethanie to the houſe of Marie Magdalen where as our lady
remaned when Ieſus went with his diſciples to Hieruſalem to
make his ſupper and to eat the paſchal lambe, and whan Iohan
was come to bethany he knocked and rapt vpon the dore / and the
bleſſed virgyn beynge in hyr prayers / hearynge hym was greatly
aſtoniſſhed and called vnto Magdalene and ſayde: Aryſe my
doughter and know what is become of my ſonne. Anon the dore
was opened and Iohan came in cryenge / wepynge and ſaynge / 
Alas reuerent mother, I brynge heuy tythynges to the / and for
ſobbynge and wepynge he coulde ſcarſely ſpeake, then the vyrgyn
with great heuynes & alſo weapyng aſked of Iohan, where
is my ſonne: where is my Ieſus: what is done with hym? is he
yet on lyue or the moſt cruell Iues hath ſlayne hym? and Iohan
as he myght ſpeake ſayd: He is yet lyuynge / but as I can perceyue:
they wyll this day put hym to death. The miniſters and
the Iues toke hym this nyght / and nowe they kepe hym faſte
bound in the houſe of Cayphas / and thoſe wicked ſcrybes and
phariſeys do ſay that he ought to be iudged to deathe. O howe
colde then was the vyrgins hert, with howe moche ſorowe was
ſhe then replete? And then furth with ſhe wente with Iohan haſtely
to Hieruſalem, and Magdalene with other diuers women
went with her / and whan ſhe came in to the citye ſhe ſaughte her
ſonne by the brode ſtretes and narrowe laynes / aſkynge of them
ſhe met, where is my dearbeloued ſonne / and ſo forthe as ye ſhal
ſe in the next article, and alſo in the .xliiii. and .lviii. articles.
               
               
                  ¶A deuout Contemplacyon
for a leſſon.
                  
                     FOr an holſom leſſon in this article we ſhall ſet before
you a breue contemplacyon of the moſt ſhamful mockinges
and deriſions that the Iues dyd vnto ye moſt
innocent lambe our ſauyour Ieſus. O my deuoute
ſoule / awayke / ryſe and depely conſider howe thy ſauyour
Ieſus whiche is the ſoueraigne lorde & glorye of angelles
is nowe made the mockynge ſtocke of the Iues, and as it were
a tenyſe ball of deryſyon wherwith the preeſtes and the ſcribes

and phariſeys done play togyther caſtynge and ſendynge hym
from one to an other to his greate rebuke and heuynes. As Annas
ſent hym to Cayphas, Cayphas to Pylate, Pylate to Herode
and Herode to Pylate agayne. And in all theſe places and
in goynge alſo thyther he ſuffred many diſpytes and greuous
paynes / as we ſayde before and ſhall ſay more herafter. Of this
the prophete Dauid ſpeaketh in the perſone of Chriſte ſayenge:
Omnes videntes me deriſerunt me:
                     Pſal. 21. All that ſe me
                        •
                      dyd mocke me,
and that .iii. maner of wayes, with-falſe wordes, with ſignes
and with ſcornefull ſentences. Of the fyrſte the prophet ſayth: Lo
cuti ſunt labiis: They haue ſpoken with theyr lyppes / withoute
good conſideracyon or aduyſement. Nowe falſe thynges imputynge
to me and ſomtyme makynge falſe promyſes to me. For
the firſte they ſayd:Math. 27. E. 
                     Alios ſaluos fecit: ſeipſum non poteſt ſa luum fa
cere
                           •
                        
                      He made other ſafe / but he can not ſaue hym ſelfe. Here they
imputed a falſe thynge to hym / that he coulde not ſaue hym ſelfe,
and that is falſe. Alſo they made to hym a falſe promiſſe whan
they ſayd.Ibidem. 
                     Si rex Iſrael eſt: deſcenda
                           •
                         hunc de cru
                           ••
                         et credimus ei.
If Chriſte be the kynge of Iſraell let hym diſcende nowe & come
downe from the croſſe and we wyll beleue to hym. There was a
falſe promiſſe for they thought not as they ſayd. The ſecond deriſyon
was with ſignes.Pſal. 21. And of this alſo ſpeaketh Dauid: Et
mouerunt capita ſua / They dyd moue and ſhake theyr heedes at
hym.Mat. 27. G And ſo ſaith Mathewe: Prete
                           •
                        eunt
                           ••
                         autem blaſphemabat
eum mouentes capita ſua. &c. They that paſſed by the mount of
Caluarie where as Chriſte was crucifyed dyd blaſpheme hym / 
mouynge theyr heedes and ſayenge (Hoy) This is he that wyl
diſtroy the temple of god and in .iii. dayes buyld it agayne. The
thyrde deriſyon was with ſcornefull and mockynge or ironyous
ſentences.Pſal. 21. And of this it foloweth in Dauid: Sperauit in domino
eripiat eum. &c. He truſted in god the father, let hym nowe delyuer
hym from our handes, let hym ſaue Chriſte / by reyſyng hym
agayne. For as Chriſt ſaith▪ His father loueth hym & wyll ſaue
hym.Mat. 27. G On this maner the Iues ſayd: Confidit in deum: liberet
nunc eum ſi vult: dixit enim, filius dei ego ſum▪
                      Chriſt truſteth in
to god the father, let hym delyuer hym nowe if he may and wyll,
for he ſaid that he was the ſonne of god. Thus they mocked hym
alſo they couered his face and ſmote hym with other thynges as
we ſayd before. Alſo of theſe thynges the prophet Dauid ſpeketh
in an other pſalme in the perſone of Chriſte: Confortati ſunt qui
perſecuti ſunt me inimici mei iniuſte. &c. My enemyes that haue

perſecuted me wrongfully haue nowe the hygher hande and dominyon
ouerme / and therfore I nowe paye and ſuffer paynes
for that thynge whiche I had not. Adam and Eue dyd eate the
apple: but nowe I paye for it and ſuffer payne for theyr ſynne.
And that a man might conforme hym ſelf to this article: let hym
remember what irriſyon and ſhame Chriſte ſuffred in this acte / 
and howe the Iues made hym theyr laughynge and mockynge
ſtocke: and as it were a chylderne game at hym / and then praye
as foloweth / or in any lyke maner.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche with ſcornefull mockes of the Iues was ſmyten
vpon the heed and bydden to arede and prophycye who
ſmote the: I beſeche the good Ieſu prophicye and ſhewe to me,
that I myght knowe what a wreche and ſynner I am, whiche
ſo ofte (alas for ſorowe) haue ſmytten the with the hand of myne
euyll and ſynfull dedes. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſte was preſented before
Pylate. The xxi. article.
               
                  THe .xxi. article is the preſentacyon of Chriſte before Pylate.
For what tyme it was clere day / that is the fyrſte
houre of the day / at .vi. of the clocke at the ſonne ryſyng.
A greate multitude of Iues came to Cayphas houſe / 
and from thens they ledde Ieſus bounde vnto the mote halle or
iudgement houſe as a mylde lambe that is borne to his deth. O
my ſoule beholde here howe thy ſauyour Ieſus entreth vnto his
iudgement bounde thurſt and many other wayes vexed / and all
men behelde hym and mockyng hym ſayd: O Ieſu thou art here
nowe, if thou had ben a prophet: thou wolde haue preuyded for
this before, with many other lyke wordes that thoſe curſed Iues
ſpake then to hym. And thus they brought hym bounde and delyuered
hym to ponce Pylate the preſident and hygh iudge of Iury
vnder the emperoure of Rome.Mat. 17. A This preſentynge vnto Pylate
was moſt greuous of all other vnto Chriſte, fyrſte bycauſe
he was preſented before that iudge, whiche had ful power vnder
the emperour to condempne hym vnto the deth. Secondly bycauſe
the Iues that preſented hym to Pylate dyd preſente hym / 
not as to be examyned by Pylate: but they delyuered hym vnto
Pylate as conuicte and founde gylty by theyr examinacyon / and
ſo to be put to ye deth without ony other examinacion or taryeng.

For they ſayd to Pylate:Ioh. 1
                        •
                     . C. If this man were not a miſlyuer and
ſo worthy deth / we wolde not haue delyuered hym to the. Of this
we ſhall ſpeake more in the next article. Thyrdly this preſentyng
to Pylate was moſte greuous to Chriſte bycauſe he had ben faty
gate and weryed the nyght before, many wayes by the crueltye
of the Iues, and therfore it was moche more payne to hym now
to be brought to the iudgement of a pagane and infidele, for they
brought hym bound to Pylate to be ſlayne and deuoured by hym
whiche was reputed as a dogge amonge the Iues bycauſe he
was a gentyle and not circumcyſed as they were.
               
                  ¶A remembraunce of the mornynge
of our Ladye.
                  
                     WHen it was publyſſhed thoroughe out all the cytye of
Hieruſalem that Ieſus was taken, and howe that
the Iues wolde crucifye hym: his moſte ſorowfull
mother the virgine Marye herde therof / and ſo almoſte
deed for ſorowe: was led by her ſyſters and other
women with vnſpeakeable lamentynges / wepynges / mornynges
and ſyghynges, to ſe her moſte derebeloued ſonne, and
ſo wepynge without ceaſyng / ſhe ſawght hym thorough ye brode
ſtretes and narowe lanes of Hieruſalem cryenge / and ſayenge:
where is my moſte derebeloued ſonne, where arte thou my moſt
ſwete Ieſu, where ſhal I fynd the / who hath taken the from me?
why may not I dye for the? Theſe wordꝭ with other lyke might
this moſt ſorowefull mother of Ieſu ſay. And whan they came
to that place where as they myght ſe Ieſus, they ſeynge hym ſo
bounde / ſo tormented / ſo deformed with theyr ſpyttynges, forſaken
of all his diſciples / diſpyſed / mocked and deſtitute of all help
and ſolace, ſo ſhamfully and paynfully with a greate multitude
of armed men cruelly led to the tribunall of the wycked Iudge,
and there to be condempned to the death, our ladye with her ſyſters
and the other women I ſaye ſeynge and conſiderynge theſe
thynges: what heuynes / what ſorowe and bytterneſſe were they
then fulfylled with: it can not be ſpoken nor expreſſed by any ſentence.
Alſo our lorde Ieſus ſeynge and knowynge his mother
with the other women in ſo great ſorowe: greatly ſorowed therof,
for without doute he had greate compaſſyon of them / and ſo
was greatly greued of this compaſſyon / and moſt ſpecyally for
his moſt kynd mother, for he knewe that her ſorowe was almoſt

to the deth, as it ſhall appere in the .lviii. article. And as ſome
doctours ſay: there were .xl. ſeruantes that led Chriſt from Cayphas
houſe vnto Pylate beſydes the greate multitude of people
that went with them: and there were a thouſande paſſes frome
Cayphas houſe vnto the houſe of Pylate.
               
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this leſſon, that the ſecular power
is not to be diſpiſed but to be honoured. For as ſaynte
Poule ſayth:Ro
                           ••
                        . 13. A. there is no power but of god, and therfore who
ſo reſiſteth the power: he reſiſteth the ordinauns of god. And
therfore as ſaynt Auſten ſayth: Our lorde god ſtode before Pylate
a gentyle and pagane iudge / and ſpake neuer one word vnreuerently
vnto hym. So ſhulde we with reuerence ſtand before
our prelates and iudges though they be not good: but euyll and
vicyous.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Lorde Ieſu Chriſte ſonne of the lyuynge god, whiche in
the firſte houre of the day for our helth wolde be preſented
by the Iues vnto Pylate a pagane iudge: graunte to me for the
loue of thy name that I diſpyſe no maner of power / but that I
may gyue due and worthy honoure to my ſuperiours and to all
iudges. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the Iues falſely accuſed Chriſte before
Pylate. The .xxii. article.
               
                  THe .xxii. article is the falſe accuſacyon that the Iues
made of Chriſte, for whan Chriſte was brought in
to the mote hal and there ſtode bound before Pylate
the iudge: the Iues wolde not come in to the mote
hall bycauſe they wolde not be defoyled and made
vnclene, for that day was theyr Paſch day, wherin all the Iues
that were clene ſhulde eate the pure breade that is made of pure
where without leuyn, and the Iues had this opinyon, that yf
they came in the houſe of any gentyle or ſtraunger whiche was
not circumcided as they were: by that entrance they were made
vnclene and ſo myght not eate of thoſe pure breades: vnto ſuche
tyme they were fyrſt purifyed.Suꝑ Iohn̄ trac. Cxiiii And here ſayth ſaynt Auſten. O
wycked blyndnes, the Iues feared to entre the houſe of a ſtraunger,
bycauſe they wolde not be contaminate / but they feared not
to ſley theyr innocent brother and alſo lorde. O thou chriſtiane

note here howe the Iues kepte them ſelfe frome all vnclennes
that they myghte eate the pure breade of wheate whiche gaue
to theym no grace of god for the ſelfe eatynge, moche more
then ſhuldeſt thou keape thy ſelfe clenne, whiche receyueſt
the bleſſed bodye of Chryſte / the heuenlye breade whiche gyueth
to the / the eternall lyfe. The Iues wolde not entre in
to ye iudgmēt houſe: and thou wylt not auoyd euyl compaigny
and tauernes / where as oftentymes bene ſpoken temerary vngodlye
iudgementes,Libro. xiii. and alſo moche blode ſhedde by falſe
de
                     •
                  xaccyons and other wayes. Symon de Caſſia alſo ſayth
here: That the Iues of an olde tradycyon and ordynaunce / 
auoyded and ſhunned the houſes of ſtraungers in ſuche hyghe
ſolempnytyes. And ſo they euer intendynge to ſuche lyghte
and vayne ceremonyes and lytyll regardynge greatter thynges:
fell in to the deape pytte of greate ſynnes,Ioh. 18. E. and Pylate ſeyng that
they wolde not enter in to hym: he went forth to them and ſayd:
what accuſacyon brynge you agaynſt this man. And here ſayth
Symon de Caſſya:Libro. xiii. It apperteyneth to the wiſdome and iuſtyce
of euery iudge and preſident not to iudge after the mynde of the
accuſers / excepte theyr accuſacyon be probable and true. Therfore
Pylate wyſely dyd inquyre, and ordinarylye dyd procede
in this cauſe / whan he ſayde: what accuſacyon ſhewe yow
agaynſte this man. For alſo by the lawes of the Romaynes / 
no man ſhulde be condempned to deathe, Excepte he be fyrſte
accuſed and that proued, Alſo Pylate merueylynge and alſo
moued with diſpleaſure agaynſte the Iues, that they of theyr
owne auctoritye wolde bynde Chriſte / nor yet conuicte before
the iudge: thoughte that they hadde ſome greate cauſe agaynſt
Chriſte, and therfore he aſked of them / what cauſe they layde
agynſte hym.Ioh. 18. E. And then they anſwered: Si non eſſet hic malefactor:
non tibi tradidiſſemus eum: If this perſone were not
a myſordred lyuer: we wolde not haue delyuered hym to the,
As if they hadde ſayde / after Symon de Caſſya we be not moued
of enuye / nor yet ſtyrrede of haytred,Libro. xiii. Nor yet we haue
bene haſtye in this dede, before that we delyuered hym to the:
we dyſcuſſed hys cauſe, we ſe his euyll dedes, we knowe his
myſcheuous tongue / there is nothynge that compellethe vs to
delyuer hym vnto the / to be iudged & cōdempned by the: but his
euyl dedes. Alſo addyng this we haue examined him in our wiſe

and lerned counſell / and there we haue founde hym worthy to
dye / wherfore it is not nedeful to haue any further examinacyon.
Thus theſe malicyous Iues dyd iuſtify them ſelf before the iuge
that they myght the more ſpedely cōdempne the innocent. Pilate
ſōwhat moued or deſpleaſed with theyr anſwere bicauſe he knew
that they accuſed Chriſt for enuy onely that they had to Chriſte,
and therfore thynkyng that they wold not ſhewe what cauſe they
had againſt hym: for bycauſe he had offended againſt theyr law,
therfore I (ſayd Pilate) wold not puniſh him but remitted hym
to theyr puniſſhmēt, which was onely to be beaten & not to inner
deth.Ioh. 18. F. And ſo Pylate ſayd to them: Accipite eum vos: et ſecūdum
legem veſtram iudicate eum, Take you chriſt and iudge him after
your lawe, as if he ſhuld ſay, If your examinacyon be ſufficient
then iudge you hym and condempne hym for I wyll condempne
no man without a cauſe proued before me. And this alſo he ſpake
mockynge them,Ibidem. for he knewe well that they myght condempne
no man to deth. then the Iues ſayd to hym: Nobis non licet interficere
quem
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                     : we may ſley no man / for that auctoritie was taken
from them by the emperour of Rome. And here ſayth ſaynte
Auſten:Suꝑ Iohn̄ trac. Cxiiii. If he be ſo a miſcheuous perſon as ye ſay: why may ye
not ſley hym, if ye may not ſley hym for your ſolempne feeſte of
paſche: why do ye crye and ſaye: crucifye hym / crucifye hym / 
Pylate perceyuing by theyr wordes that they wold not be cōtent
with any ſmall puniſſhement of Chryſte / but that they wolde
haue hym ſlayne: he wolde nedes heare the cauſe why he ſhulde
dye. And then they perceyued that Pylate was angrye: began
to accuſe Chryſte falſely in many thynges, of the whiche onelye
thre we rede in Luke.Luc. 23. A. And ſo the Iues ſayde, Hunc inuenimus
ſubuertentem gentem noſtram. &c. we founde thys perſone
ſubuertynge our people from our lawe. Alſo forbyddyng the peple
to pay tribute to the emperoure. And ſaynge hym ſelfe to be
Chryſte and our kynge. But theſe accuſacyons were al falſe.
And therfore they ſayde: Inuenimus: we haue founde hym,
for that was onely in theyr owne malicyous hartes, for it was
not truthe in dede: but onelye theyr owne ymagynacyon and
inuencyon. For he whiche came to fulfyll the lawe and not to
breke it: dyd not ſubuert the people from ye lawe. Nor he dyd
not ſubuert them: but rather cōuerted them to goodnes whom he
taught ye truth, nor he dyd forbyd ye people to pay tribute to ye emperour / 
for he ſaid openly:Mat. 22. C pay or rēder tho thyngꝭ to ye emperour

whiche be his,Mat. 17. D and gyue to god that apperteyneth to hym▪ And
alſo he payd tribute for hym ſelfe and alſo for Peter, and where
he ſayd hym ſelfe to be Chriſte the kynge: he ſayd truthe, but yet
he wolde not take vpon hym his kyngdome in this worlde, and
ſo he was falſely accuſed and that not withſtandynge: he wolde
not anſwere one worde for his excuſe.Mat. 27. D And therfore Pylate ſayd
to hym: Non audis quanta aduerſum te dicunt teſtimonia? Doyſt
not thou heare what and howe many accuſacyons they brynge
agaynſt the? And Ieſus anſwered
                     •
                   not one word in the preſence
of the Iues, in ſo moche that Pylate moche merueyled therat:
And ſpecyally ſeynge that the Iues vnreſonably and with great
turmoyle and with importunitye / requyred his death but Chriſt
for all that wolde not anſwer, remembrynge the ſayenge of the
wyſeman.Eccl. 32. A. 
                  Vbi non eſt auditus: non effundes ſermonem: Speake
not where as is no conuenient audience. Then Pylate entred
in to the motehall, bycauſe he myght more quietely examyn hym
frome the turmoyle and noyſe of the people, and there lityll
regardynge the firſte accuſacyon whiche was concernyng theyr
lawe, nor yet the ſeconde accuſacyon, for he reputed that to be
falſe, for parauenture he had hard before howe Chriſt ſaid / gyue
to the emperour that is his, therfore he onely examined hym in
the thyrde cauſe ſaynge:Ioh. 18. F. 
                  Tu es 
                        •
                     ex iudeorum? Arte thou the kyng
of Iues? as if he ſhulde ſay / is it true that the Iues ſaye of the / 
that thou woldeſt vſurpe and take vpon the the name of a kynge
contrarie to the decree and ſtatute of the emperour of Rome / for
the emperour had taken frō the Iues ye name of a kyngdome that
they ſhulde haue no kyng / and that was to breke theyr pryde and
to take from them all occaſyon of rebellyon. Then Ieſus ſaid to
Pylate A temetipſo hoc dicis:
                  Ibidem. 
                  an alii tibi dixerūt de me? Spekes
thou this of thyne own mynd: or other perſons haue ſpoken this
to the of me, ſhewyng by theſe wordes yt Pylate dyd not folowe
the order of ye lawe, as if he ſhuld ſay / if thou knowe yt I haue taken
vpon me the name of a kyng ſhew openly ye ſignes or actes of
my rebellyon / if onely thou hereſt this of oder ꝑſons / make ordynary
inquiſition & cauſe thē to bryng in witnes. Then pylate anſwered,
I am no Iue / and therfore I ſpeke it not of my ſelf / thy
people & thy biſſhoppꝭ haue delyuered ye vnto me / whiche ſhulde
defēce the, but it ſemeth that yu haſt greatly offēded thē: that they
ſo obſtinatly do accuſe the,Ibidem. what haſt yu done? Ieſus anſwered:
Regnū meū nō eſt de hoc mūdo:
                  Apoc. 1
                        •
                     . C my kyngdom is not of this world
& ſo he denyes not to be a kyng for he is ye kyng of kingꝭ and lorde

of lordes, if my kyngdome were of this worlde: my miniſtres
and ſeruantes wolde feyght for me & defend me then Pylate ſaid:
Ergo thou arte a kynge.Ioh. 18. G. And Ieſus anſwered: Tu dicis: Thou
ſayſt ſo / as if he ſayd it is as thou ſayſt, for I am a kynge, and
that thou ſhuldeſt knowe the condicyon of my kyngdome, for
that cauſe I was borne temporally into this worlde / and for that
cauſe I came into this worlde: that I might bere teſtimony and
witnes to the truthe, and who ſo euer is the chylde or louer of
truth: he hereth my voyce, Of theſe wordes we maye take that
there be .ii. thynges requyred to the kyngdom of Chriſt, the firſt
is truth yt it be hard, and the ſecond is obedience: that is yt the
truth herd be fulfylled.Ioh. 18. G. Then Pylate ſayd: Quid eſt veritas: what
is truth? Pilate dyd not here inquire the diffinition of truth / but
what is that vertue of truth: thorough whoſe perticipation and
vertue men be taken and made of the kyngdom of god. The ſolution
of this queſtion Pylate wold not abyde to here, for ſeynge
that he was not of the kyngdom of chriſt / nor wold intricate hym
ſelf with ſpūall thynges: therfore he had no cure or deſire to here
it; and alſo he cared not for it / bycauſe he ſhuld ſhortly cōdempne
the truth. And alſo bycauſe he herd a great murmur & trouble of
the people without forth feryng ſome buſynes or inſureccyon bycauſe
he differred ye deth of Chriſt ſo longe,Ibidem. and for theſe cauſes:
he haſted hym to the Iues and ſayd to them: Ego nullam cauſam
inuenio in homine iſto:
                  Suꝑ Iohn̄ 
                     omel. 83. I fynde no cauſe of deth in this man. Here
as Chriſoſtom ſaith: Pylate dyd ſubſtancyally alledge for chriſt
that he nother knewe or coulde fynd any cauſe of malice in hym.
And then the Iues for aſmoche as they fayled in theyr proue for
wante of reſonable cauſes: wolde haue preuayled by theyr multitude
& cryeng,Luc. 23. A. and at laſte they brought agaynſt hym this accuſacyon,
He hath troubled al the people from Galilee vnto this cytye,
wyllynge ſo to aggrauate theyr accuſacyon / bycauſe it appared
contrarie to the peace of the emperour vnder whome Pylate
was the hyghe iudge in Hieruſalem, that therby Pylate ſhulde
be the more moued agaynſt Chriſte. But you wycked Iues / 
howe dyd he moue the people to ſedicyon and warre: that euer
preached and taughte peace / and came to make peace bytwixte
god and man? But ſpyrytually we maye ſaye that he moued
the people and troubled them frome theyr ſynfull lyfe / by hys
holſome monicyon teachynge them the way of vertue and truth.
Of the whiche mocyon and alſo trouble: the prophete Dauid
ſayethe:Pſal. lix. 
                  Commouiſti terram: et conturbaſti eam: Thou haſt

thou haſt moued the erth that is erthly perſons / and thou haſt trobled
it, that is / put them from theyr erthly and ſynfull lyfe / cure / 
and heale (good lorde) his woundes / for he is moued to goodneſſe
and vertue. And Pylate then herynge them ſpeke of Galilee
and knowynge that Ieſus was of Galilee he ſent hym to Herode,
as ye ſhall ſe in the next article.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  IN this article we may lerne this leſſon that we ſhulde beware
that we accuſe not our ſauiour Chriſt falſly or of falſe-thynges.
They accuſe Chriſte of falſe thynges / whiche impute
or put any falſe thyng vpon hym, as the Iues / paganes and heretykes
do. For the Iues put vpon Chriſte that he was the naturall
ſonne of Ioſeph the carpenter, and that he was a gloton and
a drynker of wyne, that the deuyll was in hym and that he ſubuerted
the people whiche all were falſe. The paynyms impute
to hym that he was a pure man and not god, and that it was inpoſſible
that god ſhuld be incarnate. The heritykes put to chriſt
that he had no true bodye / but onely a fantaſticall body, and that
he was no very true man: but onely apparent. &c. There be other
yt accuſe god falſly, as theſe euyl & falſe chriſtians / which accuſe
god, as the cauſe of theyr ſynnes, ſaynge: God hath made me
of that compleccyon: that I muſt nedes ſynne, the conſtellation
or coniunccyon of ſuche planetes or ſterres made me to ſynne,
and god made the ſterres, therfore he made me to ſynne. Thou
doſt falſly impute thy ſynne to god. True it is that god made the
ſterres and alſo the of that compleccyon / for he create all thynges
and they were good. But all theſe can not compell the to ſynne,
for it is onely the malice and frowardnes of thy wyll. &c. Alſo a
man to conforme hym ſelfe to this article: ſhulde remember how
he that is the very truth dyd pacyently ſuffer to be falſly accuſed
for vs, that he myght founde and grounde vs in the truthe.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche wolde for me be falſely accuſed in many falſe
thynges before the iudge Pylate: teache me to auoyde the
diſceyres of wicked men and truly to profeſſe thy faith with good
werkes. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſt was ſent to Herode.
The .xxiii. article.
               
                  
                  THe .xxiii. article is the ſendynge of Chriſte to Herode.
For whan Pylate herde that Ieſus was a man of the
countrye of Galilee and ſo vnder the power of Herode
whiche was the captayne and the reuler of Galilee
vnder the emperour hauynge this occaſyon to delyuer his handꝭ
of Chriſte: ſent hym to herode / whiche was the ruler of Galilee
and at that tyme he was alſo in Hieruſalem, Pylate wyllynge
herby to do honour vnto Herode that he beynge the capteyne of
Galilee: ſhulde delyuer or condempne Chriſte beynge a man of
his countrye / ſo wyllyng that euery man ſhulde be examined and
iudged of his owne iudge / accordyng to the lawes of the Romanes,
and whan Ieſus was thus ſent / there was a greate cōcurſe
of people folowynge hym. O bleſſed lady Marie howe wente
thou in ſuche a multitude? who helped the in that great thronge
of people? Surely thou was then the example of ſorowe and heuynes
to all that loueth the or Chriſte thy ſonne,Luc. 23. B. and whan Herode
dyd ſe Ieſus he had greate ioye therof, not that he thought
to wynne ony thynge therby: but for that he was curious to ſe a
ſtraunge man and ſuche a man / whom he had longe deſired to ſe / 
that is from the decollacyon or behedyng of ſaint Iohn̄ the Baptiſte,
for that tyme Chriſte beganne to preache openly and to do
many miracles, whiche al Herode herynge: was moch deſirous
to ſe hym / and to ſe hym ſhewe ſome wonderous ſigne or miracle,
not for any deuocyon: but for curioſitie and to proue hym what
he coulde do: for he thought that Chriſte had ben a iugler or any
gromancyer, and for this cauſe he deſired to ſe no miracle of our
ſauiour Ieſus. This ſendynge is conueniently accompted amonges
the articles of Chriſtes paſſyon, for it is a great diſpleaſure
for any man to be ſent from one iudge to an other, how moch
more then was it paynfull to this moſt ſwete and innocent lambe
our ſauyour Ieſu? Herode aſked of Chriſte many queſtyons / 
as we ſhal ſe in the next article. Alſo there were .CC. paſſes from
Pylates houſe vnto Herodes houſe / by the whiche ſpace / bothe
goynge and comynge he ſuffred many deſpytes and rebukes.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  IN this article we may lerne this leſſon: that is to ſuffer
pacyētly if we be ſhamfully ſent from one iudge to an other
for the loue of Chriſte, ſeynge that our ſauyour Ieſus was ſo ſerued.
And ſpecially religyous ꝑſons which ſhuld be the folowers

of Chriſte ſhulde not be troubled / if ſomtyme for obedience they
be ſent from one place to an other, and nowe vnder this prelate / 
and nowe vnder that. &c.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for my loue dyd not feare to be ſent from Pylate
vnto Herode: graunt to me I beſeche the that I with
a glad mynd for thy loue may obey to the cōmaundementꝭ of my
ſuperiours thoughe they be wicked, and to do my obedyence
promtly and redylye without any grudgynge. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Herode derided and mocked Chriſt.
The .xxiiii. article.
               
                  THe .xxiiii. article is the deriſyon or mockynge that Herode
dyd to Chriſte,Luc. 23. B. for after that he was preſented to
hym: he moued to Chriſte many queſtyons and proued
hym in them, as parauenture he aſked hym whether he
was that chyld / at whoſe birth a new ſtarre dyd appere to the .iii.
kynges? and whether he dyd gyue ſyght to that man which was
borne blynde, And if he dyd reyſe Lazar that was .iiii. dayes
dead? and ſuche other queſtyons. Some perſons do moue queſtyons
onely for curioſitie to here newe thynges, ſome to know
the truth / and ſome onely to tempte and proue howe the other perſone
can anſwere, and ſome to take the anſwere in a trippe or defaute.
And Herode here aſked Chriſte many queſtions / not as a
ſtudious perſon to lerne or knowe the truth: but rather to rebuke
Chriſte, not as a louer of the truthe: but to tempte hym, not to
wynne or get any truth or vertue therby: but for curioſitie to here
newes. And for theſe cauſes Chriſt wolde ſhewe no token or myracle,
nor yet anſwere vnto hym. Alſo Herode in his queſtions
behaued hym ſelfe ſcornfully vnto Chriſt, and as mockyng hym
ſayd: If thou wyll do any miracle in my preſence / I ſhall quyte
the and delyuer the, and if thou wylt not honour me with ſome
thynge I ſhall condempne the at the wyl and deſyre of thy aduerſaries
theſe malicyous Iues. But for all this our ſauyour Ieſus
whiche doth all thynges ordinately.Pſal. C. xi. And as dauid ſayth: Diſpoſeth
his wordes and ſentēces in ryght reaſon and iudgement:
He (I ſay) wolde not anſwere to any one queſtyon, for he iudged
it moſt godlye to kepe ſilence at that tyme, for one word ſpoken
without prophet: may be ſomtyme the cauſe of the condempnacyon

of the ſpeaker. And at that tyme all the prynces of the
Iues ſtode ſtyfly accuſynge Chriſte, as we ſhall declare in the
nexte article.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this leſſon after ſaynt Gregorye
that as ofte as our audience wold here our preachyng / ſentence / 
or mynde, not for to amende therby theyr peruerſe and vicyous
lyfe: but onely to commende our ſaynges: then ſo ofte we
ſhulde kepe ſilence and ſpeake not as they wolde, for if we ſhuld
for that purpoſe folowe theyr deſyre: we ſhuld offende god in ſo
doynge, and theyr vicyous lyfe ſhulde be in no thynge amended
therby. There be many thynges wherby we maye knowe and
perceyue the mynd of the herer and deſyrer, and ſpecyally if they
euer prayſe that thynge whiche they here, and yet neuer folowe
that thynge whiche they ſo prayſe.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wolde ſuffer Herode ſcornfully to demaund
many queſtions of the, to the which thou wold not
anſwere one word: graūt to me for thy loue, yt I may paciently
here and bere ſcornfull queſtyons and mockynge wordes, and
that I may declyne and auoyde my vayne prayſe by my ſilence.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſte was accuſed before Herode.
The .xxv, article.
               
                  THe .xxv. article is the accuſacyon of Chriſte before
Herode.Luc. 23. B. For as Luke ſayth: Stabant principes facer
dotum et ſcribe conſtanter accuſantes eum. The princes
of the preeſtes and the ſcribes ſtode ſtyfely accuſynge
Chriſte before Herode.Libro. xiii. And here Symon de
Caſſia ſaith: I wolde that the euangeliſte or the interpreter that
tranſlated the euangelie of Luke out of Greke in to Latyne had
vſed this terme or worde pertinaciter: rather than this worde
conſtanter, for conſtantia is a name of vertue: and ſuche a vertue
as it is not conuenient and agreynge to enuyous or hatefull
perſons and all gyuen to miſcheyfe. But this worde pertinatia,
that is frowardnes: is conuenient to ſuche euyll perſons, for it
is the name of a vyce / and that ſuche a vice which wyll not gyue
ouer or ceaſe vnto the tyme his malicyous mynde be broughte to
purpoſe. Theſe malicyous Iues ſtode obſtinatlye and ſtyfelye

accuſynge Chriſte that he myght be ſhortly put to deth, and they
as the chylderne of deth: wold not ſuffer the lyfe to lyue vpon the
erth, they accuſed Chriſte before Herode ſpecyallye ſaynge that
Chriſte had troubled and moued al the people begynnyng in Galilee / 
whiche was vnder the rule of Herode yt therby they myght
the more rather moue hym agaynſt Chriſt, bycauſe he had troubled
& moued the people in his dominion. And notwithſtādyng
the accuſacyons of Chriſt before Herode were the ſame that were
ſpoken before Pylate: yet for aſmoche as that they were ſpoken
before an other iudge, and ſo a newe payne and ſorowe was therby
vnto Chriſte: therfore this article is put here as diuerſe or an
other from the .xxii. article. And as Chriſte in no thynge wolde
anſwere vnto Herode: ſo he in no thynge anſwered to his accuſers.Suꝑ Lucā. Cap. 98.
But as ſaynt Ambroſe ſayth: He kept ſilence bycauſe theyr
vnfaythfulnes deſerued not to here the truth of god, and our lord
alſo declyned then or wolde auoyde iactance and vayne prayſe,
for he wolde do no miracle before Herode as he then wolde gladly
haue ſene. Alſo he wolde not then ſhewe any miracle bycauſe
he wolde not let his paſſion.Suꝑ. 23. Luce. And as Albert ſayth: The pride and
curioſitie of Herode dyd not deſerue it. And her to our lorde commaūded
in his goſpell ſayng Nolite ſanctum dare canibus:
                  Mat. 7. A. Gyue
no holy thynge to dogges, do no miracles before ſuche as wyll
not prophet by them. Alſo ye knowe that a worde can not be ſpoken
or formed without a voyce, ſo bycauſe our ſauyour Ieſus is
the eternall worde of god, and ſaynt Iohan the Baptiſt is called
the voyce of that ſame worde, & Herode ſlewe that voyce Iohan
Baptiſte the Eeſter laſte paſſed the yere before, therfore he was
not worthy to here yt eternal worde of god that is Chriſt / ſpeke.
And furthermore he was not worthy to heare Chriſte ſpeake / for
his manyfolde ſcornynge wordes, and alſo to gyue vs example / 
that we may better ouercome vayne and mockynge wordes / by
ſilence then by ſpeakynge.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may lerne this leſſon, that truth is not to
be ſpoken or ſhewed / in all places / in all tymes / nor to all
perſons, for oftymes it is better to kepe ſilence as we ſaid before.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche preſented before Herode wolde for my loue
ſuffer the falſe accuſacyons of the Iues, and thou wolde
not excuſe thy ſelfe / or deny in any worde theyr iniuſt ſayenges:

graunt to me that I be nat ouercome by the iniuries of wycked
men / nor that I ſhewe thy holy miſteries to the vnworthy ꝑſons.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſte was deſpiſed of Herode.
The .xxvi. article.
               
                  THe .xxvi. article is of the deſpeccyon that Herode and
his ſeruauntes dyd to Chriſt / for Herode ſeyng Chriſt
wolde not ſhewe any ſigne or miracle before hym, nor
ſpeake one word to all his queſtions, nor yet anſwere
to the accuſacyons of the Iues for his owne defence: He reputed
hym to be a fole and to haue no witte or reaſon,Luc. 23. B. And therfore
he deſpyſed hym and ſo dyd all his compeigney and ſeruauntes.
Fyrſt bycauſe Chriſte kepte ſo ſtably his ſilence in no thynge moued
to ſpeake though the Iues dyd ſo falſly accuſe hym. Secondly
Herode diſpiſed Chriſt, bycauſe he reputed hym a fole or ferefull
of the death that the Iues labored to bryng hym vnto, or els
for that he thought Chriſte to be preſumptuous in his lyuynge
and maners / and nowe kepte ſilence: bycauſe he could not defend
his owne cauſe for want of good reaſon and iuſtice in his cauſe.
And thyrdly he wolde be deſpyſed of Herode for a greate miſterie,
it is a profounde miſterie and gyueth to vs a matter of hygh
contemplacyon, to conſider howe the eterne wyſdome of god:
wolde be reputed foliſſhnes, and the infinite power of god wold
be taken for infirmitie as of lytyll or of no power, ſo that Chriſt
the ſonne of god very god and man wolde be made the obprobry
or rebuke of men, the abiection and out caſt of the people / and
the mockynge ſtocke of kynges and great men. And in lyke maner
nowe a dayes the folowers of Chriſt be diſpyſed of euyl men
and reputed as foles, and that ſpecyally when ſuch euyl perſons
haue a wicked reuler or heed, for comonly ſuche perſons ſhortlye
conſent vnto ſuche a captayn or reuler. A comen prouerbe / Such
a kynge hath ſuche counſellers & lyke ſeruantes, and therfore it
was ſo moch ye more to the obprobry & rebuke of Chriſt / that not
onely Herode deſpyſed Chriſte: but alſo al his compaigney and
ſeruantes. And in theſe dayes there be many that diſpyſe Ieſus
as Herode dyd: lokynge to ſe ſignes and miracles nowe / whan
it is not tyme to ſhewe ſignes / but rather to do good werkes / our
lorde ſayd of the Iues:Luc. 16. G. 
                  Habent moiſen et prophetas: They haue
moyſen that is the lawe of moyſes and the prophetes, lette them
here them and folowe them. And we haue morouer the goſpelles

and the apoſtles with the actes and apocalipſe / and yet we wolde
ſe ſignes, we do not fulfyll the goſpell and in lyuynge therafter:
but rather we deſppyſe it. This deſpyſynge of Chriſte is conueniētly
taken for an article of Chriſtes paſſyon, for ſyth it wold
greue any man to ſe hym ſelf deſpyſed of other men and ſpecyally
of great men though he were but ſymple and an ideote: moche
more it ſhulde greue our ſauyour Chriſte whiche was all good / 
omnipotent and moſt wiſe, to be mocked & taken as omnipotent
bycauſe he wolde do no miracle before Herode / to be reputed an
ideote without knowlege: bycauſe he wolde not anſwere to hys
queſtions, to be accompted as a fole / bycauſe he wold not defende
hym ſelfe agaynſt his accuſers, and not onely they deſpyſed hym
in wordes: but alſo in dede, puttynge a folys cote vpon Chriſt / 
as ye ſhall ſe in the nexte article.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this leſſon / that we ſhulde rather
wyll to be deſpyſed of euyll perſons: then to be commended
of flaterers. As our lorde (after ſaynte Gregorie) dyd
choſe rather to be openly diſpiſed of proude perſons: then vaynly
to be lauded of vnfaythfull perſones.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche was contente to be deſpyſed for me of Herode
and his compaignye or ſeruantes: graunte me to deſpyſe
all worldly pompe for the / and not to regarde the deſpyſynge of
wicked men for thy loue and for iuſtyce. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſte was cladde with a whyte garment
to his deſpyſyng. The .xxvii. article.
               
                  THe .xxvii. article is the mockynge of Chriſte with a
whyte garment / whiche was put vpon hym to his great
confuſyon and ſhame.Libro. xiii. And here ſaith Symon de Caſſia
that this worde albedo / that is to ſaye / whitnes, is not
taken at all tymes in ſcripture for vertue / or to the beſt parte, for
ſomtyme it ſignifyeth the want of vertues, and ſo this whyt veſtment
wherwith Herode dyd mocke Chriſt doth ſhewe what was
Herode and his ſeruantes or folowers, for he and all they were

voyde of all the multiplicacitye or varietie and diuerſitie of vertues,
and ſo theyr mockynge of Chriſte / turned to theyr owne
preiudice / and to theyr euerlaſtynge deſpeccyon and rebuke. It
is euer knowen to be a greate illuſion and mockynge of Chryſt:
when his vertues are forſaken for worldlye pompe, whan his
teachynges be deſpyſed and all his dedes that he dyd and paynes
that he ſuffred for our loue: be no thynge regarded. And ſo dyd
Herode here / for not onely he deſpyſed hym: but alſo as Luke
ſayth:Cap. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . B. 
                  Illuſit indutum veſte alba, He cladde hym in a whyte cote
(whiche was taken for a folys cote) and ſo mocked hym in dede / 
to the greate deriſyon of Chriſt, for Herode wold haue hym knowen
of all people for a fole. For it is lyke that that tyme to haue
or weare a whyte garment: was a ſigne or token of a fole / and
it is alſo very lyke that that whyte garment was lengar than the
ſtature of Chriſte, and ſo therby thorowe the thurſtyng & throng
of the cruel Iues: he was oftymes thrawen downe to the groūd.
But thoughe Herode dyd thus aray Chriſte to his rebuke: yet
this whyte garment was not without greate miſterie: as were
all the other actes and dedes aboute the paſſyon of Chriſt. Therfore
as ſaynt Ambroſe ſayth:Suꝑ Lucā. Cap. 98. This whyte garment doth ſignify
the immaculate and innocent paſſion of Chriſte, for he without
ſpotte of ſynne: dyd beare and ſuffer payne for all ſynnes of the
worlde, whiche whyte garment is ſignifyed by the albe of the
preeſte wherin he ſayth maſſe, for the veſtmentes that the biſſhop
or preeſt vſeth at maſſe: doth repreſēt the hole paſſion of Chriſt.
For our hygh byſſhop Chriſte was cladde in his paſſyon with
all the ornamentes of a byſſhop. Fyrſte he toke his amyſſe when
the Iues couered his face / he toke his albe: whan Herode cladde
hym in this whyte garment / he toke his manyple whan the Iues
or ſaugiours bonde his handes, but what tyme they lowſed
his handes and put a rede in his ryght hande: then the corde or
bonde dyd remayne vpon his lefte hande, and in token herof / the
preeſt vſeth the maniple vpon the lefte hande or arme / he toke his
gyrdle: when he was bounde aboute the myddle to the pyller,
he toke his ſtole: when he was bounde by the necke to the pyller,
he toke his cheſyble: when the ſaugiours of Pylate put an olde
purpur garment vpon hym, he had a crowne of thornes for hys
mytour, he had a rede in his hand for his croſſe, he had his glouys
for his handes & his ſandalles for his feete: when they were
made all redde with blode. The ſandalles haue a reed hole aboue
wrought with red ſylke, and the glouys haue an vche or a redde

precyous ſtone, or otherwyſe wrought with red: to ſignifye the
woundes of Chriſt in his handes and feete. Theſe be the ornamentes
of a biſſhop whan he doth conſecrate any thyng. Alſo many
of theſe the preeſt doth vſe at his maſſe, to ſignify that he ſhuld
haue in his vnderſtandynge the meditacyon of Chriſtes paſſion / 
in his memorie the remembraunce therof. The compaſſion ther
of in his affection and wyll, ſo that as he is lyke to Chriſt in his
veſtmentes: ſo he may be lyke in his herte and mynde and alſo lyuynge,
for who ſo euer hath theſe outwarde tokens of Chriſtes
paſſion / nothyng fealyng inwardly by meditacyon and compaſſyon:
doth not ſerue or loue Chriſt: but rather mocke hym with
Herode, which in that white garmēt ſent hym to Pilate agayne,
As it ſhall appere in the nexte article.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may lerne this leſſon, all they that wyll
lyue godly & innocently after the example of our newe man
Chriſt: ſhalbe mocked & be had as folys of other perſons yt lyue
after the old ſynful maner. But for al this, the true ſpirituall ſeruantes
of god / ſhulde not be troubled: but rather ioyfull / for the
newe man our ſauiour Chriſt clad in a white garmēt which ſignifyeth
(to vs chriſtians) his innocētie was mocked & 
                        〈◊〉
                     
of the chylderne of this worlde, to whome that white garmente
was a ſigne of foliſſhenes. Alſo a man in his garmentes or arayment
ſhuld onely loke for profyt and his neceſſitie, and nothyng
for vanitie or curioſitie, for our ſauyour was reputed as a fole
for his aray. And that a man myghte conforme hym ſelfe to this
article: he ſhulde thanke god: that it wold pleaſe hym to gyue to
vs the garment of innocentie: for the deriſion that he ſuffred of
his whyte cote. And a man ſhulde alſo oftymes thynke howe oft
he hath defoyled by his ſinnes, that white veſtment of innocentie
whiche our lorde gaue to vs at our baptiſme, and pray thus.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu which wold be for me clad in a white garment & mocked
as a fole of Herode and his ſeruātes: graūt me warely
to declyne or auoyde the wiſdome of this worlde whiche in thy
ſyght is but a foliſſhenes, and with a pure hert to come to the,
whiche arte the very true wiſdome. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſt was ſent agayne to
Pylate. The .xxviii.
               
                  
                  THe .xxviii. article is the ſendyng agayn of Chriſt from
Herode vnto Pilate, for Herode when he fond no cauſe
of deth in chriſt: he diſpyſed & mocked hym & ſent hym
agayn to Pilate in a white cote, and in this it apereth
that he dyd cōſent vnto ye deth of Chriſt / for ſith Chriſte was ſent
to Herode as one of his iuriſdiction & vnder his power, when he
ſe no cauſe worthy deth ꝓued of Chriſt: he ſhulde haue abſolued
hym & deliuered hym from ye handes of the Iues, and not to haue
ſent agayn vnto a ſtraūge iuge ye which had no power ouer hym.
And ſo Herode offēded in that yt he ſent Chriſt agayne vnto Pylate,Luc. 23. B.
which ſēdyng agayne is cōueniently taken for a ſpeciall article,
for therby Chriſt had a newe payne & labour. Alſo for that
he returned agayne to Pylate clad in a white cote: to his greate
ſhame & rebuke. Thyrdly by cauſe alſo he brought wt hym, Herodes
conſent of his owne deth, whiche appered both in ſigne or
token and alſo in dede, In ſigne: bycauſe he was ſent in a folys
cote,Ibidem. In dede: that is in the cōfederation of theyr frendſhyp / for
that ſame day Herode & Pylate by this ſendynge of Chriſte were
made frendes where as before they were enemyes, which frendſhyp
of Herode & Pylate was a figure & ſygne that the Iues and
gentyles ſhulde agre to gether in the perſecucyon of chriſtians,
Or els we may take this frendſhyp for a good ſigne: ſaynge that
the Iues & gentiles which before ye deth of Chriſt were enemies,
by his deth were made frendes & agreynge in one faythe of Ieſu
Chriſte. For he is the peace or corner ſtone that ioyneth the two
diuerſe peoples in one. And whan Pylate ſe that Herode ſente
Chriſte agayne vnto hym: he was very ſorye therof. And ſo caſt
in his mynde howe he myghte delyuer Chriſte frome deth. And
therfore he called togyther the prynces of the preeſtes / the greate
men of the Iues / and the comen people, and goynge forth to
them: ſayde / ye haue broughte and preſented to me this man. &c.
As in the nexte article.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this leſſon, that the nature of
goodnes hathe ſuche ſtrengthe and vertue that it agreithe
euyll perſones and maketh theym frendes / and ſpecyallye in
the perſecucyon of goodnes / and therfore the euyll perſons may
be well ſignifyed by the foxes that Sampſon toke and tyed theyr
tayles togyther,Iudic. 15. A to diſtroye the corne and fruyte of his aduerſaries.

So euyll perſons ben confedered and tyed togyther to
perſue good men,Pſal. 2. and ſo Herode and Pylate, the Iues and the
gentiles agreed to gyther againſt our lord and his ſonne Chriſt.
And herto ſayth Theophilus: The deuyll in al places cōioyneth
and agreeth enemyes to conſpyre the deth of Chriſte. Therfore
the iu
                        •
                     te perſon ſhulde not be afrayd / thoughe he ſe euyll perſons
copled agaynſt hym, for that is a ſigne yt there is ſome goodnes
in hym, and therby alſo he is cōformed & made lyke vnto Chriſt / 
agaynſt whom all euyl perſons agreed in one, and alſo thoſe perſons
as were enemyes before. Alſo a man to conforme hym ſelfe
to this article ſhuld remember what payne it was to Chriſte to
be ſo ſhamfully led from one iudge to an other, and if a man haue
any hatred in his herte agaynſt any perſone: let hym forgyue it
with all his hert, and that for the loue of Chriſt, the whiche for
vs in his bleſſed paſſyon wolde alſo agree wycked perſones and
make them frendes, and praye thus.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wolde be ſent agayne from Herode vnto
Pylate, and therby wolde make them frendes: graunt
me that I feere not the frenſhyp of wicked men agaynſte me, but
rather that I may ſo profyte by theyr exercyſe: that I maye deſerue
to be conformed and made lyke vnto the. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſt was forſaken of the Iues / and Barrabas
by them was delyuered. The .xxix. article.
               
                  THe .xxix. article is the reprouing or forſakyng of Chriſt
for whan Chriſt was brought agayn to Pilate he called
together the princes of the preeſtꝭ / the great men of the
Iues & the comen people / and goyng forth vnto theym
ſayd:Luce. 23. BC. 
                  Obtuliſti mihi hūc hoiem quaſi auertētem populum. &c. Ye
haue 
                     •
                  ſented this man vnto me as a ſubuerter of the people, and
behold ſaid Pylate / I examynyng hym afore you / can not fynde
hym gylty in any ſuch cauſe as ye accuſe hym of / nor yet Herode,
for I ſent you vnto hym / and loo nothynge worthy deth is done
vnto hym. Pylate went forth of ye motehall to ye Iues that ſtode
without / and that he dyd to excuſe chriſt / and to ſhewe ye blyndnes
or maliciouſnes of the accuſers.Libro. xiii. And here ſaith Symon de Caſſia:
The Iues ſtode without for they knewe not the inwarde ſecretes
and miſteries of the lawe / they were put without from the
light of truthe / and frome al ſhynynge and operation of vertue▪
Pylate wente forthe to confounde the Iues, he wente forthe
to theym: Not as moued to conſente vnto theyr malyce: but

to declare and ſhewe vnto them in what euyls / peryls / and daungers
that people ſtandethe: whiche is excluded frome all goodnes.
And therfore openly before all that were preſent he wolde
reproue and ſhewe to be vayne all ſuche accuſacyons as they had
ſpoken agaynſt Chriſt, whom after due examinacyon: he founde
innocent. And alſo he went forth to the Iues to ſignifye ſpiritually
that they ſhulde be caſte out of theyr kyngdome and alſo
frome the kyngdome of god. And ferthermore Pylate ſayde to
the Iues, ye haue a cuſtome that I ſhulde dimi
                     •
                  ſe at your denomination
one priſoner euery paſchall tyme / to his liberty, which
of theſe .ii wyll ye haue delyuered from pryſone to libertye, Ieſus / 
or Barrabas. In this eleccyon: the Iues dyd choſe Barrabas,Libro. xiii.
and yt was to ſhewe theyr peruerſe / obſtinate & malicyous
mynde. And here ſayth Symon de Caſſia: Pylate put to
the eleccyon of the Iues whither they wolde delyuer Barrabas / 
or Chriſte, Barrabas was a ſtronge thefe / a ſedicyous perſone / 
and a manquellar, Chriſte was al good / Pylate ioyned theſe .ii.
togyther / that they conſiderynge the miſcheuous lyfe of the one
and the goodnes of the other though there be no comperiſon bytwene
good and euyll) they ſhulde condempne the euyll perſone
and delyuer ye good.Luc. 23. C. And after that Pylate had granted to them
a ſpace and tyme to conſider whom they wold choſe: the prynces
of the preeſtes and the ſeniours of the people dyd per
                     •
                  wade and
moue the people to aſke Barrabas. And then Pylate inquiryng
whiche of theſe .ii. they wolde haue delyuered: they aſked that
Barrabas might be put to libertie: and that Chriſt ſhulde be condempned
vnto moſt cruell deth. And therfore it foloweth in the
goſpell: Tunc vniuerſa exclamauit turba: tolle hunc: et dimitte no
his Barraban: All the people cryed away with Chriſt: and delyuer
Barrabas vnto vs, as if theſe malicyous Iues ſhulde ſaye:
ſley hym yt dyd rayſe deed folkes and delyuere that thefe & manſleyar
Barrabas, that he may ſley them that be on lyfe. And therfore
vnto this day the Iues can haue no peace, bicauſe they wold
rather choſe the ſedicyous thefe Barrabas, and ſo in hym the ſe
dicyous prince & captayne of all ſynne the deuyll / whiche vnto
this day doth reigne in them (rather I ſay) than Chriſt. Theyr
example done folowe nowe a dayes ſuch perſons that wyl rather
help & ꝓmote euyl men: then good men. And ſo in many elections
and ꝓuiſions of benefices or offices t
                     •
                  orall & ſpūall / Ieſus / that
is ye good ꝑſon ye frend of god which hath a good wyl to help and
ſaue him ſelf & alſo other / & therfore worthy to be choſē & ꝓmoted:

is reproued and put awaye. And contrary wyſe / Barrabas / the
euyll and vnworthy perſon / and the enemy of Chriſte, whiche
wyll ſlay hym ſelfe and alſo other in ſoule: is choſen and promoted.
And this article of Chriſtes paſſyon: is not the leſte, or of
lytyll payne, for ſyth any man wyll be ſory to ſe hym ſelfe reproued / 
and alſo an other not ſo worthy: promoted: howe moche
more then myght Chriſte be 
                     •
                  ory / ſeynge that ſo vyle and dampnable
a perſon was preferred before hym, and that the Iues dyd
aſke the lyfe of the manſlayer,Mat. 27. C and the lyfe of the ſonne of god.
And then Pylate aſked of them: Quid faciam de Ieſu qui dicitur
Chriſtus? What ſhall I do with Ieſus whiche is called Chriſte
your kynge and Meſſias? Pylate ſpake this to make them aſhamed
of theyr iniquitie and alſo ſhewynge the meſure of theyr wickednes,
but the Iues were nother aſhamed of that Pylate confeſſed
Ieſus to be theyr meſſias:Ibidem. nor yet kept the meſure of theyr
wickednes. For they all cryed with one voyce crucifigatur: crucifye
hym,
                     Omel. 35. ſuꝑ Math. in the whiche ſaynge (as Origene ſayth) they multyplyed
the meaſure of theyr wickednes. For before Cayphas they
ſayde: he is worthy deth, and nowe before the iudge they determine
the kynde and maner of death ſayng: Crucifye hym.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  IN this article we may lerne this leſſon / that we quietly and
pacyently ſuffer if any perſone of vyle condicyon and euyll
maners be preferred before vs, conſiderynge that a ſtronge thefe
and a manqueller was preferred before Chriſte god and man.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu Chriſt the ſonne of the lyuyng god, whiche for mannes
ſaluacyon diſdeyned not in the thyrde houre of the day
to be reproued and forſaken of the Iues that dyd aſke the ſedicyous
thefe Barrabas, to be delyuered from deth vnto his liberty.
And wolde haue the the auctor and gyuer of lyfe to be crucifyed:
graunt to me that I may euer choſe the my creatour and maker
before all other, and neuer to reproue or forſake the: for any creature.
Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶The pullynge of the garmentes of Chriſt.
The .xxx. article.
               
                  
                  THe .xxx. article is the puttyng of Chriſtes garmentes.
For whan Pylate heroe that the Iues dyd aſke Barrabas
to be dimy
                     ••
                  ed: and Ieſus to be crucifyed: he
ſayd vnto them:Luc. 23. C. 
                  Quid enim mali fecit: Nullam cauſam
mortis inuen
                        •
                     o in eo: Corripiam ergo illum et dimittam. What euel
hathe Ieſus done / I fynde no cauſe of deth in hym, therfore yf
he committed any treſpas agaynſte your 
                     •
                  awe or ceremonyes / I
ſhall correcte and amende hym and ſo dimiſſe hym. In theſe wordes
Pylate beganne to ſwerue frome the iuſtyce of the lawe / he
ſayd that he wolde correcte and amende the innocent.Luc. 23. C. O Pylate
if he be innocent:Mat. 27. C howe mayſt thou amende hym or correcte hym.
except thou decline from iuſtice? and ſo furthwith he toke Chriſt
and began to rebuke hym. And firſte they put of his garmentes,
and this was no lytyll iniurie and rebuke to Chriſte to be ſtrypt
naked before all the compaigney. And though Chriſte was not
borne of that infecte and corrupte ſtocke of Adam, wherby oure
nakednes was made ſhamfull (for before that Adam dyd ſynne / 
he was naked & in nothynge abaſhed therof / but after that he had
ſynned: he was aſhamed of his nakednes, and therfore he ſayd:
Timui eo ꝙ nudus eſſem: et abſcondi me:
                  Gene. 3. B. I was afrayd or aſhamed
bycauſe (ſayd Adam) that I was naked / and therfore I dyd hyde
me) thoughe I ſay Chriſt was not borne by the ſede of man: yet
bycauſe he came to take our infirmities and to ſuffer for our 
                     •
                  ynnes:
therfore he was abaſſhed to be ſene naked / and ſo moche the
more aſhamed then all other chaſt virgyns be: in how moch that
his honeſty and chaſtitye excelled without compariſon the clennes
of all other virgyns. And whan Ieſus was thus naked / Pylate
toke hym to the ſaugiours to be ſcourged as ye ſhall ſe in the
next article. And note here that one doctor ſayth that Chriſt was
thryes ſcourged. Fyrſte with roddes: bycauſe he dyd trouble and
moue the people / and there he had .xl. ſtrokes ſaue one, accordynge
to the commaundement of the lawe.Deut. 25. A Secondly with ruſhys
of the ſee, whiche be more ſharp than thornes, and this beatynge
was bycauſe he had preached and taught a newe doctrine.
And here he was ſcourged as Heliodore was by the angelles of
whome we rede in the ſeconde boke of the Machabeis. Thyrdlye
they ſcourged hym with whyppes.Cap. 3. E.
               
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this leſſon that as Chriſte had
his garmentes pulled of his bdye and was ſtryped naked:
ſo ſhulde we put of our olde ſynfull cote and lyfe, and make open

and naked our cōſcience before god and his miniſter our curate,
by pure and playne confeſſion of all our ſynnes, auoyde all cloke
and colour of excuſacyon / for al thynges ben open and naked before
the ſyght of god. And a man to conforme hym ſelfe vnto this
article: ſhulde remember howe miſerably / and with howe moch
iniurie and ſhame Chriſte was ſtrypt naked and his clothes violentlye
pulled of hym. And praye thus.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wold haue thy clothes pulled violentlye
of thy backe and wolde be ſtrypt naked to be ſcourged:
graunt to me that I may caſte of from me myne olde ſynfull cote
or lyfe with al his operations by true / pure and playne confeſſion
of all my ſynnes and that I neuer apere in thy ſyght naked from
vertues. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſte was ſcourged.
The .xxxi. article.
               
                  THe .xxxi. article is the ſcourgynge of Chriſte. For when
Ieſus was ſo ſtrypt naked: Pylate delyuered hym to
the ſaugiours.Ioh. 19. A. The goſpell ſayth: Apprehendit illum
Pilatus et flagellauit: Pylate toke Chriſte and ſcourged
hym, that is, Pliate made hym to be ſcourged of his ſaugiours,
that the Iues (as ſaynt Auſten ſayth) ſacyate and content with
thoſe his paynes and rebukes:Suꝑ Iohn̄ tract. cxvi. ſhulde deſyre no more his death.
And ſo he that dyd lowſe them that were bounde / our ſauiour Ieſus
was bounde faſt to a pyllar, whiche was ſo great and thycke
that his armes & his handes myght nat compas it. And therfore
the ſaugiours corrupt by mony drewe out his armes with harde
cordes: that all the vaynes of his armes appered out to the extremitie.
And then thoſe ſaugiours called in all theyr compaigney
and our ſauiour Ieſus ſo bounde and naked / they bette ſo cruelly
with roddes / knotted whyppes and thorny ruſhes of the ſee:
that they dyd teare the fleſh and drewe it away / ſo that his bones
ware ſene bare, and alſo greate gobettes and pecys of the fleſſhe
hange vpon the ſcourges and whyppes. There ſtode naked before
all the people: the moſt louely yonge man / eligant and ſham
faſt, beautious aboue all other men, ſpeakynge not one worde / 
but as meake as a lambe dyd ſuffer pacyently the harde / ſharppe
and paynfull beatynges of thoſe moſt vyle & cruell tormentours.

That moſt innocent and tender fleſſhe, moſt pure and moſt fayre
the floure of all mankynde was replete and full of ſtrokes / blomes / 
woundes and broſers / he was wounded thorow out all his
moſte holye bodye, ſo that fro the toppe of the hed vnto the ſole
of his foote: there was none hole ſkynne. That noble and precyous
blode of his: ranne from euery parte of his bodye, the cruell
tormentours added plage vpon plage and heped wounde vppon
wounde / broſynge vpon broſynge / blode vpon blode / vnto
the tyme that both the cruell tormentours and alſo the beholders,
were wery of ſmi
                     •
                  ynge and ſeynge, and ſo he was commaunded
to be lowſed from the pyllar. And here ſayth ſaynte Barnarde:
that the tormentours dyd ons lowſe Ieſus, and bounde hym agayne / 
turnynge his backe to the pyllar and bounde his handes
aboue his heed, that they myght ſcourge hym vpon bely & breſte
and alſo his face, and ſo they ſpared no place of his moſt tender
bodye whoſe crueltye cōſyderynge ſome of the pagans there ſtandynge
and beholdynge this ſorowfull ſcourgynge: ranne to our
lorde and bracke the ropes and ſo dyd lowſe hym, and thoſe cruell
tormētours not ſaciate with that ſcourgyng: pulled the heyre
of his moſt bleſſed berde and alſo of his heed, wherin was fulfylled
the prophecye of Eſay:Eſaie. 1. C. 
                  Corpus meum dedi percutientibus:
et genas meas vellentibus: which auctoritie we declared before in
the .xvi. article. ¶But howe many plages or woundes our
ſauyour Ieſus had at this ſcourgynge, it can not be knowen but
by reuelacyon, for they were in a maner innumerable, forſythe
ſcripture ſayth Pro menſura peccati:
                  Deut. 25. A 
                  erit plagarum modus: After
the meaſure of the ſynne: ſhalbe the meaſure of the beatynges or
plages: and Chriſte was ſcourged for our ſynnes / whiche be innumerable:
therfore his plages and woundes muſte be innumerable.
And that noted,Eſaie. 1. B. the prophet whan he ſayde of Chriſte, A
planta pedis vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad verticem capitis: non eſt in eo ſanitas: Frome
the toppe of his hed vnto the ſole of his fote: there was no hoole
parte in hym.Suꝑ Mat. 27. As ſaynte Hierom ſayth: Chriſte wolde be ſcourged
that therby he might deliuer vs from perpetual ſcourgyngꝭ.
As a louynge mother ſeynge the father beatynge her ſonne: wyl
runne bytwixt the rodde & her ſonne with her armes ſpred abrode
and receyue the ſtrokes to defende her ſonne from that beatynge / 
ſo dyd Chriſte for vs, and therin was verifyed the ſaynge of the
prophet that he ſpake of Chriſte ſayenge:Eſae. 53. B 
                  Diſciplina pacis noſtre
ſuper eum: et liuore eius ſanati ſumus: The diſciplyne of our peace
dyd lyght vpon hym: that is: the beatynges which we deſerued

for our ſynnes / and were not punyſſhed for them. but lyued in
peace and pleaſure / theſe beatynges (I ſay) dyd fall vpon Chriſt
and ſo by his woundes we were made hole. And after that Ieſus
was thus ſcurged: they mocked hym in many thynges / as it ſhal
appere in diuers articles folowynge.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this leſſon that we ſhuld gladly
ſuffer ye ſcourges of god / ſo that euery one of vs might ſay
truely with the prophet:Pſal. 37. 
                     Ego in flagella paratus ſum: I am prepared
and redy to receyue beatynges. And that is conuenient. For
ſyth the onely ſonne of god was redye to receyue vpon his owne
bodye beatynges and ſcourgynges for our ſynnes, and that at
the obedience of god his father: moche more then ſhulde we that
be but the adoptyue chylderne of god: be redy to ſuffer gladly the
ſcourges of our father in heuen, whiche he by hym ſelfe or by his
miniſtres, doth mercyfully ſende to vs for our amendement.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche wolde for me be bounde to a pyllar and greuouſly
ſcourged: graunt to me that I may pacientlye and
gladly beare the ſcourges of thy fatherly correccyon, and neuer
to ſcourge the agayne with my ſynnes. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe they put an olde purpur cote vpon
Chriſte. The .xxxii. article.
               
                  THe .xxxii. article is the puttynge on of an olde purpull
cote, for after that Chriſte was ſcourged and lowſed
from the pyllar: they ledde hym ſo naked and ſcourged
aboute the houſe to gather vp his clothes / which were
caſt about the houſe in diuers places by thoſe cruel tormentours,
and when he hadde founde them and wolde haue put them vpon
hym: thoſe moſt wicked ſaugiours ſayd to Pylate: Syr / this
lewde felowe called hym ſelfe a kynge, therfore (if it pleaſe you
we ſhall aray hym lyke vnto a kynge, and ſo moche ſcornfullye
they brought before hym al the ornamentes cōuenient for a kyng,
and then theſe wretches called in all theyr compaigney / that they
myght mocke Chriſte aſmoche as any of them wolde, before that

they wolde put hym vnto the deth, Pylate paraduenture / commaundynge / 
or at leſte ſufferynge that it ſhulde ſo be and that he
dyd to mitigate and ſwage the furie and malicyous mynd of the
Iues.Suꝑ Iohn̄ Omel. 83. Or els as Criſoſtom ſayth: The ſaugiours dyd thus to
pleaſe the Iues of whom they receyued money. Fyrſte they put
vpon hym a robe of purpull / a kynges garment / but it was olde / 
to the more confuſyon of Chriſte,Mat. 17. B this garment was conuenient
for the bodie of Chriſte ſo ſcurged, for it was of red coloure and
all his bodye was red with his owne blode. And herin was fulfylled
the queſtion that the prophet moued in the perſons of the
angelles ſaynge:Eſae. 63. A. 
                  Quare rubrum eſt indumētum tuum: et veſtimen
ta tua ſicut calcantium in torculari: Why is thy clothyng red / and
thy garmentes as of them that treyd in the preſſe, to the whiche
Chriſte anſwereth by the ſame prophet ſaynge: Torcular calcaui
ſolus: I alone haue troden in the preſſe, I alone haue ſuffred the
preſſure and payne of the croſſe of ſcourgynges and beatynges
for the ſynne of Adam and all mankynde, and therfore my bodye
(whiche is as the garment of my godhed) is all red. Alſo this
purpull veſtment was moche conuenient to Chriſte, for purpull
colour is made of the blode or lyquor of a certen fyſſhe of the ſee
that is called in latyn Murex or conchilium, ſome men call it a
Whelke, it is a ſhell fyſſhe. Our ſauyour Chriſte was cladde
on good Fryday with .iii. maner of garmentes, that is / a whyte
garment / a ſcarlet robe / and a purpull robe, to ſignify that who
ſo euer wylbe of the houſhold of Chriſt: he muſt were the whyte
garment of innocentie, the reed or ſcarlet of charitie and obedyence,
and the purpull of penaunce.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  
                     IN this article we may take this leſſon, that we ſhulde
hyde and couer our ſynnes with the werkes of charitie,
for like as Chriſt ſcourged and wounded for our ſynnes
wold be couered and clad with a robe of purpull: ſo we
ſhulde couer and hyde our blody werkes / that is our ſynnes with
the purple of floriſſhynge charitie,Iaco. 5. D. For as ſaynte Iames ſayth:
Charitie couereth and hydeth the multitude of ſynnes. Or els
by the purpull may be noted the remembraunce of the paſſyon of
Chriſt. Herunto it is writen in the canticles of the ſpouſe of god,
that is the faythfull ſoule: Come capitis eius: ſicut purpura regis,
The heyre of her hed:Cant. 7. B. be as the purpull of a kynge, for the cogitations

of our mynde whiche be ſignifyed by the heyre of oure
hed: ſhuld be diligently and continually occupyed in the remembraunce
of the pa
                        •
                     ſyon of Chriſt, or els aboute other werkes of
charitie. And a man to conforme hym ſelfe to this article and to
the .vii. other folowynge: ſhulde diligently remember the acte of
euery article with the circumſtances of the ſame. And praye
thus or in lyke maner.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wolde be clad in an olde purpull robe
to thy diſpyſynge: graunte me continuallye to haue in my
mynde or to be clad with the remembraunce of thy paſſyon, and
to hyde and couer my ſynnes with the purpul of charitie. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſt was crowned with thornes.
The .xxxiii. article.
               
                  THe .xxxiii. article is the puttynge of the crowne of
thornes vpon the hed of Chriſte.Ioh. 19. A. A kynge ſhulde
haue a deademe or a crowne, and for this crowne,
the ſaugiours writhed a crowne of thornes & thurſt
it harde vpon his hed as a man ſhuld put a garlande
vpon an other mannes hed. And this crowne was of the ſharpe
ruſſhes of the ſee, whiche hath ſharp corners and prickes, more
ſharpe and perſynge than thornes. This crowne they put vpon
his hed with the prickes dounwarde vnto his hed: not ſo moche
to hurte hym: as to mocke hym therwith, though they dyd both
mocke hym and alſo moſte greuouſly payne and hurte hym, and
herunto ſayth ſaynt Barnarde, That godlye hed of Chriſt was
perſed vnto the brayne with thoſe thornes, in ſo moche that the
blode that ranne from his hed: dyd waſſhe his forhed / chekes / all
his face and necke. In this crowne was .lxxvii. ſharp thornes,
of theſe thornes it was ſpoken to Adam:Gene. 3. D. 
                  Terra ſpinas et tribulos
germinabit tibi: The erth ſhall bryng forth or burgen to the / thornes
and breers / for the erth of our bodye doth burgen and brynge
forth many ſynnes, whiche with theyr prickes dothe prycke and
wounde our conſcience / as thornes the bodye. Chriſt toke theſe
thorne and bare them as a crowne of victorie. Theſe warryours
that haue ouercome theyr enemyes / are wonte to beare or
weare the armoure of theyr aduerſaries ſubdued / in a ſigne or

token of victorie, and do greatly reioyſe therin. So Chriſte
the lambe of god whiche hath ouercome the deuyll and taken away
the ſynnes of the worlde: and wolde weare a crowne of thornes
vpon his hed, in token of his victorie. For as I ſayd before
theſe thornes were our frute and the badge of our armes, & therfore
Chriſte wolde weare them. It is moche pleaſaunt and alſo
deſyrous to euery louyng ſoule / to ſe our kyng with this crowne.
And herunto the ſpouſeſſe in her canticles callethe all faythfull
ſoules ſayng:Cant. 3. D. 
                  Egredimini filie ſion et videte regem ſalomonem
in diademate. &c. O ye doughters of ſyon / or faithful ſoules / come
forth and ſe your true kynge Salomon Ieſus Chriſt in his diademe
or crowne with the whiche his mother the ſinagoge of thē
Iues hath crowned hym, or els ſpiritually: his mother charitie
hath thus crowned hym. For as ſaynt Barnarde ſaythe: Thy
loue (O bleſſed Ieſu) and our iniquitie: made the to be ſcourged
and crowned and nayled to the croſſe.Gen. 22. C. A figure of this crownyng
we rede, that Abraham ſe a ſhepe or a wether faſtned by his hornes
amonge the thornes, in the whiche viſyon, he ſpyrytuallye
dyd ſe Chriſte crowned with thornes.
               
                  ¶Here folowe .ii. Leſſons.
                  
                     THe firſte leſſon of this article is, that we euer bere our
ſynnes by remembraunce in our mynde, puttyng vpon
our hed a crowne of thornes, that is / not to differ / but
ſpedely to take vpon vs with a pure conſcience, an hard
and paynfull lyfe, as in abſtinence / watche / labour / and other
werkes of penaunce for god, as Chriſte wolde beare vpon hys
hed the thornes of our ſynnes for our loue. ¶Second is that
we ſhuld labour to be crowned with the thornes of temptations.
For euery temptacyon that doth impugne vs: is as a thorne prickynge
the hed of our ſoule, whiche temptation if a man ouercome:
he prepareth and byeth a precyous gemme to his crowne / 
and as many temptacyons as he ouercummeth: ſo many precyous
ſtones he addeth to his owne crowne of glorie. And therfore
the ſpouſe ſayth in his canticles:Cap. 2. A. 
                     Sicut lilium inter ſpinas:
ſic amica mea inter filias: As the lylye floriſſheth among the thornes / 
ſo doth my faithfull frende amonge the doughters of thys
worlde by pacyence / meaknes / and charitie.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wold be crowned with thornes: make
me ſo worthely to be compuncte by the thornes of penance / 
that I may deſerue to be crowned of ye in thy heuenly kyngdom.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the ſaugiours put a rede in Chriſtes ryght
hande. The .xxxiiii. article.
               
                  THe .xxxiiii. article is the puttyng of a rede in Chriſtes
ryght hande for his regall ſceptre,Mat. 27. D ſignifyenge therby
that his kyngdome (whiche he vſurped callynge hym
ſelfe a kyng) was voide and weyke as a rede, but they
dyd not remember that Chriſte ſayde:Ioh. 1
                        •
                     . F. My kyngdome is not of
this worlde / that is tranſitorie, and this was the thyrde acte of
theyr ſcornfull illuſyon. Theſe .iii. that is / a purpull robe / a
crowne or a deademe / and a ſceptre be the ornamentes of a kyng,
the whiche thre / theſe cruell ſaugiours gaue vnto Chriſte to his
greate contumelie and illuſyon, and therby, they wolde ſhewe
that Chriſte was a falſe treytour agaynſte the emperour / bycauſe
he wolde haue vſurped and taken vpon hym (as they ſayde) to
be a kynge agaynſt the ordynaunce of the emperour. But that
they dyd to the cōfuſion and rebuke of Chriſt: he turned it to his
owne glorie & excellency,ſuꝑ Math. 27. & herunto ſaynt Hierom ſaith: Chriſte
helde the rede in his hand to write the ſacrilege of the Iues / and
to ſhewe hym ſelfe to be that perſon that ſhuld write his elect people
in the boke of lyfe.Suꝑ Mat. canone. 33. And ſaynt Hillary ſaith: Therfore oure
lorde wold hold the rede in his right hand: that therby he might
ſhewe / that he wyll kepe & maynteyne his ſeruantes though they
be frayle & weyke / and he wyll replenyſſh them with al goodnes.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this leſſon that we ſhulde diligently
remember that we of our ſelfe be frayle / weyke and
voyd of all goodnes / except we be ſuſteyned & maynteyned with
the ryght hand of god / euyn like as a rede which is in it ſelf voyd
and weyke or ſhortly broken but holden in the hande of Chriſte:
it is ſtrengthed.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche wolde haue a rede to be put in thy ryght hand
ſcornfullye for a royall ſceptre: I beſeche the ſo to ſtrength
myne imbecillitie and fraylty with the ryght hande of thy power

that thy kyngdome maye be continually confirmed and ſtabliſſhed
in me. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the ſaugiours ſcornfully ſaluted Chriſte.
The .xxxv. article.
               
                  THe .xxv. article is the ſcornful worſhippyng & ſalutynge
of Chriſte, for after that the ſaugiours hadde
arayed Chriſte with the ornamentes of a kynge:
they kneled downe before hym and mocked hym ſaynge:Mat. 27. D.
                  Aue rex iudeorum: Hayle kyng of the Iues,
as if they ſhuld ſay / thou wold haue ben a kynge but thou mighteſt
not.Suꝑ Mar. 15. And here ſayth Bede: They worſhypped hym ſcornfullye
as god: bycauſe he ſayde falſlye hym ſelfe to be god as they
thought. Alſo they ſaluted hym ſcornfully as a kynge bycauſe he
ſayde hym ſelfe to be a kynge, and this they dyd that theyr illuſyon
myght reanſwere to the accuſacyon of the Iues, for the Iues
accuſed Chriſt in both theſe .ii. Alſo theſe ſaugiours dyd theſe
thynges to Chriſte of a deteſtable & dampnable mynde, for they
crowned hym with ſharp thornes and afterwarde ſcornfully worſhypped
& ſaluted hym, and that to the great confuſyon of Chriſt
And therfore ſayth Symon de Caſſia:Libro. xiii. The miniſters of Pylate
to aggrauate and multiplye the vylenes & ſhame put vpon chriſt:
dyd knele before hym, and beſydes that: that they mocked hym
after the maner of chyldren / they illuded hym with great threttes,
ſo that nothyng wanted to the deſpyſyng and the ſhame of chriſt,
and in the remembrance of this deſpiſyng, vpon good Friday we
do not knele downe when we pray for the Iues, and though the
gentyles dyd thus mocke Chriſte: yet it is imputed to the Iues
for they were the autours and the cauſe of this illuſion. After
this ſcornfull ſalutacyon: they ſmote hym / as ye ſhall ſe in the
nexte article.Gen. 9. D. This fourthe acte of the mockynge of Chriſte
was figured in Noe when he ſlepte in his tabernacle: his ſonne
Cham dyd laughe hym to ſcorne. Noe dothe ſignyfye Chriſte / 
whome the Iues his owne chyldren dyd mocke and ſcorne. Alſo
it is figured in Heliſeus the prophete / whiche aſcendynge vnto
the hyll of Bethell,Quarto regum. 2. D. the chyldren that dyd ſe hym: dyd ſay and
crye mockynge hym: Aſcende calue aſcende calue: Aſcende or
come vp thou balde man: aſcende thou balde man. And of this
mockyng ſpeketh the ꝓphet Dauid ſayng:Pſal. 21. 
                  Omnes videntes me de
riſerunt me: Al that ſe me dyd mocke me / alſo ye ꝓphet Eſay ſaith:

                  Blaſphemauerūt ſanctum Iſrael: They haue blaſphemed the holy
of Iſraell / that is the Meſſias and ſauiour of the worlde.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may lerne this leſſon, that we ſhulde be
ware yt we do not falſly worſhip or ſalute Chriſt / which we
do (as Bede ſayth) when we beleue in hym,Suꝑ Mar. 15. but yet we deſpiſe
hym with our euyl and froward dedes, when we confeſſe Chriſt
with our mouth and denye hym in our dedes as ſait Paule ſaith.Titū. 1. D.
Alſo they falſly worſhyp or ſalute Chriſte: whiche when they
pray or be in the ſeruice of god: occupye theyr mynde wylfullye
with any thyng contrarie to the honour of god. Alſo they which
in the churche ſhe we ſignes of greate deuocyon / and afterwarde
do greuous iniuries to Chriſte in hys membres.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wolde be ſcornfully worſhypped and
ſaluted of the ſaugiours knelyng and ſaynge: Haile kyng
of the Iues: graunte to me that I may worſhyp the (my verye
lorde and god) in ſpirite and treuth, and reuerentlye to ſalute
the / the onelye kynge of all kynges. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the ſaugiours ſmote Chriſte with
theyr handes. The .xxxvi. article.
               
                  THe .xxxvi. article is the ſmytynge of Chriſte / for theſe
ſaugiours wyllynge to mocke Chriſte aſwell in dedes:
as in ſignes and wordes,Ioh. 19. A. 
                  Dabantei alapas: they ſmote
hym with theyr palmes or handes, & that was to ſhewe
in dede: that ye honor which they had done to hym before: was
onely to mocke hym, and in this they made theyr mockyng / more
to the deſpiſyng of Chriſt, for before where as they dyd worſhyp
and reuerence to hym as to god / and dyd ſalute hym as a kynge / 
nowe they ſmote hym to his diſpite & ſhame. And this ſmytyng
is not that of which we ſpake before in ye .xi. article, for that was
in the houſe of Annas / and thys was in the motehall of Pylate,
alſo that was but one ſtroke whiche one of the miniſters called
Malcus dyd gyue to Chriſt / here were many ſtrokes gyuen by
diuers men to Chriſt. Thyrdly a Ie
                     •
                  e dyd gyue that ſtroke, but
the ſaugiours & gentiles dyd gyue theſe. Fourthly yt ſtroke was
gyuen to reuenge ye anſwere yt Chriſte made to ye biſſhop Annas,

but theſe were gyuen onely to mocke Chriſt. And therfore this
ſmytyng doth conueniently make a ſpecyall article, diuers from
the other, and after this they dyd ſpyr in his face as ye ſhall ſe in
in the next article. The leſſone we may take as in ye .xi. article.
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu which wold be ſmyten of the ſaugiours for me: make
me euer to lande and prayſe the both in word and dede / and
alſo that the dedes of other men (thoughe they be euyll) maye
euer torne to my good and profyte. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the ſaugiours dyd ſpytte in the face of Chriſt.
The .xxxvii. article.
               
                  THe .xxxvii. article is the ſpyttynge of the ſaugiours in
the face of Chriſte, whiche dyd moche aggrauate all
theyr actes done before,Mat. 27. D. for what can be more vylanye
to man: than to ſpyt in his face as dyd the ſaugiours
in Chriſtes face, lyke vyle and lewde perſons. And herby ye may
perceyue that thoughe theſe perſons ben called in laten / milites,
whiche comonly in englyſſhe we cal knyghtes / yet they were not
knyghtes / that is gentyll and noble men / that be called alſo in laten:
Equites aurati, and that is for theyr golden ſpurres, for ſuch
gentyll men and noble perſons wolde mocke no good man nor
ſpytte in his face, nor yet crucifye hym and take his garmentes / 
whiche properly perteyneth to hangmen and tormentours. But
theſe be called Milites, after the olde cuſtome, ſeruantes / fotemen
or ſaugiours / as it appereth in the lyfe / actes and geſtes of Iulius
Ceſar / where as Milites ben called fotemen / ſeruynge or hyred
men that feyght on foot / and the knyghtes ben called horſmen
Theſe bene called / Milites,
                  Vide Calepinum et Suetoniū ī vita ceſat̄. not for theyr noblenes: but for theyr
ſtrength. For comonly thoſe ſaugiours were ſtronge in bodye
and redye to all euyll.Sanctus Thomas. And of theſe ſpeaketh Theophilus ſayenge:Suꝑ Mar. 15.
The vayne glorie of theſe ſaugyours in theſe mockynges / 
euer reioyſynge in the inordynate rebukynges of other: done
ſhewe what they be / that is vyle and lewde perſons for the more
parte of them, and this article is diſtincte from the .xvii. article,
for that was done in the houſe of Cayphas before the Iues and of
the Iues, but this ſpyttynge was in the motehall of Pylate,
done by the ſaugiours before Pylate and all the compaygney.

Thoſe were the ſpyttynges of the Iues, but theſe ware of the
gentiles, and after this they ſmote Chriſte vpon the hed with a
rede / as ye ſhall ſe in the next article. The leſſon as in the .xvii.
article.
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me dyd ſuffer the vyle ſaugiours to ſpyt in
thy moſt beautious face: graunt to me that I neuer polute
or defoyle thy face in the ſacrament of the aulte
                        •
                      by my vnworthy
receyuynge therof, and that I neuer defoyle my conſcience with
vnciene thoughtes. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the ſaugiours ſmote Chriſt vpon the hed with
a rede. The .xxxviii. article.
               
                  THe .xxxviii. article is the ſmytynge vpon Chriſtes
hed with a rede, for his more payne and confuſion / 
for vyle and ſtoborne perſons are wonte to be ſmyten
with a ſtaffe as beſtes be. And alſo they ſmote
Chriſt vpon the hed with a rede: to make ye crowne
of thornes to go farther into his hed. And here note that ye redes
in thoſe partes ben great and groſſe / as bygge or great as a ſtaffe
wherwith we beate dogges.Mar. 15. 
                        •
                     . The cruell ſaugiours ſmote Chriſt
vpon the hed with a rede to his more rebuke & ſhame / as if they
ſhulde ſay: O thou vyle & lewed felowe why woldeſt thou make
thy ſelfe a kyng / and here they ordred Chriſte as theues and manſleyers
be ordred with vs / for oftymes they be manycled to ſhewe
and confeſſe what they haue done / and the harder they thurſte the
manycles ye more it is to theyr payn, and in lyke maner here they
ſmote Chriſtꝭ hed that was crowned with thornes / and yt to put
hym to more payne. They ſmote with a rede that hed whiche is
ferefull to all deuyls, reuerent to all the vertues & angelles of heuen,
the moſt bleſſed hed of Chriſte which is to be worſhypped
of all ſayntes for euer, from ye which hed cometh all bleſſyng and
grace / not onely into our berde but alſo into the hem of our garmentes,
that is / not onely in to ye holy apoſtles & martyrs which
be as the berde of Chriſte. But alſo his bleſſynge and grace
deſcendeth in to all the membres of the churche thoughe they
be but of verye ſmall perfeccyon / all they that be the chylderne
of god: receyue this influens. O ye wretches howe fereful
and terrible ſhall that hed apere to you at the day of iudgement:

whiche nowe ye be not afrayd to ſmyte? And with that ſmytyng
the blode ranne downe from his hed: vpon his necke / forehed and
face, and ſo he appered lyke vnto a lepre, for the 
                     •
                  pyttynges mixted
with that blode: made hym lyke vnto a lepre. And then Pylate
wente forth to the Iues. &c. as in the nexte article.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  
                     IN this article we may take this leſſon, that we be well
ware that we ſmyte not Chriſtꝭ hed with a rede, as they
do whiche impugne or denye his godhed, ſaynge that
Chriſte is not god. Alſo they ſmyte Chriſte vpon the
hed: whiche by theyr vayne and ydle lyfe offende Chriſte that is
our hed, from whom cometh (as we ſaid before) the influence of
grace in to al his membres / wherby his membres haue their liuelye
operations / and this hed hath gyuen to vs example of al our
werkes. Wherfore in euery tyme that we haue any oportunitie
to do any good: the ydle perſon that wyl not do that good worke
doth in a maner ſmyte Chriſte vpon the hed, ſo that by that ſmytynge
and the prickynge of the thornes: the blode runneth from
his hed / and nothynge to theyr comforth. And this it is yt Chriſt
nowe ſoroweth / and is pricked vnto the ſheddynge of blode for
our ydylnes, for he ſeeth that his examples do not fructifye in vs
for we wyll take no payne for Chriſte / nor do good werkes after
his examples.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche wolde haue thy noble and precyous hed ſmyten
with a rede for me: graūt to me that I neuer offend the
our hed with my vayne and ydle lyfe / but that I may euer pleaſe
the with my good and quyete maners and lyuynge. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Pylate dyd ſhewe Chriſte ſcourged vnto
the Iues. The .xxxix. article.
               
                  THe .xxxix. article is the ſhewyng of Chriſte ſo pitiouſlye
arayed / vnto the Iues,Ioh. 19. A. for after that the ſaugiours
had ſo miſerably entreated our ſauyour Chriſte: Pylate
toke Ieſus and went forth vnto the people of the
Iues & ſaid to thē: Ecce adduco eū vobis foras vt cognoſcatis quia
nullā ī eo inuenio cauſā. Behold (ſayd Pilate) I bryng him forth

to you thus puniſſhed for your wordes and to certifye you that I
fynde no maner of cauſe of deth in hym, therfore he thus correct
and puniſſhed:Libro. xiii. I ſhall dimiſſe hym. And here ſayth Symon
de Caſſia: Pylate ſayd that he found no cauſe of death in Chriſt,
wherby he excludeth all crimes from Chriſte, for he bryngeth in
an vniuerſall negation / that is no cryme I fynde in Chriſt, and
this he dyd for to ſhewe his diligēce for the deliuerance of Chriſt.
And morouer Pylate dyd brynge forth Chriſte in the ſame habyt
and aray: as he was illuded and mocked of the ſaugiours / and
that was for the intent that the Iues ſeing hym ſo miſerably and
ſhamfully arayed: ſhulde ceaſe of theyr malice towardes Chriſt.
And alſo Pylate ſhewed Chriſt to the Iues on that maner: knowynge
that they wolde be very glad to ſe Chriſte thus diſpyſed
and puniſſhed, and alſo ſuppoſyng yt therby they content / wolde
no more ſpeake of his deth, & for this cauſe Pylate dyd ſcourge
Chriſt and ſhewed hym to the Iues, and therfore the euangeliſt
ſayth:Ioh. 19. A. 
                  Exiuit ergo Ieſus portans ſpineam coronam et purpureum
veſtimentum: Ieſus came forth hauyng a crowne of thornes and
a purpull robe and alſo a rede in his hande for a ſcepter. Behold
here a lamentable ſpectacle / Ieſus went forth (as ſaynte Auſten
ſayth) in a kynges ornamentes not glorious and ſhynyng in his
apparell:Suꝑ Iohn̄ tract. cxvi. but full of obprobry and confuſyon.Vbi. ſupra. And therfore Pylate
ſayd to the Iues: Ecce homo: Beholde this is a man / as yf
he ſhulde haue ſayd (after ſaynt Auſten) If ye haue enuy to hym
bycauſe he called hym ſelfe a kynge: nowe ſpare hym / haue pytie
vpon hym, for ye nowe ſe hym lyke to no kynge but ſhamefullye
and miſerably deiecte lyke a moſte miſerable wretch, for he ſcourged / 
crowned with thornes / mocked in a kynges ornamentes / 
deſpyſed with many rebukes / and bet or ſmyten with many ſtrokes / 
therfore ſith ye ſe hym thus diſpiſed: let 
                     〈◊〉
                   enuy wax colde
or ceaſe. But for all theſe theyr enuy nothynge decreaſed: but rather
encreaſed and waxed more hote and feruent. Se howe great
is the malice of the Iues / that hereby wolde not ceaſe of the procurynge
of the deth of Chriſte, theyr obſtinate wickednes wold
not be relented with mercye. And among all the other illuſions:
this was more payne to Chriſt, that is / that his deedly enemyes
ſhuld ſe hym ſo diſpytefully arayed of the ſaugiours, of ye which
ſyght: they had no lytyl ioy, and yet they were not content with
this ſyght: knowyng that Pilate wold haue ſo delyuered Chriſt
to his libertie / but they hauynge no compaſſion of Chriſte / nor
yet cōtent with the excuſacyon of Pylate: cried out with a lowd

voyce and alſo moued other to crye ſayng: Crucify hym: crucifye
hym. &c. as in the next article.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may lerne to haue Chriſt thus illuded and
mocked euermore in our remembraunce ſo that we neuer
vaynly reioyſe in our outwarde garment / habite / or apparel / for
our lorde god was mocked and ſcorned in his apparell. And ſpecyally
religious perſons ought to folowe Chriſte in this thyng / 
for they repreſent Chriſt thus illuded and mocked in theyr habyt
and tonſure, for the habyt of a religiouſe perſon is a vyle thynge
deſpyſed and mocked of the worldlye people. The tonſure or
crowne of the religious perſon: doth repreſent ye crowne of thornes.
And alſo in olde tyme religious men as monkes were wont
to beare ſtaues or ſtyckes in theyr handes whiche dyd repreſente
the rede that Chriſte had in his hande, and as Chriſte diſdeyned
not to be brought forth and ſhewed to the Iues in that ſcornfull
habite: ſo religious perſons ſhulde not be aſhamed of theyr vyle
habit nor to folow Chriſt which was diſpiſed in this kyngꝭ aray.
And herunto ſaynte Paule ſayth,Pri
                           •••
                         co
                           
                              
                           
                           rum
                        . 4. B. 
                     Spectaculum facti ſumus mūdo:
We that deſpyſe the worlde: be made a mocken ſtocke vnto the
worlde / and neuer ſo moche as in theſe dayes / our lorde ſende
vs pacyence, and lyghten the ſoules of the diſpyſers.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wolde be ſhewed and preſented vnto
the Iues in ſo ſcornfull and diſpitefull aray: graunt me to
auoyde all oſtentation of vayne glorie / and to appere before the
at thy iudgement in ſuche aray as ſhall ſtande with thy fauour.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the Iues dyd crye / Crucifye hym / crucifye
hym. The .xl. article.
               
                  THe .xl. article is the cryenge of the Iues to haue Chriſt
crucifyed, for when the biſſhoppes and the other Iues
had ſene Chriſt ſo ſcornfully arayed / ſo miſerably ſcourged / 
bet and mocked / not content therwith / nor yet alowynge
the excuſacyon of Pylate:Ioh. 19. A. dyd crye: Crucifige eum crucifige
eum: Crucifye hym / crucifye hym, they ſayd twyſe: Crucify

and that was to ſhewe theyr feruent deſyre that they had to crucifye
Chriſte, and alſo for that they crucifyed hym both in wyl and
in werke.Pſal. 56. And as Rabanus ſayth: It had ben more profitable
to theyr ſoules to haue ſayde: Miſerere mei deus miſerere mei:
Haue mercy vpon me (O thou god) haue mercy vpon me, or els
theſe wordes of the prophet Iohel:
                     Iohel. 2. D 
                  Parce domine parce populo
tuo: Spare lorde / ſpare thy people / gyue not thyne inheritance
in to rebukes and confuſion, let not the gentiles haue dominion
vpon thy people the Iues, theſe prayers had ben more conuenient
for them: but they were ſo malicyous that they cryed / crucify
crucifye hym, and when they cryed thus: it was the thyrde hour
of the day / that is .ix. of the clocke after our computation. At
that houre the Iues dyd crucifye Chriſt with theyr tongues. As
ſaynt Auſten ſayth:Suꝑ pſal. 63. D and after this expoſycyon the wordes of the
euangeliſte Marcus are to be vnderſtanded where as he ſaythe:Mar. 15. C
                  Erat autem hora tertia et crucifixerunt eum: It was ye thyrd hour
of the day and the Iues dyd crucifye hym / that is with theyr tongues.
&c. openly ſhewynge therby that the tongues of the Iues
were more to be ſayd or called the ſleyers of Chriſte than the handes
of the ſaugiours. And therfore this crye is conueniently aſſigned
a ſpecyall article of the paſſion of Chriſte. They aſked
and cryed to haue Chriſte crucifyed, whiche maner of deth was
at that tyme of ſuche ſhame and confuſion: that after a perſone
ware put to ſuche a death: he ſhulde neuer be remembred and ſpoken
of agayne: but to his euyl and deſpiſyng, and in a maner no
man durſt ſpeake (ſpecyally any good) of hym that was hanged
vpon the croſſe after his deth.Pſal. 21. And of this complayneth Chriſte
in the pſalme ſaynge: Sicut aqua effuſus ſum: I am put out of
mynde / as the water out of the veſſel. Of all other liquores that
be in a veſſell, when they be put out of that veſſell: there remayneth
colour or ſmel, that ſheweth / what liquor was before in that
veſſell, but whan water is put out of a veſſell there remaynethe
nothynge, wherby we myght knowe what liquor was in that
veſſell,Sapien. 2. D. ſo Chriſte ſaythe, that he is clerely forgoten. Alſo ye wiſe
man ſayth in the perſon of the Iues: Morte turpiſſima condempnemus
eum: Let vs condempne Chriſt to the moſt ſhameful deth.
And the prophet Hieremy ſaith in the perſon of our lorde Chriſt:Hier. 11. D.
                  Cogitauerunt ſuper me conſilia dicentes: venite mittamus lignum
in panem eius: The malicyous Iues haue counſeled agaynſt me
ſayenge: Let vs put a tree in to his breade, that is / let vs crucifye
hym / and ſo he ſhalbe forgoten and diſpyſed of all people.
               
                  
O thou faythful ſoule / behold here thy ſauiour Ieſus howe miſerably
and ſcornfully clad and crowned: he is brought forth with
a rede for his ſcepter in his hand, and how ſhamefaſtly he ſtādeth
nowe with his heed downwarde, before ſuche a great multitude
cryenge and ſayenge: Crucifye / crucify hym / and alſo deridyng
and mockynge hym, that he wolde be taken for a prophete and a
wyſe man ſayenge: Where is nowe thy wyſdome / thy prophicye
and miracles. &c. and ſo he not onely ſuffred payne and ſorowe:
but alſo rebukes and thretnynges of the Iues. Then Pylate
ſayd to the Iues:Luc. 23. C. 
                  Quid enim mali fecit: What euyll hath he
done, I fynde no cauſe of deth in hym. Theſe wordes of Pylate
done / inſtructe and teache all iudges to procede in all cauſes / and
ſpecyally in cauſes of deth: wyſely and diligently. But alas
where ſhall we fynde a iudge that wyll laboure ſo diligentlye for
the delyuerance of an innocent: as Pylate dyd for Chriſte, and
ſurely if Pylate were lyuyng in theſe dayes: I ſuppoſe he wolde
excell in ryght iudgement many of our iudges both temporall
and alſo ſpirituall. At that tyme the biſſhoppes and ſeniours / 
and preeſtes and the religious / and all the people of the Iues
were agaynſte Chriſte, and Pylate lytyl regarded all theyr wordes,
for he of a longe ſeaſone▪ and oftymes laboured to delyuer
Chriſte from them,Ioh. 19. A. and therfore he ſayd: Accipite eum vos et cru
cifigite: Take you hym and crucify hym: for I fynd no cauſe in
hym. Theſe wordes Pylate ſayd for diuerſe cauſes. Fyrſt / after
Symon de Caſſia,Libro. xiii. to rebuke the pryde of the Iues which ſo
farre dyd excede: that they determined and aſſigned vnto the preſident
and hyghe Iudge vnder the emperour, what deth Chriſte
ſhulde ſuffer / that is the moſte deteſtable and ſhamefull death of
the croſſe. Secondly Pylate ſpake theſe wordes / for to delyuer
and acquyte the innocent Chriſte.Ome
                        •
                     . 83. Suꝑ Iohn̄
                   Herunto ſayth Criſoſtome:
The Iues brought chriſt to Pilate: yt he ſhuld be put & condēpned
to deth by the ſentence of the iudge, but it happed ye cōtrary
for the iudge declared Chriſt to be innocent, and oftymes he delyuered
and excuſed hym from theyr accuſacyons. And that Pylate
ſayd to the Iues: Take you hym and crucifye hym: was
ſpoken in abhorryng theyr wordes, for that they wold haue com
compelled hym to a thynge agaynſt hys mynde and alſo agaynſt
ryght. Thyrdly he ſpake ſo for the declaracyon of his power and
auctoritie / for he wolde gladly haue ben delyuered from the iudgement
of Chriſte,Ioh. 19. B. the whiche the Iues perceyuyng: added the
thyrd accuſacyon beſydes the other .ii. ſpoken in the .xxii. article

ſaynge: Nos legem habemus: et ſecūdum legem debet mori: quia filium
dei ſe fecit: We haue a lawe after the which he ought to dye / 
for he hath made hym ſelfe the ſonne of god.Libro. xiii. And here as Symon
de Caſſia ſayth: It apereth manifeſtly the falſenes of theyr
accuſacyon, for if the wordes ſhulde be referred to theyr intent,
or contrarie wyſe if theyr intent ſhuld agre to theyr wordes, both
wayes: the Iues do lye and theyr iniquitie doth lye and ſpeake
falſe to themſelfes, for Chriſt dyd neuer make hym ſelfe god, nother
in this worlde: nor yet eternally, for he was god euerlaſtyngly / 
not made / but eternally generate and goten of the father,
but the Iues thought Chriſt to be onely a man and not god, nor
Chriſte at any tyme as man / dyd affirme hym ſelfe to be made the
ſonne of god but for aſmoche as he beynge the eterne ſonne of
god / was made man for vs / his godhed in no thynge chaunged,
but takynge for our ſaluation / our nature: therfore he called him
ſelf the ſonne of god / for he was both god and man in one perſon,
but Pilate when he had herd this ſayng of ye Iues:Ioh. 19. B. he was more
afrayd than he was before, not for that he feared theyr lawe: but
that he was afrayd to condempne the ſonne of god. And alſo he
was afrayd hearynge ſuche a hyghe ſentence / that was aboue his
witte and vnderſtandyng / that is that a man ſhulde be or make
hym ſelfe the ſonne of god, and whether it were true or not: he
was afrayd to gyue ſentence of deth.Suꝑ Iohn̄ 19. And herto ſayth Alquine:
He dyd not feare for that he harde them ſpeake of theyr lawe, for
he beynge a ſtraunger and a gentill / regarded not that / but he
was afrayd to cōdempne the ſonne of god, and therfore he entred
in agayne in to the motehall and callynge Ieſus vnto hym ſayd:
Vnde es tu?
                  Ioh. 19. B. Of what ſtocke or kyndred art thou? Pylate wolde
haue knowen if he were the ſonne of god / or if he were of the kynd
or ſtocke of ye goddes. And this laſte poynte myght haue bene
eaſely or lyghtlye perſuaded vnto Pylate, for he was a gentill:
which do ſuppoſe and beleue that many men may be of the ſtocke
of goddes / and ſo the ſonne of goddes. But Ieſus dyd not anſwere
one worde to his queſtion, and that was bycauſe Pylate
was not ſufficient to receyue or vnderſtande the ſolution of hys
awne queſtion.Eſae. 53. C For the prophet ſayth: Generationem eius quis
enerrabit? Who is able to declare and ſhewe his eterne generation?
and though Chriſt was able to declare it: yet there is no
mortall man able to vnderſtande it. Secondly Ieſus wolde not
anſwere to Pylates queſtion: that Pylates ſynne ſhulde not be
aggrauate and made more greuous. And thirdly that the paſſion

of Chriſte ſhulde not be letted.Pri
                        ••
                      co
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                     . 2. B. For as ſaynt Paule ſayth, Si cog
nouiſſent: nun
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      dominum glorie crucifixiſſent: If they had knowen
(howe Chriſte was the ſonne of god) they wold neuer haue
crucifyed the lorde of glorie, and this is to be vnderſtand of Pylate
and ye gentyles & not of the Iues, for they myght haue knowen
ſufficiently if they had wolde.Ioh. 19. B. Then Pylate ſayd to Chriſt:
Mihi non loqueris, Neſcis quia poteſtatem habeo crucifigere te. &c
Why wylt not thou ſpeake to me? doſt thou not knowe yt I haue
power to crucifye the / or to dimiſſe and delyuer the? In theſe
wordes Pylate cōdempneth hym ſelfe.Omel. 83. Suꝑ Iohn̄
                   And therfore Chriſoſtom
ſayth: O Pylate in this worde thou condempneſt thy ſelfe, If
thou haue this power: wherfore then doſt not thou delyuer hym
thou knowyng and ſo oftymes openly ſayng that he is innocent?
If thou reioyſe or boſt thy ſelfe of thy power that thou haſte to
kyll Chriſte or to delyuer hym: may not Chriſt then laufully ſay
vnto the:Luc. 19. D. 
                  De ore tuo te iudico ſerue nequam: I iudge the by thyne
owne wordes / thou wycked ſeruant? and then Ieſus to reproue
the boſtynge and pryde of Pylate ſayd:Ioh. 19. B. 
                  Non haberes aduerſū me
poteſtatem vllam: niſi datum tibi eſſet de ſuper: Thou ſhulde haue
no power ouer me: except it were gyuen to ye from aboue or from
an hygher power. Fyrſte from god: of whome is all power, as
ſaynt Paule ſayth.Rom̄. 13. A. And ſecondly from the emperour, which at
that tyme had the dominion ouer the Iues. And in theſe wordes
Chriſt reproueth couertly or ſecretly the ſynne of Pylate, for nother
god, nor yet the emperour had ordred Pylate there a iudge
to condempne or puniſſhe the innocentes / but rather to defende
and delyuer them. And notwithſtandyng the ſynne of Pylate
was great: yet it was not ſo greuous as the ſynne of the Iues or
of Iudas. And this our lord ſheweth in the wordes folowyng:
Propteria qui tradidit me tibi:
                  Ioh. 19. B. 
                  maius peccatum habet: Therfore
he that dyd betray or delyuer me vnto the: his ſynne is the more
great and greuous, and that well apereth, for Iudas dyd ſynne
moued of a couityſe mynde, the Iues ſynned: moued of malyce
and enuy, but Pylate: onely for feare of the emperour & fauour
of ye Iues. It is more greuous offēce to ſinne of a couetyſe mind
and of rancor and enuy: than onely of feare, for feare accuſethe
the ſynne in a parte / though not in the hole, and here Pylate conſideryng
that he was reaſonably in a maner conuicte of ſynne in
this cauſe: for he (as a wytty perſon) perceyuynge that he ſhuld
be noted of ſynne / if he ſhulde condempne the innocent: therfore
he ſought oportunitie and occaſion to dimiſſe and lette hym go,

as he dyd before / in ſendyng Chriſt to Herode, and alſo in ſayng
that he founde no cauſe of deth in hym. But the Iues anone perceyuyng
the mynde of Pylate: returned to theyr firſt accuſacyon
and cryed ſaynge: Si hunc dimittis non es amicus ceſaris: If thou
dimiſſe this man thou art not true to the emperour. &c. as in the
next article ſhal apere. And here note that there ware about. lxxx.
M. people that cryed: Crucifige: crucifige: Of the whiche Peter
conuerted in one day .iii. M. & ſhortly after .v. M. vnto ye fayth.
               
                  ¶Here folowe .ii. Leſſons
                  
                     IN this article we may take firſt this leſſon, it is no difference 
or diuerſitie (to ſpeake of the intente of ſynne)
whether thou kyll a man with thy tongue / or with thy
ſwerde, for thy intent in both theſe .ii. is to kyll hym.
And therfore the profyte Dauid ſayth:Pſal. 56. 
                     Lingua eorum gladius acu
tus: Theyr tongue is a ſharpe ſwerde, and this was ſpoken of
the Iues that dyd cry:Ioh. 19. A. 
                     Crucifige crucifige: And of this text ſaint
Auſten ſayth:Suꝑ Iohn̄ trac. 114. & ſuꝑ pſal. 63. Loke not vnto the vnarmed handes of the Iues:
but to theyr armed mouth, for frome thens came yt ſharpe ſwerde
that ſlewe Chriſt. Therfore lette all bacbyters and ſclaunderers
of theyr neyghbours beware that they do not make theyr tonges
ſharpe as a ſwerde / for as a ſwerde kylleth the body: ſo the ſclaū
                     derer
tongue ſleyeth the fame and good name of a man.Prouer. 18. D. And herto
ſayth Salomon: Mors et vita in manibus lingue: Deth & lyfe
be in the handes or power of the tongue. The ſeconde leſſone 
is that we ſhuld not alwayes anſwere to euery queſtion, for here
in this paſſyon of Chriſte: we rede that thryes he kepte his ſcilence.
Fyrſt before the biſſhop / and that was to teache vs pacyence
agaynſt contumelyes and rebukes. Secondly before Herode / 
and that was agaynſt curiouſe queſtyons to teache vs for
to ſerch for true and neceſſarie thynges and not for vayne & curious
thynges. Thyrdly before Pylate / agaynſte vayne laude or
prayſe / to teache vs to folowe the true laude of god and to auoyd
all vayne prayſynges. And a man to conforme hym ſelfe to this
article ſhulde remember howe terrible ware thoſe cryenges of
the Iues. And remēber alſo if he at any tyme hath cryed agaynſt
his neyghbour by conſent vnto the wicked iudgementes of men / 
or to theyr detraccyons & ſclaunders ſpoken agaynſt theyr neyghbour.
And then pray as foloweth or in lyke maner.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer:
                  
                     
                     O Ieſu whiche for me was not afrayd to here the terrible and
fearfull voyces of the Iues cryenge: Crucifige: crucifige:
That is crucifye hym / crucifye hym: graunt to me that I be not
afrayd of the curſed and malicyous wordꝭ of myne enemyes / and
that I neuer hurt my neyghbour with my ſpeche. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſte was brought vnto his iudgement.
The .xli. article.
               
                  THe .xli.Ioh. 19. B. article is the bryngynge of Chriſte before the
iudge / for when the Iues dyd perceyue yt Pylate wold
haue delyuered Chriſte: they returned to theyr fyrſte
accuſacyon and cryenge ſayd: Si hunc dimittis: non es
amicus ceſaris: If thou delyuer this perſon thou art not the frend
of the emperoure nor true to hym, for who ſo euer maketh hym
ſelfe a kyng: he is a traytour to the emperour. This they ſpake
to make Pylate afrayde,Libro. xiii. and here ſayth Symon de Caſſia that
the Iues ſerched all the falſe craftes and deuyſes that they could
ymagyne,Suꝑ Iohn̄ trac. C.xvi. and all to put Chriſte vnto the deth. And then Pylate
hearynge theſe wordes beganne to be more afrayd, for he myght
not contempne the emperour that gaue hym his power and auctoritie
as ſayth ſaīt Auſten.Ioh. 19. C. And therfore he brought Ieſus forth
and ſat downe to gyue ſentence / openly, and this he dyd that the
ſentence of Chriſtes d
                     •
                  th ſhuld not be imputed to hym / but to the
Iues. And when Pylate ſat downe to gyue ſentence: it was the
ſyxte houre of the day that is .xii.Mat. 27. B of the clocke. And then his wyfe
ſent to hym ſaynge: Nihil tibi et iuſto illi, Mel not thou with the
deth of that rightuous man,Gloſ ordin̄ Suꝑ Mat. 27. this night I haue ſuffred many thinges
in my ſlepe about hym, for as the gloſe ſaith there: the deuyl
perceyuynge that he ſhuld leſe his kyngdom & power by the deth
of Chriſt: was ſory that he made Chriſt to be taken, and therfore
he ſhewed certen viſions to Pylates wyfe, that by her the death
of Chriſt ſhulde be letted, as in the begynnynge he brought deth
in to the worlde by a woman. Then Pylate commaunded that
Ieſus ſhulde be preſented before hym where as he ſat in iudgement
and then he ſayd to the Iues:Ioh. 19. C. 
                  Ecce rex veſter: Behold your
kynge / before he ſayd: Beholde a man, therby ſhewynge howe
ſhamefullye and miſerably Chriſt was arayed, and that Pylate
ſpake to moue the Iues to compaſſion. And nowe to moue them
agayne: he ſayd ſcornfully mockynge them: behold your kynge / 
as if he ſhulde ſaye: ye awght to be aſhamed / that any wyſe man

ſhuld perceyue that ye be afrayd that this ſimple perſon, ſo vylely
abiecte and deſpiſed / ſhuld be your kynge / but the Iues in nothynge
aſhamed nor yet moued to pitie:Ibidem. cryed, Tolle tolle crucifige
eum: Away with hym hens with hym / take hym frome our
ſyght, it is deth for vs to loke vpon hym, away with hym / crucify
hym. And note here that they dyd crye thrice: Crucify hym
and in the remembraunce therof we ſay thryce / Agnus dei / in the
maſſe.Ibidem. Then Pylate ſcornfully ſayd to them: Regem veſtrum cru
cifigam? Shall I crucifye your kynge? wyllynge therby to rebuke
them and make theym aſhamed to ſpeake any more therof,
whom he coulde not moue by the deſpyſynges of Chriſte / but the
Iues paſt all ſhame anſwered ſaynge:Ibidem. 
                  Non habemus regem niſi
ceſarem: We haue no kyng but the emperour. And herby ye may
ſe howe moche the vnkynde Iues deſyred the deth of Chriſte / for
they to procure his deth wylfully ſubmitted them ſelfe vnder the
ſubieccyon of the Romaynes, the whiche before that tyme they
wolde neuer gladly do, but rather they were alwayes in a mynde
and purpoſe to rebelle agaynſte the emperour for to haue theyr libertye.
And here note that this article was more greuous to
Chriſte / then any of the other before: for here he was broughte
to his iudgement and his accuſars moſte cruelly dyd crye / away
with hym / hange hym vpon the gallowes. &c. where as all the
other were done and ſpoken, the iudge not ſyttynge in iudgemente.
And then Pylate ſeynge that that he myght in no thyng
profyte to the delyueraunce of Chrſte called for water. &c. as
ſhall appere in the nexte article.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may lerne howe to iudge oure ſelfe in our
owne ſoule and conſcience / as Chriſte was iudged for vs,
that therby we myghte auoyde the ſtrayte iudgemente of god.
For as ſaynte Paule ſaythe:Prim̄ co
                           •
                        . 11. G. If we here iudge our ſelfe: we
ſhall not be Iudged.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Lorde Ieſu Chriſte the ſonne of the lyuynge god whiche
in the ſyxte houre of the day wold for me moſt wretched ſinner / 
be preſented before the iudge ſyttyng in iudgement: graunt
to me ſo to iudge my ſelfe in my ſelfe of all my ſynnes / by the teſtymonie

or witnes of myne owne conſcience / and alſo pacyentlye
to ſuffer thy iudgemente in all aduerſities: that I may in ſuerty
appere in thy laſte and terrible iudgement. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſte was condempned.
The .xlii. article.
               
                  THe .xlii. article is the condempnacyon of Chriſt by the
ſentence of the iudge,Suꝑ Iohn̄ 19. for Pylate ſeynge that he in nothyng
profyted for the delyuerance of Chriſt, but that
more buſines was made / for as the gloſe ſayth: The
Iues reputed to Pylate treaſon and rebellion agaynſt the emperour,
he was anone ouercome by feare / ād ſwerued from the way
of treuth and iuſtice.Mat. 27. C But fyrſt he toke water and waſſhed hys
handes ſayng: Innocens ego ſum a ſanguine iuſti huius: vos videritis:
                  Pſal. 25.
I am innocent of the blode and deth of this iuſt perſon / Pylate
toke water and waſſhed his handes accordyng to the ſayeng
of the ꝓphet: Lauabo inter innocentes manus meas: I ſhal waſſh
my handes among the innocentes, but he ſayd to the Iues: Vos
videritis: Loke you to your parte / cōſider what ſhalbe your ſyn.
I am the miniſter of the lawe, take good hede whom ye offer to
me to be ſlayne, for I muſt gyue ſentence after your ſayngꝭ / and
not after my knoledge and mynde / and therfore this ſynne ſhalbe
imputed to you and not to me.Mat. 27. C And then all the people of the Iues
anſwered and ſayd: Sanguis eiꝰ ſuper nos et ſuper filios noſtros,
His blode fall vpon vs & vpon our childern. This ſayng / for the
wordes is very good & moſt ꝓfitable to man ſaluacyon / for it is
greatly to be deſired that the blode of Chriſt fal vpon vs to waſſh
vs from all fylth of ſynne / accordyng to the ſayng of ſaynt Iohan
Dilexit nos et lauit nos a peccatis noſtris in ſanguine ſuo:
                  Apoc. 1. B. Chriſte
hath loued vs & waſſhed vs frome our ſynnes in his blode. But
the Iues ſpake theſe wordes with an other intent, for they deſyred
yt the vengeance of his blode and deth ſhulde fall vpon them
and vpon theyr children,Suꝑ Mat. 27. and ſo it doth vnto this day yt is almoſt
xv, hūdreth yeres & ſo ſhal cōtinue (as ſaint Hierom ſaith) nygh
vnto the ende of the worlde. And ſo pylate thought he had ſayd
before and declared Chriſt to be innocent / and ſo to be delyuered,
yet nowe wyllyng to pleaſe the Iues / and ſacyſfye theyr cryengꝭ
and fulfyll theyr wyl / dyd yt thyng which was not pleſyng to god
and accordynge to iuſtyce. Alſo fearynge that he ſhulde haue
bene accuſed of treaſon agaynſt the emperour. Alſo ſuppoſynge
no great peryll or daunger / though he condempned to deth this

pore innocent perſon, ſpecyally conſiderynge that no man ſpake
or intreated for hym, al this conſidered (I ſay) Pylate gaue ſentence
and iudged Chriſte, for that he wolde haue ben a kyng contrarie
to the precepte of the emperour: to be hanged vpon ye croſſe
or crucifyed, and this ſentence was agaynſt all iuſtyce, and alſo
agaynſte his owne knowledge, for he knewe Chriſte to be innocent
in this cauſe and all other. And thus he gaue moſt cruel ſentence
agaynſte the innocent in whome was no cauſe of deth. And
ſo by his iudgement and power of the emperoure: he betoke Ieſus
vnto the Iues that he ſhulde be crucifyed. And note here that
the euangeliſt ſayth not (Vt crucifigerēt eū:
                  Mat. 27. C 
                  ſed vt crucifigeretur)
That the Iues ſhulde crucifye Chriſte, but that he ſhulde be crucified
by the auctoritie of the iudge, but he ſayth that Pylate betoke
Ieſus vnto the Iues: to ſhewe that they were the cauſe of
his deth / though they wolde not haue had it ſo taken, for Pylate
wold not haue gyuen this ſentence / but onely for that he ſe that he
coulde none otherwyſe pleaſe and content the Iues. But what
was the forme and the wordes of the ſentence: it is not ſhewed
in the goſpelles: but in the euangely of Nichodeme it is writen
howe that Pylate gaue ſentence in theſe wordes folowyng / Gens
tua comprobauit te regem: propterea precipio te primum flagellari
ſecundum principum ſtatuta deinde 
                        〈◊〉
                      cruce leuari: Thy people
haue affermed the to be a kynge, therfore I commaunde the firſt
to be ſcourged accordyngly to the ordynaūces and ſtatutes of the
princes of Rome and after that to be hanged vpon the croſſe. Beholde
here howe the moſte innocente lambe Chriſte dyd choſe
to be dampned for the with an vniuſte and falſe ſentence to delyuer
the frome the iudgement of iuſtyce and payne of eternall
dampnacyon, he payed for that he neuer had he ſuffred payne for
oure ſynne. And here remember what lamentacyon his frendes
then made, when they herde this horrible and moſte vntrue
ſentence gyuen agaynſte Chriſte. And in the remembraunce
of that ſentence and deth of Chriſte / whiche in ſcripture is called
Alpha and Oo,Apoc. 1. B. the begynnynge and the endynge, and bycauſe
that Chriſte was that daye taken frome vs by his death.
Therfore the churche euery yere in that day vſeth to omitte and
leaue the begynnynge and endynge of the houres of the ſeruyce.
After this condempnacyon: the ſaugiours toke oure ſauyoure
Ieſus. &c. as in the nexte article.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  
                     
BY this article we may lerne to be ware that we neuer worthely
deſerue the iuſt ſentence of deth / nother of the ſoule / 
nor of the bodye. And alſo as Chriſte ſuffred for vs a falſe and a
wicked ſentence to be gyuen agaynſt hym by a frayle man: ſo in
lyke maner we ſhulde not feare the wicked iudgementes of men
gyuen or ſpoken agaynſt vs,Prim̄ co
                           •
                        . 4. A. but pacyētly ſuffer them for the loue
of god. And herunto ſayth ſaynt Poule, Mihi autem pro minimo
eſt vt a vobis iudicer: aut ab humano die, I do lytyll regarde to be
iudged of you or of any mannes day.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wolde pacyently and innocently ſuffer
the vniuſt ſentence of deth: and that of the moſt ſhamefull
deth of the croſſe: graunt to me that I neuer deſerue the iuſt ſentence
of deth in ſoul or in bodye / and that for thy loue I feare not
the wicked iudgementes of men, and alſo that I neuer iudge any
perſone wrongfullye. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſte bare his croſſe.
The .xliii. article.
               
                  THe .xliii. article is the bearynge of his croſſe, for
after that Pylate had gyuen ſentēce of deth agaynſt
the innocent Chriſt Ieſus:Mat. 27. D. then the ſaugiours toke
hym and pulled of the purpull or ſcarlet robe, and
put on hym his owne garmentes. And here ſaythe
Symon de Caſſia:Libro. xiii. When Chriſte ſhulde be crucifyed then the
ſaugiours toke from hym that garment wherin they had derided
and mocked hym, and nowe they beganne (not mockyngly or in
ſporte / but in verye dede) to put hym to the payne and deth of the
croſſe / and therfore they put vpon hym his owne garmentes / that
therby he myght be the more knowen, and ſo goynge to his deth
in his owne clothes: it ſhulde be the more to his confuſyon and
ſhame. And at this tyme without any doubte Chriſte ſuffred a
newe payne and that was moſte greuous / for that olde purpull
robe was harde baken and cleued faſte to his backe, in the woū
                  des
whiche he ſuffred before at his ſcourgynge, and therfore this
robe myght not be pulled of his backe: but to his moſt greuous
payne, for they rent and pulled the fleſſhe frome his bodye with
that cote, and ſo put Chriſt, to a newe & intollerable payne agayn.

Then they byndynge his handes and necke with a rope: therby
ſhewed that he was cōdempned vnto the deth, and ſo drewe hym
out of his propre citie as a miſdoer, and they layde the great / heuy
and groſſe tree of the croſſe / vpon his moſte ſoore and tender
ſholders, that he ſhulde beare it vnto the place where as he ſhuld
be crucifyed. And for aſmoche as that tree was reputed and
thought of the Iues to be a prophane and vnclene thynge: and
alſo that deth of the croſſe ſhamefull / for the ſcripture ſayth:Deut. 21. D 
                  Ma
ledictus omnis qui pendit in ligno: He is a curſed that is hanged
vpon a tree, therfore no man durſt beare that tree not yet touche
it. And for this cauſe: they leyde it vpon Chriſte, that he dampned:
ſhulde beare his owne croſſe.Ioh. 19. D. This was a great ioye and
ſporre to the wicked men, but it was a great miſterie to vs chriſtians.
And therfore ſaynt Barnarde ſayth: O here is ſpectacle
or thynge done that was neuer ſene before / neuer herde nor done
before, that a thefe or a malefactour ſhulde be compelled to beare
the gallowes or tree wherupon he ſhulde be hanged / but onelye
now in Chriſt? And here ſayth ſaynt Auſten: The mylde lambe
Ieſus taketh and beareth his owne croſſe vpon his ſholders goynge
with great payne and ſorowe vnto the place of his paſſyon,Eſaie. 9. B.
and herin was fulfylled the ſaynge of the prophet: Factus eſt ptin
cipatus ſuper humeum eius: His dignitie and power is made vpon
his ſhoulder, his croſſe: is his dignitie and power, wherby
he dyd ouercome the power of the deule, and for his obedience vnto
the deth:Philip 2. B god dyd exalte hym as ſaynte Poule ſayth. And as
greate men beare diuers thynges in token of theyr diuers dignities,
As kynges: a crowne, biſſhoppes a myter, other men a
gartar. &c. ſo Chriſte in the remembraunce of his dignitie: bare
the croſſe, and ſo thou ſerchynge: ſhal not fynde or perceyue that
Ieſus reigneth in any perſon: but by payne & herdnes / and therfore
theſe delicates & carnall perſons whiche wyl ſuffer no payne
but folowe all pleaſure: ben the enemyes of the croſſe of Chriſte
as ſaīt Auſten ſaith.Gen. 22. B In this acte was fulfylled ye figure of Iſaac
whiche bare the ſtickes wherwith he ſhulde haue bene offered to
god in ſacrifice.Tertio regum. 17. B. Alſo this acte was figured in the wydowe of
Sareptha that gatherd .ii. ſtickes.Nū
                     
                        •
                     . 13. C. Alſo our ſauyour Chriſte is
ſignifyed by that cluſtre of grapes that was borne vpon a tre bytwixte.
ii. men, for Chriſte was hanged vpon a tre bytwixt two
theuys. Alſo this Chriſte is ſignifyed by Helyſeus whiche kut
downe a tre and went with it to ſearche for the yren whiche was
fallen in to the watre, and at that ſearchynge: the yren ſwame

aboue the water / where as the tree was, ſo our ſauiour Chriſte
ſaught for man kynde whiche was fallen in to the deape water of
troubles and drowned ſynne / and in hell, but by the tree of the
croſſe of Chriſte: it ſwame vp agayne and ſo was recouered agayne.
Of this article ſaynt Anſelme ſayth: O my ſoule behold
and ſe howe thy lorde god is in al thynges here deſpiſed and compelled
to bowe his backe vnder the heuye burden of the croſſe / 
and ſo to beare his owne confuſion and ſhame. O merueylouſe
ſpectacle to beholde doſte thou not ſe hym? beholde his dignitie
and power is ſhewed vpon his ſholder,Pſal. 44. this is the rodde or tree
of equitie, the tree of his kyngdome and power. And thus when
Ieſus had gone a lytyll forth bearynge his heuy croſſe: he was
ſo feynt & wery, partly for feblenes and tendernes of his bodye,
and partly for the great afflicacyon and payne that he had ſuffred
all the ſame day and nyght before: that he was fayne to go ſoftly
and alſo to lay downe the croſſe from hym, or els (as ſome ſayth)
he fel downe vnder the croſſe there to re
                     •
                  t hym and eaſe hym ſelf.
But thoſe moſte cruell tormentours not wyllynge to differ hys
deth, and alſo fearynge leſſe that Pylate ſhulde reuoke his ſentence
bycauſe he ſhewed hym ſelfe to haue a good wyll to delyuer
Chriſt from deth, therfore they conſtrayned a ſtraunge man that
paſſed by them called Symon Cireneus to beare the croſſe after
Ieſus.Mar. 15. B Not moued (as the gloſe ſayth) of any pitye or mercye
towardes Chriſt:Gloſa ordi Ibidem. but that he myght the ſoner come to his death.
And alſo that it myght appere that Ieſus was not god / ſeynge
that he was ſo feble & weyke a man that he was not able to beare
that croſſe as ſayth ſaynt Auſten. And this Symon was not a
Iue or of the chylderne of Iſraell: but a pylgryme a ſtraunger
of the Sirenys that is a cytye in the countrie of Libia. And in
this man was veryfyed the ſaynge of the prophet Dauid:Pſal. 17. 
                  Popu
lus quē non cognoui: ſeruiuit mihi: The people that I haue not
knowen: hath done ſeruice to me. And though the iues put this
labour (that is to beare the croſſe after Ieſus) vnto this Symon
as to a vyle perſon & deſpyſed amongꝭ them: yet it was not done
without great miſterie,Gloſ ordi
                        •
                      Suꝑ Mar. 15. &. Mat. 27. for as the gloſe ſayth: Beholde and note
here / that no Iue or Ebrewe: but a ſtraunger / a gentyle is ſubdued
to the obprobry and croſſe of Chriſte, to ſhewe that the plentuouſnes
of grace & of the ſacramentes or miſteries of the lawe
ſhulde departe from the Iues vnto the gentyles. Symon is as
moche to ſay by interpretation as obedient,Beda. Suꝑ Lucā. 23. and Cireneus is interpreted:
heres / that is an heyre. And therfore by this man may

be well noted all good chriſtians conuerted frome the erroure of
gentilitie vnto Chriſte: whiche ſomtyme ware as pylgryms or
ſtraungers vnto the lawe and preceptes of god, but by theyr faith
and obedyence vnto the cōmaundemētes of god: they were made
of the houſholde of god and his heyres / and alſo coenheritours
with Chriſte. And thus bearynge his croſſe: they brought hym
to Golgotha. &c. as in the nexte article.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  IN this article we chriſtians maye lerne to beare the croſſe
after Ieſus for (as the gloſe ſayth) Firſte Chriſte beareth
the croſſe / for he ſuffred firſt,Suꝑ Mat. 27. &. Mar. 15. afterwarde it was put to Symon
Cireneus to beare it after Chriſt / for we ought to folowe the ſteppes
of Chriſt, for Symon dyd folowe we and not go before Chriſt.
And herunto our lord ſayth in the goſpell:Luce. 9. C. 
                     Si quis vult venire poſt
me: tollat crucem ſuam quotidie et ſequatur me: If any man wyll
come after me: lette hym take his owne croſſe dayly and folowe
me. And here be noted thre thynges, neceſſary for hym that wyl
folowe Chriſt. Fyrſt that he beare it voluntarylye and not compelled
agaynſt his wyll, and therfore he ſayth: If any man wyll
come after me: notynge therby that it muſte be of his owne wyll.
Seconde that he beare his owne propre croſſe / and therfore / he
ſayth let hym take his owne croſſe. Thyrde that it be done for the
glorie of god / and not for vayne glorie, and therfore he ſayth and
folowe me / do it to my honour and for my loue. And by this croſſe
here is noted the purpoſe of godly and vertuouſe lyfe, ſo that the
hole lyfe of a chriſtiane whiche lyueth after the goſpell of Chriſt
may be called a croſſe and a martirdome. And this croſſe is to be
dayly borne after Chriſte, and for the loue of Chriſte. Fyrſte in
our hert by remēbraunce and compaſſion. In our mouth by ofte
and deuoute thankes. And in our bodie by diſcreate / chaſtyſyng
and ſubduynge of the ſame, that ſo we myght reanſwere & gyue
thankes vnto our ſauiour in hert / worde / and dede. Herby ye
may ſe that loue without this croſſe / nor yet this croſſe without
loue: may deſerue any laude or prayſe in thought / worde / nor
dede. But that croſſe is hyghely to be prayſed whiche is ioyned
with loue / whiche loue alſo the ſame croſſe doth brynge in. In
this ſtate was ſaynt Paule whiche ſayd of hymſelfe:Gala. 2. D. 
                     Chriſto con
fixus ſum cruci: I am faſtened to the croſſe for the loue of Chriſt.
In this croſſe fyrſt our fleſſhe or body is faſtened with the nayles

of feare and hexunto the prophet Dauid ſayth:Pſal. C. 18. 
                     Cōfige timore tu
                           •
                        o
carnes meas: Faſten or nayle faſte my fleſſhe with thy feare. Secondly
our ſpirite muſte be faſtened with the nayles of loue. And
thyrdly our outwarde ſenſes: with the nayles of diſciplyne and
rigour or payne.Eccl. 12. D. And herunto the wyſe man ſayth: Verba ſapien
cium quaſi ſtimuli: et quaſi claui in altum confixi: The wordes of
wyſe men be as pryckes or broddes, and as nayles faſtened in the
profunditie of our ſenſes. Fourthly our handes muſt be nayled
with the nayles of laboure. And therfore the wyſe man ſayth:
Quodcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         poteſt manus tua:
                     Eccle. 9. C. 
                     inſtanter operare: Werke diligently
what ſo euer good thy handes may werke. Herby it doth clerely
appere: that that perſon ſheweth hym ſelfe manifeſtly to haue no
true loue: whiche wyll not prepare and gyue hym ſelfe to harde
and paynfull thynges for his louer. O howe gladlye ought the
chriſtians to take and beare his croſſe, ſyth he is taught and moued
therunto by nature and alſo by crafte. Naturally the byrdes
when they flye in the ayre: they vſe the ſigne of the croſſe / for
theyr hed and theyr tayle and theyr winges abrode: make a croſſe,
and ſo in theyr flyenge they take theyr croſſe. In lyke maner a
man ſwymmynge takes his croſſe. The ſhyppe goyng vpon the
ſee: maketh the ſigne of the croſſe. Alſo a man to conforme hym
ſelfe to this article ſhuld remēber with how great charitie Chriſt
bare his croſſe for vs, and of what heuynes it was to hym, ſeynge
that all the ſynnes of the worlde was put vpon his croſſe,
whiche all: this ſwete and mylde lambe whome he went to be offered:
dyd beare vpon his ſhoulders. Alſo a man may ymagyne
in hym ſelfe as if he bare the croſſe of Chriſte with hym as Symon
Cireneus dyd, and ſo pray thus.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me a wretche wolde beare thy heuy croſſe
vpon thyne owne ſhulders: make me wilfully and gladlye
to take the croſſe of penance and ſtreyter lyfe / and to beare it daylye
after the and for thy loue. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſt was led vnto Golgoltha that is the
mount of Caluarie. The .xliiii. article.
               
                  THe .xliiii. article is the ledynge of Chriſte vnto Golgotha,
there to be crucifyed, for after that they had layde
the croſſe vpon Chriſtes ſhulders and there tyed it faſt.
As ſaynt Iohan ſayth:Ioh. 19. D. 
                  Eduxerunt eum: They led hym
out of the citie. Fyrſte to fulfyll the fygures of the lawe. For it

was commaunded in the lawe that the calfe and the gote / whiche
were o
                     •
                  red in the moſte ſolempne ſacrifice for the expiation and
purifyeng of the people:Leui. 9 & 10. that they ſhulde be buryed without the
caſtelles or the habitacyons of men. So Chriſte whiche is the
ſacrifice for the expiation and redēption of all man kynde: ſhulde
ſuffer deth without the caſtels or cities. And alſo he wolde ſuffer
without ye citie to declare & ſhewe vnto vs howe yt the vertue of
his paſſion ſhuld not be included within the cooſtes or boūdes of
the Iues: but that it ſhuld be knowen to be a comon ſacrifice for
all the worlde. And thyrdly to ſignifye and ſhewe to vs / that who
ſo wolde haue the effecte and vertue of this paſſion: he muſte
go forth / or go from the worlde / at leſt in deſire / affeccyon / or loue
that is: that he haue no inordinate loue to the worlde, the gooddes
or pleaſure therof. Wherfore let vs folowe Chriſte and go
vnto hym frome our carnall frendes and worldlye conuerſacyon
bearynge with hym and for his loue rebukes and ſharp paynes.
And herunto ſaynt Bernarde ſayth: Chriſte ſuffred his paſſyon
and deth without the citye, therfore let vs go to hym from the cytye,
that is by the contempte of worldlye conuerſacyon, and that
may be done by .iii. maner of wayes. In affeccyon or loue / that
we loue not inordinatly the world. In effect & dede: that we vtterly
forſake the worlde both in wyll and alſo bodye. And thyrdlye
by profytynge: that we deſyre and labour to be made one ſpirite
with god. For as ſaynt Gregorie ſayth: The more that a
man is ſeparate from the loue of the worlde: the more nygh he is
to god. This ledyng aboue al the other .viii. of which we ſpake
in the .viii. article: was moſt paynfull and ſhamefull to Chriſte
and that for many cauſes, and therfore conueniently it maketh a
ſpecyall article. Fyrſt by reaſon of his rebuke and ſhame / for it 
was moche ſhamefull to be led vnto hangynge. Secondly, for 
that he was copled and ioyned or led with .ii. theues and miſcheuous
perſons / and that was done to his more confuſyon & ſhame
that the people ſhulde thynke / there was no difference bytwixte
Chriſte and them. Thyrdly for the greate noumber of people 
that ſe hym and folowed hym / and that not onely of men but alſo
of women as the euangeliſt ſayth.Luc. 23. D. But they all dyd not folowe
hym of one intent and one mynde / for ſome were moche ioyfull
of that ſyght / as the moſte parte of the Iues. And it is no ſmall
payne to a man to behold and ſe other men, and ſpecially his enemyes
gladde and ioyfull of his affliccyon and rebuke. There
were alſo ſome that dyd wepe and were ſorye for that ſyght, as

the bleſſed woman. And alſo this was moche paynfull to Chriſt
to ſe his frendes & louers in ſorowe and heuynes for hym.In libro de planctu virginis. Saint
Bernarde deſcribeth this ledynge and proceſſion in this maner
folowynge. When Chriſt (ſayth he) was broughte forthe to be
ledde vnto his paſſion: there was gathered about hym a greate
multitude of people, as ye comonly ſe: when theues and murderars
be had to hangynge. Some went ſaughynge / and ſome
caſt clay or durte vpon his moſt bleſſed hed and face. If Chriſte
loked before hym / he ſawe them caſt durte vpon hym. If he loked
aboue hym: he ſawe the heuy tre of the croſſe lyenge vpon
his necke and greuouſly oppreſſed hym. If he loke behynd hym
he ſawe his mother with a great nomber of men and women wepynge
and lamentynge for hym. And as ſome doctours do ſay / 
his moſt ſorowefull mother wolde haue come to hym to haue helpen
hym: and myght not be ſuffred / the whiche her ſwete Ieſus
ſeynge and conſederynge her great heuynes: fell downe for ſorowe
and werynes vnder the croſſe. And that ſeynge his moſte
louynge mother: for ſorowe ſhe fell to the erth as deade. And in
the remembraunce of this ſwonyng there was afterwarde a chapell
buylded by the faythful people in the ſame place in the honor
of our lady whiche is called: ſancta Maria de Spa
                     •
                  mo. and
after this:Luc. 23. D. Ieſus turnynge hym ſelfe to the women that wepte:
ſayd, Filie Hieruſalem nolite flere ſuper me: ſed ſuper voſipſas flete
et ſuper filios veſtros: O ye doughters of Hieruſalem wepe not
vpon me for I take theſe paynes and deth with my good wyll,
for it is the wyll and ordinaunce of god my father / that I ſhulde
thus dye, and alſo for the great profet yt ſhall come therof to mankynde,
for by my deth I wyll ouercome euerlaſtynge deth, but
wepe for the cauſe of my paſſyon and dethe, that is: the ſynnes
of the people which cauſe me to ſuffer deth by the order of iuſtice.
And thus to wepe: it is neceſſarie for you, and therfore it foloweth:
Sed ſuper voſipſas flete: et ſuper filios veſtros: But weape
for your ſelfes and for your chylderne. Herin Chriſt doth not rebuke
theyr affeccyon and compaſſyon that they had to hym: but
he doth teche them an order howe to wepe, that is firſte to wepe
for them ſelfe and theyrs, for it is a vayne thyng and of no profyt
to wepe for the paſſyon of Chriſt: and therwith to deſpyſe hym
with our euyl dedes and lyuyng. Alſo he byddes them that wepe
for hym: to conſider what paynes be lyke to fal vpon them ſelfe,
And therfore they ſhuld wepe for them ſelf and for theyr childern,
and therfore Chriſte ſaythe:Luc. 23. D. 
                  Quoniam ecce venient dies in quibus

dicent:
                  Luc. 23. D. 
                  beate ſteriles. &c. For the dayes ſhall come (ſayth Chriſt)
when they ſhall ſay: Bleſſed and happy be the baren and tho that
brought forthe no fruyte, and thoſe pappes or teates be happye
that neuer gaue ſucke or mylke, then they ſhall begynne to ſaye
to the mowntes: Fal vpon vs, and to the hylles: Couer vs. And
thsi he ſpake for the tyme of the ſeage of Hieruſalem by the emperours
Vaſpaſyan and Titus his ſon, for then the Iues were
in great diſtreſſe as it appereth by the hiſtories of Ioſephus and
Egeſippus, or els we may ſay that Chriſte ſpake this for the extreme
and laſt day of iudgement. And the cauſe or reaſon of both
theſe he addeth and ſayth: Quia ſi in viridi ligno faciunt: in arido
quid fiet? For ſithe ſo greuous paynes and ſhamefull deſpites be
done to me whiche am a grene tree floriſſhyng and quicke in the
roote of my diuinitie / in the charitie of my manhode / in the branches
of my vertues / in the leeſes of good wordes / and the fruyte
of my good dedes, if (I ſay) they do theſe thynges to me, that
is: condempne me to the ſhamefull deth of the croſſe / without all
iuſtice: what ſhall they do to the drie tree or ſtocke / that is to the
ſynner / whiche wanteth the moiſture of grace / the fruyte of iuſtice / 
the greniſſe or floriſſhynge of the conſcience, what payne
(thynke you) be they worthy to haue. O Ieſu, thou grene tre.
O our hed. O thou glorie of all meake perſons. O thou cedre of
clenlynes, Palme of pacyence, Olyue of mercy, Vyne of gladnes,
ſhewe to vs what was done to the? And he anſwering ſaith
this grene tre is pilled or the barke pulled of, it is ſhred / lopte / 
it is cut downe and caſt vpon the erth. Marke this well frendes
ſith he that came in to this worlde without ſynne: departed not
hens without moſt greuous paynes and paſſyon: what paynes
then be they worthye to haue / whiche were conceyued and borne
in ſynne, and all theyr lyfe haue continued in ſynne? Herunto
ſaythe ſaynte Gregorie. As ofte as I remember the deth of our
ſauiour / the pacyence of Iob / and the death of Iohan the Baptiſte.
I ſay to the (O ſynner) therby I conſider what paynes
ſhall they ſuffer when god reproueth: ſyth tho whome he loueth 
and hathe choſen / ſuffer ſo greuous paynes. Fourthlye / this
ledynge was moche paynfull to Chriſte, For the place whether
he wente: was moche fylthye and ſtynkynge, It is called in
Ebrew: Golgoltha / that is by interp̄tation / Iocus Caluarie, The
place of the ſkull, for Caluaria is called ye ſkull of a mannes hed
when the ſkynne / fleſſhe & the heire is all gone, this place was

ſo called bycauſe all they that were condempned to deth were headed
or hanged there. To that place they broughte hym: bycauſe
men ſhulde ſuppoſe that he was a miſordred perſon. There was
alſo many boones of deade mennes bodyes / and ſpecyallye the
ſkulles of the heedes ſpredde abrode ouer all that place / and
that made it abhominable to beholde and alſo ſtynkyng. And for
this cauſe this leadynge was moche paynfull to Chriſte, and the
ſpace that Chriſte went bearynge his croſſe: was .vi.C.lxvi.
paſſes. And from the fote of the mount of Caluary vnto the top
where as the croſſe was fixed in the erth: were fyfty paſſes. And
in this ledynge Chriſt fel. v. tymes vnder the croſſe vnto the erth,
and when they had brought hym to that place: the ſaugiours pulled
of his clothes. &c. as in the next article.
               
                  ¶Here folowe .iii. Leſſons.
                  
                      OF this article we may lerne .iii. leſſons. Firſt is, as Chriſt
was led wyllyngly vnto his paſſion with all pacyence / as
a ſhepe vnto his deth: ſo ſhuld we wyllyngly and with pacyence
be led vnto the obedience of the preceptes of god and of our prelates
in the place of our lorde, by the whiche obedience: our propre
wyll is ſlayne or ſubdued, this deſyred the prophete ſaynge:
Deduc me in ſemita mandatorum tuorum. &c.
                     Pſal. C. 18. Lede me lorde in the
path of thy commaundementes: for that I haue deſyred. The
 ſeconde leſſon is that we ſhulde folowe Chriſte goyng to his paſſion,
wepyng the miſerie of our awne frayltie with the women,
for as Theophilus ſayth: The frayle ſoule ſignified by the woman,
if it with a contrite herte wepe by penaunce: it foloweth
 Chriſte. The thyrde leſſon is / that pylgryms that go on pylgrymege
for penaunce or deuocyon, and religious perſones for
obediens goynge by the way / if at any tyme they be wery: they
ſhulde remember this ledynge of our ſauiour Ieſus and his werynes.
&c. And a man to cōforme hym ſelf to this article: he ſhuld
remember with howe great ſhame Chriſte was ledde vnto hys
deth for our greate glorie, and ſo lette hym wepe with the holye
women / at leſt in the deſyre of his hert / and thē pray as foloweth.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu which forme wolde be led vnto Golgoltha to be there
crucifyed: lede me in the pathe of thy commaundementes,

that I may folowe the ſteppes of thy paſſion with the holye women / 
and wepe vpon my ſelfe the miſerie of my frayle cōdicyon.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſte was ſpoyled of his clothes before
the croſſe. The .xlv. article.
               
                  THe .xlv. article is the pullyng of Chriſtes clothes before
yt he was crucified, for whē Ieſus was come to ye place
where as he ſhulde be crucifyed: the ſaugiours pulled
of his clothes before the croſſe.Mar. 15. B And as Marke ſayth:
Dabant ei bibere vinum mirrhatum: They gaue hym to drynke:
bytter wyne for it was mixte with gall / as Mathew ſayth,Cap. 27. D and
when Ieſus had taſted of it: he wolde not drynke, for he wolde
not mortifye or hurt his tongue, wherwith he intended to praye
for his enemyes and to make his teſtament. And in this was
fulfylled the ſaynge of the ꝓphet.Pſal. 68. 
                  Dederunt in eſcam meam fel. &c.
They put gall in to my meate, and they gaue me to drynke aſell
or vynacre. This poynt of the pullyng of Chriſtes clothes doth
conueniently make a ſpecyall article: for it is no lityll payne for
a man to be ſtripte naked before all the people, for ſo they dyd to
Chriſt, for he was all naked without any cloth / the which thing
was neuer done before to the moſt vyle perſons, for comonly at
the leſt they left theyr ſhyrtes to hyde theyr nakednes. And in this
pullyng of his clothes his woūdes that he had before with theyr
beatynges and ſcourgynges: ware renewed to his great ſorowe
and payne, for his inner garment dyd cleue faſt vnto his backe.
And herunto ſayth the prophet:Pſal. 68. 
                  Super dolorem vulnerum meorum
addiderunt: They added wounde vpon wounde and ſo ſorowe
or payne vpon payne vnto me.Ancel ī dialog paſſion̄. O bleſſed mother / what ſorowe
was this to the when thou ſe hym ſo cruelly handled, thou wente
to hym with ſpede and tyed thy veyle aboute his bodye. This
moſt louely lorde Ieſus wold be naked: that thou ſynner myght
beholde howe pitiouſly that moſt pure bodie of his was arayed
for the, he was naked for the / whiche dyd create the, and beynge
eterne god: was cladde with beautie and ſtrēgth, he was naked
to whome we ſynge and ſaye with the prophete:Pſal. C. 3. 
                  Confeſſionem et
decorem induiſti: amictus lumine ſicut veſtimento: Thou arte
cladde with prayſynges and beautie, thou arte cladde with light
as with a garmente. This lorde god is made a ſpectacle to all
the worlde / a wonder to many perſones and a mockynge ſtocke
to the people / for at hym they ſhoke theyr hed. Thou our hed / our

ioy and our honour and glorie good Ieſus: arte thus deſpyſed.
this article is different from the .xxx. article for there he was naked
before Pylate and his miniſters, and here it was openly before
all the people. There they toke from hym the white garmēt
that herode put vpon hym to mocke hym: here they ſpoyled hym
of his owne clothes, there he was ſtripte naked to be ſcourged,
here to be crucifyed, there he was clad agayne: here they toke all
his clothes frome hym.Li. x. ſuper Luc. ca. C. Of this nakednes ſaynt Ambroſe ſaythe:
Chriſte naked aſcended his croſſe, and there he ſhewed hym ſelfe
vnto vs that we myght knowe / howe we were made by god and
nature, he hange vpon the croſſe: as Adam was in paradiſe / for
as our firſt Adam dyd inhabyte paradiſe naked: ſo the ſeconde
Adam our ſauiour Ieſus dyd enter in to paradiſe naked. And as
ſome ſay: there was a ſtone vpon the whiche our ſauyour Ieſus
ſat naked vnto ſuch tyme the croſſe was prepared and made redy,
and there ſittyng: he ſuffred many rebukes both by ſpyttynges / 
ſmytynges / and many blaſphemouſe wordes ſpeakynge to hym.
And whan the croſſe was made redy: then moſt furiouſlye they
toke Chriſt. &c. as in the next article. A leſſon as in ye. xxx. article.
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wolde be ſpoyled of thy clothes and ſyt
naked before ye croſſe: make me to be ſpoyled or naked from
all worldly thynges that be hynderaunce to my ſaluacyon that I
naked myght folowe thy naked croſſe. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſt was layde or ſpred vpon the Croſſe.
The .xlvi. article.
               
                  THe .xlvi. article is the extenſyon of Chriſte vpon the
croſſe, for after they had taken his clothes frome hym
and the croſſe was made redy: they with greate fury
toke Chriſte from his mother Marie / not without her
great ſorowe / wepynge & ſobbyng: they caſt hym very harde naked
as he was vpon the harde croſſe lyeng vpon the erth / and ſo
cruelly they ſpred hym abrode vpon the croſſe / and drewe out his
armes and legges as a cloth is ſtretched & drawen out vpon tenters,
in ſomoche they drewe hym ſo that all his mēbres and ioyntes
were in a maner out of theyr proper places. Of this ſpeaketh
the prophet ſayng:Pſal. C 39. 
                  Funes extenderunt in laqueum: Theſe moſte
cruell tormentours haue extended theyr ropes to make a ſnare for
me.Pſal. C. 18. And in an other pſalme: Funes peccatorum circumplexi ſunt
me: The roopes of ſynners haue compaſſed me aboute, and

that ſo ſharplye: that all his bones myght be nombred: and therfore
the ſame prophet ſayth of theſe tormentours in the perſone of
Chriſte:Pſal. 21. 
                  Dinumerauerunt omnia oſſa mea: They haue nombred
all my bones, for they dyd prepare the croſſe without aduyſemēt
or any meſure takynge of the length and brede of Chriſtes body,
or els they dyd it of pure malice / that is to make the holes ſo far
diſtance: to put Chriſt to the more payne. And when Ieſus wyllingly
prepared hym ſelfe to lye downe vpon ye croſſe: thoſe moſt
wicked and cruell tormentours toke hym by the armes violently
and caſt his moſt holye and tender bodye vpon the harde croſſe,
in ſo moche that therby the crowne of thornes was thurſte more
faſt and farther in to his hed and ſo put hym to extreme payne. O
thou chriſten ſoule beholde the face of thy ſauyoure Chriſte, but
howe can thou lyft vp thyne eyne vnto his face to beholde his tormentes
without teares? And howe can thou thynke in thy herte
of his moſt greuous paynes without ſorowe and ſyghyng? And
conſider what tribulation and ſorowe he founde when he ſaught
the. And herby ye may perceyue that this extenſion doth conueniently
make a ſpecyall article, for therby Chriſte ſuffred a great
and greuous payne.Luſtra. ſe
                        •
                      qui tam per acta. And therfore the churche doth ſay and ſynge
in a certen hympne: Flecte ramos arbor alta tenſa laxa viſcera. &c.
O thou high tre of the croſſe bowe downe thy branches / lawce
the bowels that be ſtretched vpon the. &c. This extenſion or ſtretchynge
forth of the bodie of Chriſte doth alſo ſhewe and declare
vnto vs the great effuſyon of the goodnes of Chriſte towardes
vs whiche procedeth from his highe and infinite charitie that he
hathe to vs. By this extenſion of his armes and membres vppon
the croſſe, he doth ſhewe yt he loued vs aſmoche as he might / 
gyuynge to vs / to gette our loue all that he was in hym ſelf / and
all that he myght do. And that whiche he coulde not expreſſe by
worde (for his charitie in vnſpeakeable) he dyd expreſſe it with
this ſigne and token of his bodye, that is in this extenſyon and
ſtretchynge oute of his bodye vpon the croſſe. And hereunto
ſaynte Bernarde ſayth: Verylye oure ſauyour Ieſus is a large
and a liberall diſpenſer / ſtewarde / or prouyſoure, whiche hath
gyuen to vs his owne fleſſhe to oure meate / and his blode to
oure drynke, his ſoule: for the pryce of oure redemption, hys
woundes: for oure remedye agaynſte temptacyons, hys armes:
for oure refuge and comforth, his croſſe: for oure ſhelde,
his herte: for a token of loue to vs, his water: to bathe and

waſſhe vs, his ſwette: for a medicine to vs, his nayles: for our
ſauce, his crowne of thornes: to our ournament, his wordes to
our inſtruccyon, both his lyfe and deth: to our example. Theſe
be the .xii.Apoc. 22. A fruytes of the tre of lyfe of whiche ſaynt Iohan ſpeaketh
in his apocalipſe:Exod. 25. C Theſe alſo be ſignifyed by the .xii. breades
or looues that were dayly ſette vpon the table in the temple
of god / called menſa propoſitionis.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this leſſon that we ſhuld extend
and ſtreche forthe all our membres and partes of our body
in to the obſequy and ſeruyce of Chriſte that is our handes and
armes to good werkes, our fete in goynge to good and godlye
places, our kneys to knele in prayer, and all our ſenſes: to holy
exercyſe of theyr actes and operacyons, ſo that we may ſay with
the prophet:Pſal. 34. 
                     Omnia oſſa mea dicent domine quis ſimilis tui: Al my
bones ſhall ſay: O lorde who is lyke to the? there is none ſo louynge
to vs as thou arte, therfore we aught to ſerue the with all
the partes of our bodie.Rom̄. 12. A. And herunto ſaynt Paule exhorteth vs
ſaynge: Obſecro vos vt exhibeatis corpora veſtra hoſtiam viuētem
ſanctam. &c. I beſeche you that ye ſo order your bodies that they
may be a quicke or lyuynge hoſte / holye / pleaſaunt to god and
a reaſonable obſequie / that all thynges be done reaſonably. Of
this extencyon we may take example in the ſtrynges of a harpe
or lute / whiche wyll make no ſowne good and pleaſaunt: except
they be extended and writhed vp. And a man to conforme hym
ſelfe vnto this article: he may extende all his membres and ſpecyally
his armes in the maner of a croſſe, and that outher ſtandyng
or lyenge as his deuocyon moueth hym / and alſo extende all the
powers of his ſaule to the laude and prayſe of god / and pray as
foloweth or in lyke maner.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wold be extended vpon the croſſe & that
ſo cruelly that all thy bones myght be nombred: make me
to extende all my membres and powers both of ſoule and bodye
vnto thy laude and prayſynge. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Chriſt was crucifyed.
The .xlvii. article.
               
                  
                  THe .xlvii. article is the crucifienge of Chriſt, for our
ſauiour Ieſus wold not onely be extended vpon the
croſſe, but alſo wolde be faſtened and nayled to the
croſſe to commende vnto vs his indiſſoluble charitie
wherby he dyd ſtablyſſhe our helth. Therfore
after that thoſe cruell tormentours had ſo ſtretched Chriſte vpon
the croſſe that the veynes and ſynnouſe were greatly and aboue
meſure extended and alſo the ioyntes of the bo
                     •
                  es out of order:Luc. 23. E.
then dyd they crucify hym and nayle hym faſt to the croſſe / bothe
his handes and fete / and that with great / harde and groſſe nayles
whiche were ſo blunte and groſſe: that they bracke both ſkyn
and fleſſhe / ſynnouſe and vaynes, and alſo put the ioyntes of the
bones out of order. And the cauſe why he wolde be crucifyed: is
this, for aſmoche as our firſte parent Adam extendynge his handes
to the tre that was forbodden to hym and with his fete going
to taſte of the fruyte of the ſayde tree dyd conſente to the deuyle
and ſo make an obligacyon of his awne dampnacyon: therfore
our ſauiour Ieſus that he myght cancell and diſtroye the ſayd obligacion
and writynge, wold be faſte nayled both in handes and
fete to the tree of the croſſe with the nayles of vnſuperable charitie,
therby cancelynge and deſtroyeng that decre and writyng
that was contrarie to our ſaluacyon,Coloſ. 2. C. for our ſauiour Ieſus toke
it from the deuyl and faſtened it to the croſſe as ſaynt Paule ſaith
O howe gladlye dyd Chriſt aſcende vpon this croſſe, with what
loue dyd he ſuffer al theſe paynes for vs, with what pacyēce was
he obedient vnto the dethe? howe great pleaſure had his father
omnipotent in that obedience? O what ſorowes / wepynges and
mornynges ware there harde amonge his frendes and louers,
and ſpecyally of his moſt ſorowful mother: when he was ſo cruelly
extended / faſtened / nayled / and in all his holye body vexed?
O moſte wonder. O the depenes of pitie. O the greate fyre of
loue. O the meruaylous pitie of god towardes vs. O the ineſtimable
charitie of god. Beſyde this reaſon we may aſſigne .iii.
other reaſons why chriſt wolde be crucifyed. Firſt that he hangynge
vpon the croſſe myght ſhewe hym ſelfe to be a mediatour
and meane bitwixt god and man, and this is taken of the gloſe,
Pri
                     •
                   ad Timoth. ſcdo.
                  Pri. Timo. 2. B. Seconde reaſon is / that as the deuyle
dyd ouercome Adam by the tre: ſo he ſhulde be ouercome by the
tre of the croſſe. The thyrde is that he myghte euidentlye ſhewe
that he ſuffred deth for to repayre the ruyne and decay of the aungelles
in heuen, alſo to bryng out and deliuered his frendes from

hel that is called Lymbus patrum: to gather together his louers
and to reconſyle his enemyes. It is comonly ſayd that the croſſe
was made of .iiii. diuerſe treeys, that is / the ſtocke or fote was
of Cedre, the ſtreyght longe tree: was a Palme, the armes or
tree ouerwharte: was a Cipreſſe, and the table aboue the croſſe
wherin the title was writen and fixed: was of Olyue. The cedre
ſignifyeth the profoūdnes of contemplacyon. The Cipreſſe:
fame of good opinyon. The Palme ſignifieth ye fruyte of iuſtice
And the Olyue: the plentuouſnes of mercy. Therfore the croſſe
of Chriſt is worthely called the tree of lyfe,Mat. 27. F for of it we may gather
threfolde lyfe or thre maner of lyues. Firſt the lyfe of nature
in token herof,Luc. 23. G. When Chriſt was Crucified: deade men rooſe agayne
to lyfe of nature. Secondly the lyfe of grace and in ſigne
herof: when Chriſt dyd pray vpō the croſſe there were many conuerted
to grace and knocked vpon theyr breſtes.Luc. 23. F. Thyrdly the lyfe
of glorie: in token herof: Chriſt hyngynge vpon the croſſe ſayd
to the thefe: This day thou ſhalbe with me in paradiſe.
               
                  ¶Here folowe .ii. Leſſons.
                  
                     
                     THe firſt leſſon is that we ſhulde crucify our fleſhe with
all his vyces and concupiſcences / that we myghte be
fixed to god with nayles, that is: with the preceptes
 of Iuſtice: as Chriſte was nayled to the croſſe. The
ſecond is: that we be ware that we neuer make nailes wherwith
the handes or fete of Chriſte ſhulde be nayled or wounded. They
make nayles to crucifye Chriſte: whiche ſawe or cauſe diſcorde
among louers and neyghbours. They wounde or nayle the handes
of our lorde whiche wyll not gyue almes of ſuche gooddes
as god hath gyuen to them. They nayle the fete of Chriſt which
wyl rather go to tauernes and vayne ſportes than to the churche.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wolde be nayled with moſte hard nayles
vnto the croſſe: and therby wolde faſten the obligation
and writynge of our ſynnes and deth vnto thy croſſe: nayle faſt
I beſeche the my fleſhe with thy feare / that I ſurely cleuyng faſt
to thy commaundementes, may euermore be faſtened to the and
to thy holy croſſe. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶How Chriſtes handes and fete were nayled & ſpecially
of the firſt or lefte hande. The .xlviii. article.
               
                  
                  THe .xlviii. article is the diggynge / borynge or naylynge
of Chriſtes handes and fete, whiche cauſed a
ſpecyall and greuous payne to Chriſt, and therfore
they make a ſpecyall article, and herof ſpeaketh the
prophet in the perſon of Chriſte:Pſal. 21. 
                  Foderunt manus
meas et pedes meos. They haue digged and bored my handes and
my fete. But for aſmoche as by ſuche cruell boryng and naylyng
Chriſte ſuffred or had .iiii. greuouſe woundes, of the which euery
one of them cauſed a ſpecyal and diſtincte payne: therfore conueniently
this article conteyneth in it ſelfe .iiii. diſtincte and dyuerſe
articles / that is for euery hand and fote one diſtincte article
ſo that this .xlviii. article is of the naylynge of the firſte hande.
The next. of the naylynge of the ſeconde hande, the .l. article is
of the borynge of the firſte fote. And the .li. article is of the boorynge
or naylynge of the ryght fote. And note here that we ſay
not the ryght hande and the lefte hand, for comonly in ſcripture
by the ryght hande is noted vertue and goodnes, and by the lefte
hand vyce & euyl, & in Chriſt is no ſiniſtrall thyng or euyll. And
as ſaynt Hierom ſayth:Suꝑ Mar. cap. 15. The extenſion of the firſte hande vnto
the croſſe: dyd take and nayle faſte deth vnto the croſſe. And the
extenſion of the ſeconde hande: dyd fynde lyfe that was periſſhed
and loſt. And the firſt hande may be here called that hand which
they firſt nayled, whiche paraduenture myght be that hand that
we call in vs the left hande bycauſe it is more nigh to the hert. Or
els for a miſterie (the whiche thoſe crucifiers dyd not intende)
that is this. For firſte the euyll / vyce or ſynne is to be remoued
whiche is ſignified by the lefte hande, and afterwarde is vertue
and goodnes brought in, whiche is noted by the ryghte hande.
Therfore the firſt wounde was in the firſt or lefte hand. In ſcripture
comonly by ye handes ar vnderſtanded werkes. And ſo theſe
handes of hym that wrought in the begynnyng or made ye world,
dyd nowe performe in the croſſe the werke of oure redemption,
whiche werke ſtandeth in .ii. thynges, that is in the deſtruccion
of deth and reparacyon of lyfe. But firſte he deſtroyed death,
wherby is vnderſtanded ſynne / and all that foloweth therof. And
therfore we ſayd before that the extenſion of the firſt hande / vnto
the tree of the croſſe: dyd take death / and ſo faſte nayle it vnto the
croſſe. And morouer he wrote with his owne blode in the ſame
hande / as it were in velym or parchment a writynge of his victorie
that he had vpon or ouer deth. And that this writyng ſhulde
euer cōtinue: he graued it very depe in to his hand, yea it perſed

through his hande. And of this ſaynt Bernarde ſayth: Chriſte
is exalted vpon the croſſe / the handes & fete of the moſte benigne
Ieſus be faſte nayled to that croſſe, his blode is drawen out / our
mediatour and meane ſtandeth before his father / as Moyſes dyd
before god in the breakynge of the golden calfe / to turne away
the wrath of his father from vs:Pſal. C. 5. that he ſhulde not deſtroye vs.
And truely our ſauiour Ieſus ſtode in cōfraccyon / in breakyng▪
for thoughe he were broſed and broken in all his bodye, yet he dyd
not fall downe in ſoule and mynde, but ſtode ſtedfaſtly in perſeuerance
of good wyll. O bleſſed Ieſu in what ſtate do I ſe the?
O moſt ſwete and amiable Ieſu / who hath put the to ſo bitter / 
cruell and odiouſe deth. O onely ſauiour of our olde rotten woū
                  des,
who hath brought the: not onely to moſt paynfull: but alſo
to ſuffer moſte ſhameful woundes. O moſt dulce and ſwete vyne
tree.Pſal. 76. O good Ieſu is this the fruyte that thy vyneyarde dothe
brynge forthe to the, whiche thou tranſlated out of Egipte in to
a moſte pleaſaunt and fruytefull ſoyle and grounde,Eſac. 5. A. and hathe
moſt paciently taried vnto this day of thy mariage / and loked
that it ſhulde haue brought to the ſwete grapes, but it broughte
forth thornes, for it hath crowned the with thornes / theſe Iues
thy vyneyarde haue cōpaſſed the about with the thornes of theyr
ſynnes Beholde to what bitternes and ſharpnes this vyne is
turned, not nowe thy vineyarde: but rather a ſtraunger to the,
for it denyed the cryenge and ſayenge Non habemus regem niſi ceſarem:
                  Ioh. 19. C.
We haue no kynge but the emperour. Therfore theſe curſed
and cruell tylmen haue caſte the out of the vyneyarde of the cytye
of Hieruſalem / or els out of theyr compaigney and there haue
ſlayne the,Mat. 21. D not ſodenly or out of hande: but with a longe tormēt
and payne of the croſſe, and haue gyuen to the many greuouſe
woundes with whippynges / beatynges / ſcourgynges, and at
laſt: naylynge the handes and fete to the croſſe where as thou ſuffred
.xxvi. ſtrokes with the hamer vpon thy handes, and .xxxvi.
vp on thy fete in dryuynge in the nayles.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may lerne howe to put and hyde all oure
troubles / aduerſities / temptacyons / infirmities / our ſynnes
and al our paynes dewe for ſynne: in this moſt ſwete wound
of the firſt hande of our ſauiour Ieſu wherwith he toke deth & al
our miſerie / and nayled it faſt to the croſſe. In that maner dyd

ſaynt Auſten ſayng:In manua li. cap. 22. When any fylthy cogitacyons doth inpugne
me: I runne to the woundes of Chriſte: and I am helped, when
the fleſſhe oppreſſeth me: I ryſe thorowe the remēbraunce of the
woundes of my lorde god, when the deuyll doth lye in a wayte
of me: I flye to the woundes of our lorde and he flyeth from me.
If carnall concupiſcence do moue my bodye: that fier of carnall
pleaſure is extincte by the remēbraunce of the paſſion of my lord
god. And this in all myne aduerſities and temptacyons, I fynde
none ſo ſure remedy: as the woundes of Chriſt, in theſe I ſlepe
ſurely / in theſe I reſte without fere and thoughe ſaynte Auſten
ſpeake here indifferently of all the woundes of Chriſte, yet properlye
we may ſay that this ſure remedye is founde in the wound
of this firſte or lefte hand of Chriſte. Alſo it apperteyneth to this
wounde, that we ſhulde auoyde all euyll werkes for the loue of
god crucifyed for vs. And a man to conforme hym ſelfe to this article
may ofte kyſſe this wounde of Chriſte and ofte remēber the
forſayde woundes of ſaynt Auſten. And pray thus.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me moſt wretched wold haue thy left hand
digged or boored with a nayle / and faſtened to the croſſe:
graunt to me that I may euer put and hyde al myne aduerſities / 
and temptacyons in the moſte ſwete wound of that left hand and
that I may fynde in it a ſure and holſome remedye agaynſte all
maner of tribulacyons. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶The boorynge or naylynge of the ſeconde or ryght
hande. The .xlix. article.
               
                  THe .xlix. article is the naylynge of Chriſtes ſeconde or
ryghte hande,Suꝑ Mar. 15. wherwith (as ſaynte Hierome ſayth)
he founde lyfe: that was loſt and periſſhed. And here
by lyfe: may be taken and vnderſtanded all thynges
that perteyne to our helth and ſaluacyon, as afore by deth were
vnderſtanded ſynne and all that folowed of ſynne. This lyfe
our ſauiour Ieſus hath gyuen to vs with his ſecond hande. And
of this gyfte he hathe writen to vs a ſure preuilege or dede of gyft
writen (I ſaye) with his precyous blode, not in paper or parchment:
but in his ryghte hande / whiche alſo he hath ſealed for a
perpetuall remēbraunce with a ſharp nayle perſynge his hande,

as it were with a ſeale.Secūda Petri. 1. A. And herunto ſayth ſaynt Peter: Maxima
et precioſa vobis promiſſa donauit deus. &c. Almightie god hath
gyuen to you moſt good and precyous promyſſes, and therby ye
may be made lyke vnto god / and felowes or partakers of his diuine
and godlye nature.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may lerne howe to hyde all our good werkes
that our lorde worketh in vs, in this wounde of this
ſecond hande attributyng them, not to ourſelfe as that we ſhuld
be the chefe werkers of them: but gyuyng all to the goodnes and
grace of god, praynge and deſyrynge his grace that all our negligences
and inperfeccyons may be reſtored / performed and fulfylled
by this moſt ſwete wounde.In manua li. cap. 21. And thus dyd ſaynte Auſten
ſaynge: What ſo euer I want in my ſelfe as of my ſelfe: I vſurp
and take it to me, of the bowelles of my lorde Ieſus / for frome
thens floweth mercy plentuouſly, nor there wanteth no hooles
or ryuers wherby that mercy myght haue recours to me. And
therfore I ſhall euermore prayſe the mercyes of our lorde, for the
woundes of Ieſu Chriſte be full of mercye, full of pitie, full of
ſwetenes and charitie, by theſe hooles and riuers: it is le
                        •
                     ull for
me to taſte howe ſwete and pleaſaunt my lorde my god is. And
thoughe this is ſpoken generally of all the woundes of Chriſte:
yet ſpecyallye it apperteyneth to the wounde of this ſeconde or
ryght hand. And a man to conforme hym ſelf to this article ſhuld
oftymes kyſſe the wounde of the ryght hande of the crucifix / and
ofte reuolue in his mynde the forſayde wordes of ſaynte Auſten
and praye as foloweth.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me a wretche wolde haue thy ryght hande
perſed thorowe with a nayle and ſo faſtened to the croſſe:
graunt to me that I may hyde in the moſt ſwete wounde of thy
ryght hande with thankes, al my good werkes that it ſhal pleaſe
thy goodnes to worke in me / and that all my neglige
                        •
                     ces and
imperfeccyons may therby be performed and ſupplyed. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶The naylynge of the firſt foote or lefte
fote of Chriſt. The .l. article.
               
                  
                  THe .l. article is the naylynge of the firſt or lefte foote of
Chriſte, By feete in ſcripture ar taken and vnderſtanded
our affeccyons and deſyres, with the whiche oure
ſoule goeth / which for the more parte / be in vs ſeniſtrall
that is of the left parte euyll or imperfite, but in Chriſte they all
be on the ryght ſyde good and perfyte, and therfore Chriſt by the
wounde of his firſt or left fote that dyd cure and heale oure euyll
cogitacyons & affeccyons. Scripture ſpeakyng of our olde and
corrupt man ſayth:Gene. 6. A. 
                  Cuncta cogitatio cordis humani prona eſt ad
malum omni tempore: All the cogitacyon and deſyre of mannes
herte is prone and redy to euyll at all tymes. But nowe of man
renewed and healed by Chriſte: may be veryfyed this ſayenge of
the wyſeman:Prou. 11. C 
                  Deſiderium iuſtorum omne bonum: The deſyre of
iuſte men is all good. Of theſe iuſt men alſo ſpeaketh the prophet
Ezechiell ſaynge:Ezech. 1. B. 
                  Pedes eorum pedes recti: The feete of them be
ryght feete / for the affeccyons and deſyres of good men be not croked / 
frowarde / or turned to euyll, and that is by the efficacitye
and vertue of this wounde of the firſt or lefte foote of Chriſte.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this leſſon that as ofte as we be
impugned with euyll cogitacyons / affeccyons or vayne deſyres:
we ſhulde forthwith flye vnto the wounde of this foote of
Chriſt, for from thens, as from a moſt pure and holſom foūteyn
there floweth to vs an holſom medicine, wherwith all the fylthe
of our cogitacyons / all our corrupte affeccyons and deſyres and
breuely all our euyl and ſynne is waſſhed and ſo purified and healed.
This perceyued wele ſaynt Auſten in hym ſelf when he ſayde
in his contemplation thoſe wordes that be writen in the leſſon of
the .xlviii. article. A man to conforme hym ſelfe to this article,
ſhulde oftymes kyſſe the wounde of the lefte foote of Chriſt with
the remembraunce of this leſſon, and pray as foloweth.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu which for me wolde haue thy moſte holye feete perſed
with a great groſſe & hard nayle and ſo to be faſtened vnto
the croſſe: graunt to me yt when ſo euer I am impugned or troubled
with euyl cogitations / ſiniſtrall affeccyons and deſyres: I
may runne to the wounde of thy left foote and there to fynde and
receyue holſome medicynes for my ſaluacyon. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               ¶The naylynge of the ſeconde or ryght foote
of Chriſt. The .li. article.
               
                  THe .li. article is the nailyng of the right foot of Chriſt.
By the wounde of this foote our good deſyres which
of them ſelfe be feble and imperfyte:Secūda cor 3. B. be ſtrengthed and
made perfit. For as ſaynt Paule ſayth: We be not ſufficyent
of ourſelfe / as of our awne vertue: to thynke any good
thynge, but our ſufficiencye therin is of god, wherfore thoughe
our cogitacyons / wylles / affeccyons & deſyres be ſomtyme good
of theyr owne kynde and nature: yet they be of no value or merit
in the ſyght of god: excepte they be dyed or put in the blode of the
feet of Chriſte,Pſal. 67. therfore the prophet ſayth: Vt intinguatur pes tu
us in ſauguine: Thy foot or affeccyon muſt he dyed and put in the
blode of Chriſte or els all is without fruyte of eternall rewarde.
And herunto ſayth the gloſe vpon theſe wordes:Pſal. 21. 
                  Foderunt manus
meas et pedes meos:
                  Gloſa Caſſiodori. They haue delued or digged my handes and
my feete, he ſayth not: Tranſfixerunt or vulnerauerunt: They
hath nayled or wounded: but foderunt: they haue delued or digged
for the erth that is delued is apte to brynge forth fruyte. So
Chriſt digged in his handes and fete, brought to vs the fruyt of
lyfe, and no meruell / for he ranne after vs all the dayes of, his lyfe
with great thyrſt and moſte feruent deſyre of our health▪
               
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  IN this article we lerne how to offre and to put al our good
thoughtes / wylles affeccyons and deſyres into the frutfull
wound of the ryght foote of Chriſt and that with great thankes
ioynynge our deſyres vnto his deſyres at all tymes / as it ware
by a louynge kyſſe that therby they myghte be performed / and ſo
myght brynge forth good fruyte. So Mary Magdalene dyd
kyſſe the feet of Ieſu: and therby ſhe receyued ſo plentuouſe frute
that all her affeccyon and loue were turned in to teares of contricyon / 
compaſſion and deuocyon, and if at ſomtyme we can not
haue good deſyres: at the leſt let vs haue a wyll to haue good deſyres / 
as Dauyd ſayth:Pſal. C. 18 My ſoule hath coueted to deſyre thy iuſtificacyons
at all tymes, and if we ſo do: then god ſhall accepte
our wyll for a dede. A man to conforme hym ſelfe to this article:
may oftymes kyſſe the wounde of the righte foote of the crucifix
with the remembraunce of this leſſon / and then pray thus.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     
                     O Ieſu whiche dyd make a founteyne of thy grace ſprynge
to vs from the holſom and moſt ſwete woūde of thy right
foote: graunt to me that I may faſten and ioyne all my good deſyres
to that ſame thy wounde with a louely kyſſe / and to make
them conformable and agreynge to thy holy deſyres. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the croſſe with Chriſte vpon it was
rayſed vp. The .lii. article.
               
                  THe .lii. article is the areyryng vp or lyftyng vp of Chriſt
vpon the croſſe,An
                        •
                     el ī dialog paſſion̄. for after ſome doctours Chriſte was
nayled to the croſſe: the croſſe lyeng vpon the erth, and
after that he was nayled therunto: they lyfted hym vp
with the croſſe / and this lyftyng vp and puttynge of the croſſe in
to the ſtamp or fote that was fixed in the erth was one of the moſt
greuous paynes of Chriſt, and that was bycauſe all the weyght
of his bodye dyd reſt vpon hys handes and fete nayled, and therfore
when they had areyſed vp the croſſe and put it downe with
violence in to the ſtampe or foote: it dyd ſo ſhake the bodye that
it rent the woundes of his handes & feet, in ſo moche that greate
plenty or ryuers of blode dyd flowe or runne out of thoſe woundes
and founteynes of our ſauiour. O bleſſed Ieſu howe ſwetly
and pleaſantly was thou conuerſant with men, Howe greate
gyftes dyd thou gyue to men, and that in moſt abundance? howe
harde and ſharpe paynes haſte thou ſuffred for them? thou haſte
ſuffred harde wordes / harder ſtrokes and beatynges, and moſt
harde tormentes of the croſſe, and that in euery parte of thy bodye.
Man was ſeake in his heade / that is in his intention, that
is when he dyd any thynge for an euyll intent, whiche intention
is as it were the heade of the ſoule. Man was alſo ſeake in hys
handes when he dyd euyll werkes or imperfyte, he was alſo ſeke
in his fete: when he had vnclene affeccyons and deſyres / he was
ſeake in his herte for he had euyl and vayne cocitacyons, he was
alſo ſeake in his hole bodye: for he lyued a worldly lyfe / after the
pleaſures of the worlde and of the bodye. And for theſe cauſes
good Ieſu / thou wolde be wounded, firſt in the heade: that thou
myght cure all our euyll and peruerſe intencyons, thou wold be
woūded in thy hādes: to heale al our ſinful & remiſſe operations
In thy fete: to purge all our vnclene & worldly affeccyons, thou
wolde be wounded in thy hert to clenſe all our euyll and vayne

cogitacyons. And alſo thou wolde be ſcourged and wounded in
all thy hole bodie: to amende all our carnall life and worldly conuerſacyon.
But wherfore good Ieſu wolde thou be lefte vp on
hight?Se
                        •
                      de 
                        〈◊〉
                      C. xxx. C. Herunto ſaynt Auſten anſwering ſaith, that was: he bycauſe
he wolde alſo purge the ayre from the power of the deuyls,
and from the infeccyon o
                     •
                   our ſynnes. And in lyke maner he clenſed
the erth: by his blode that ranne from his body vnto the erth.
Of this exaltacyon and lyftynge vp Chriſte ſayd before:Ioh. 12. E. 
                  Si exaltatus
fuero a terra: omnia traham ad meipſum: If I be exalted or
lyfted vp aboue the erth: I ſhall drawe to me all thynges / that is
all my electe and choſen people, alſo he drewe to hym of all nacyons
or of all kynde of people. who is he that hearyng theſe thynges / 
wyll not haue a ſure hope and truſte to haue remiſſion and
forgiuenes of his ſynnes, and that ſpecyally when he remēbreth
and beholdeth the deſpoſicyon of Chriſtes bodie hyngynge vpon
the croſſe / he hath his hed enclyned downe redy to kyſſe the / his
armes abrode redy to halfe the / his handes open redy to gyue / his
hert open to loue the / his fete nayled faſte to abyde and continue
with the / his body all ſpred abrode redy to gyue hym ſelfe holly
and all to gether to the.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may take this leſſon that we remembring
the paynes and paſſion of our lorde ſhulde be exalted from
the erthe, that is from erthly affeccyons or worldly conuerſation
at leſt / for that tyme of our remembrance / and thoughe it be not
gyuen to all perſons to be bodylye eleuate or lyfted vp from the
erth / as ware Mary Magdalene / ſaynte Auſten mother called
Monica / ſaynte Birgite / with diuers other: yet let vs enforce
our ſelfe with the grace of god to be eleuate in mynde, that ſo we
maye be drawen frome the erthe / vp to Chriſte hyngynge vpon
the croſſe, ſo that we may be of the noumber of them / of whome
he ſpake / ſaynge:Ioh. 12. E. And I be exalted frome the erthe: I ſhall
drawe to me all my electe people. And a man to conforme hym
ſelfe to this article maye of his deuocyon rayſe vp his herte and
mynde vnto Chriſte / as if he ſawe hym viſibly hangynge vpon
the croſſe. Alſo he may ſomtyme ſhewe that deuocyon: in the outwarde
geſture and behauiour of his bodye / and pray thus.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wolde be lefted vp on the croſſe and ſo
wolde be exalted from the erth: make me I beſech the to be
eleuate from all erthly affeccyons, and to be conuerſant in mynde
in heuenlye thynges. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe .ii. theues were crucified with Chriſt.
The .liii. article.
               
                  THe .liii. article is the crucifyenge of .ii. theues with
Chriſte, whiche without was done to his great rebuke
and ſhame,Ome
                        •
                     . 84. Suꝑ Iohn̄
                   as ſaynt Criſoſtom ſayth. And alſo to make
men beleue that Chriſte was culpable in ſuche thynges
as the Iues dyd accuſe hym in, and ſo worthely to ſuffer death.
O the wicked and curſed iniquitie of the Iues in this dede, for
they crucified Chriſt as a thefe, and with hym as the euangeliſte
ſayth:Luc. 23. E. 
                  Crucifixerunt duos latrones: vnum a dextris: et alium a finiſtris:
They crucified .ii. theues / one of the ryghte hande of
Chriſt and the other of his lefte hande. This vilanye our lorde
ſuffred wyllynge to be crucifyed with theues: to ſhewe that he
ſuffred paſſion and deth for ſynners, and herin / was fulfylled the
ſaynge of the prophet:Eſa
                        •
                     . 53. D 
                  Et cum ſceleratis reputa
                        •
                     us eſt: He is accompted
with theues or reputed to be as one of the wicked perſons,
he was rekened or accōpted with wicked men in his deth:
that by his reſurreccyon he might reuyue and quicken them: as
ſaynt Ambroſe ſayth▪
                  Suꝑ Lucā. cap. C. 2. and ſo our lorde was crucifyed bytwixt .ii.
theues as the capteyne and mayſter of them, and the worſte or
moſte miſcheuous of them, and alſo that he ſeynge or hearynge
theyr paynes and heuynes: myghte be more troubled and vexed
therby in his paſſyon. By theſe .ii. theues may be ſignifyed thoſe
perſons that be crucifyed with Chriſte for to do penance for theyr
ſynnes / in religion, and that by ꝓrofeſſion made vnto the ſame,
but ſome of them vtterly leaue or forſake theyr religion by apoſtaſie,
of whom is well veryfyed the ſayng of ſaynt Paule: Nomen
dei per vos blaſphematur inter gentes:
                  Rom̄. 2. D. The name and religion of
god is blaſphemed by ſuch apoſtatays amonges the worldly people,
and that neuer ſo moch as in theſe dayes / our lorde amende
it, and theſe perſons be noted by that the
                     •
                  e that hang of the lefte
hande of Chriſte and dyd blaſpheme Chriſt. The other that kepe
theyr profeſſyon / and paciently bere theyr croſſe of penance / be ſignified
by the other the
                     •
                  e that hang on the right hande of Chriſte
and confeſſed Chriſte and deſyred hym of his mercy.
               
                  
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we maye lerne howe we ſhulde be crucified
with Chriſte bitwixt two theues. For as Ieſus was crucified
and .ii. theues with hym: ſo morally our ſpirite noted by
Chriſt: ſhuld be crucifyed bitwixt .ii. theues yt is the fleſſhe & the
worlde. The fleſſhe is to be crucifyed: as the thefe on the right
ſyde.Gala. 5. D. And herunto ſaynt Paule ſayth: Qui Chriſti ſunt: carnem
ſuam crucifixerunt cum viciis: They that be verye true chriſtians
haue crucified and ſubdued theyr fleſſhe and ſenſualitie with all
vyces. The worlde is to be crucified as the thefe on the left hand.
And therfore ſaynt Paule ſayth:Gal. 6. D. 
                     Nichi mundus crucifixus eſt: et
ego mundo: The worlde is crucifyed to me and I to the worlde.
Theſe theues thus crucified in vs: our ſpirite is crucified with
Chriſte in the myddle,Ibidem. cap. 2. D. ſo that it maye ſaye with ſaynte Paule:
Chriſto confixus ſum cruci: viuo autem: iam non ego: viuit vero in
me Chriſtus: I am crucifyed with Chriſte / I lyue not nowe with
myne own lyfe: for Chriſt liueth in me: and in his life I do liue.
And here note that the left thefe was crucified: but not ſaued / for
he continued in his infidelitie. So the worlde though he be crucifyed:
yet he is not ſaued: for he remayneth in his miſerie and
wretchednes. The fleſſhe is crucified and ſaued with the ſpirite,
for after the generall reſurreccyon: it ſhalbe glorified with the
ſoule.Luc. 23. F. And therfore Chriſte ſayde to the ryghte thefe: Hodie mecum
eris in paradiſo: This day thou ſhalbe with me in glorie.
And farthermore note here that the croſſe wherupon our fleſſhe
is crucifyed: is the rigor of diſcipline or ſharpnes of penaunce,
and this croſſe hath .iiii. branches or partes, that is: watche / 
abſtinence / harde or ſharpe wearynge clothes / and ſharpe or rebukynge
wordes. The croſſe vpon the whiche the worlde is crucified:
is the pouertie of ſpirite, and this croſſe hath alſo .iiii. armes:
that is the contempte of worldlye glorie / the contempte of
mony / of our countrie / and of our kynſfolke. The croſſe of the
ſpirite: is the feruour of deuocyon / and his .iiii. armes / be theſe
hope / feare / loue and ſorowe, hope is the parte that is vpwarde,
feare is downwarde, loue: of the ryght ſyde, and ſorowe: of the
lefte parte, the roote wherof all theſe do ſprynge: is charitye.
And herunto ſayth the apoſtle:Epheſ. 3. D 
                     In caritate radicati vt poſſitis comprehendere,
&c. Be ye founded in charitie / that ye maye comprehende
and clerely ſe with all ſayntes what is the length / the brede
the hyghte and the depenes. In theſe wordes (as ſaynte Auſten

ſayth and alſo the gloſe ordinarye is playnly expreſſed the figure
of the croſſe and the miſterie therof.In libro devidēdo deo ad paul
                           ••
                        ā cap. 13. And a man to conforme hym
ſelfe to this article: ſhulde ofte remember howe Chriſt dyd hyng
bitwixt .ii. theues,Gloſa ordinaria ſuper Eph. 3. and remēbre therwith this leſſon & pray thus.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me a wretche wolde be crucified bitwyxt
ii. theues and wolde be reputed as one of them: graunte
that my ſpirite may be crucifyed bitwixt the fleſſh and the world,
that I may reſte quietely in the in the middle, the extremes that
is the fleſſhe and the worlde crucified to me. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the ſaugiours diuided Chriſtes
garmentes. The .liiii. article.
               
                  THe .liiii. article is the diuiſion of Chriſtes garmentes,
for when the ſaugiours had crucified Chriſte:
they toke his garmentes & deuyded them in to .iiii.
partes, to euery ſaugiour one parte, for there were
iiii. hangmen, and beſydes thoſe .iiii. partes Chriſt
had an other cote that was hole vnſewed or without any ſeame,
for it was wouen or knytte.Ioh. 19. E. Of this cote the ſaugiours or hang
men ſayd Non ſcindamus eam: ſed ſottiamur de ea cuius ſit: We
wyll not cut this cote: but caſt lottes who ſhall haue it, and herin
was fulfylled the ſcripture whiche ſayth:Pſalm. 21. 
                  Diuiſerunt ſibi veſtimenta
mea: et ſuper veſtem meam miſerunt ſortem: The hangmen
deuyded to them ſelfe my garmentes, and they caſt lottes vpon
my garment. This was a great abiection and vilanie to Chriſt
as Criſoſtom ſaith,Suꝑ Iohn̄ Ome
                        •
                     . 84. for they dyd not ſo to the theues. This thyng
is onely done to vyle / abiecte and condempned perſons that haue
nothynge but his garmentes.Thōs in cathena ſuper Mar. 15. And Theophylus ſayth: they dyd
this to the rebuke and ſhame of Chriſt, and of a wantones as yf
they ſhulde ſay ſcornfully / bicauſe he called hym ſelfe a kynge we
wyll haue iche one of vs, ſome of his royall or kynges roobes.
O meruelous pacyence and diſpenſacyon of the mercy of Chriſt
whiche is the very lambe of god, a ſhepe or a lambe doth bothe
fede and cloth them, that clyp hym and ſley hym, he feades them
with his fleſſhe and body, and clotheth them with his flees. So
our true lambe Ieſu Chriſte dyd cloth thoſe ſaugiours with his
garmentes, and alſo he feades vs daylye in the ſacrament of the

aulter with his precyous bodye fleſſhe and blode.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may note that charitie (which after ſaynt
Auſten is ſignifyed by the cote without ſeames) can not be
deuyded, and yet that ſame charitie doth knytte vertues togyther.
And alſo by that ſame cote is ſignifyed one holye catholical
and vniuerſall churche whiche gathereth all faythfull people in
to one fayth / which churche & faith: No man ought to deuyde by
any ſciſme or hereſye. Of this churche ſpeaketh the ſpouſe in his
canticles:Cant. 6. C. 
                     Vna eſt columba mea: vna eſt perfecta mea: My douue
(that is my ſpouſeſſe ſymple as the douue) is one / my perfecte
ſpouſeſſe is but one / and ſo theyr is but one churche / as theyr is
but one god / one fayth / and one baptiſme.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wolde haue thy garmentes deuyded amonges
thy crucifiers / and wolde haue them caſt lottes for
thy vnſewed cote that was wouen or knyt and without ſeames:
graunt to me to take parte with thy ſaintes and to folowe theyr
examples in the kepynge of thy commaundementes / and that I
maye euer keape thy charitie in me. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the writynge of the title aboue Chriſtes
heade. The .lv. article.
               
                  THe .lv. article / is the ſuperſcription or wrytynge
of the title, for Pylate at the deſyre of the Iues
wrote a title expreſſynge the cauſe of Chriſtes deth
and this was it:Ioh. 19. D. 
                  Ieſus nazarenus rex iudeorum: Ieſus
of Nazareth kynge of the Iues / as if he ſhuld
ſay / Ieſus of Nazareth was crucifyed: bycauſe he is the kynge
of the Iues. And this title was writen thus to ſeparate the cauſe
of his deth / from the cauſes of the other .ii. that were crucifyed
with hym, and that for theyr euyll dedes and lyfe. The Iues intended
by this title (as Theophilus ſayth) ſcornfully to rebuke
the perſon of Chriſt which (as they ſayd) made hym ſelfe a kyng
ſo that the people paſſynge by and redynge this title / ſhuld haue
no compaſſion vpon hym:Thōs in cathena ſuper Lu 23. & ſuꝑ Mat. 15. but rather rebuke hym as a tyrante / 

that wolde haue vſurped the kyngdome. But Pylate wrote not
as they wolde haue had hym to write / that is: that he made hym
ſelfe the kynge of Iues, but he wrote playnly / that Ieſus is the
kynge of Iues.Suꝑ Mat. 27. And herunto ſaynt Hierome ſayth: the Iues of
enuy and to ſcorne Chriſte / dyd ſpeake for the writyng
                     •
                  of the title:
but the vertue and ſecreate power of god dyd ordre it otherwyſe
in the herte of Pylate, thoughe he were ignorant and wy
                     •
                  t
not what he dyd (as the gloſe ſayth) For it was god that procured
ſuche a title to be put aboue Chriſtes heed / that therby the Iues
myghte knowe that Ieſus was theyr kynge / and that they culd
not auoyde though they ſlewe hym for that purpoſe yt they wolde
not knowe hym for theyr kynge,De lita ſuꝑ Iohn̄. 19. that notwithſtandynge it appered
by the title that he was theyr kynge,Beda. Suꝑ Mar. 15. for his kyngdom or dignitie
was not loſt or hyndred by the deth of the croſſe: but rather
confirmed / ſtablyſſhed and the more ſtrengthed as Bede ſaythe:Suꝑ Lucā. libro. 6. cap. x C.
Alſo by this title Pylate commended Chriſte in .iii. thynges / 
thoughe Pylate dyd not ſo intende, for the deth of Chriſte was
firſte the cauſe of the remiſſion of our ſynnes, and that is noted
in this worde Ieſus a ſauiour. Secondly the deth of Chriſt is
the cauſe meritorious of our grace that we haue a
                     •
                  d that is noted
in this worde Nazarenus, that is as moche to ſaye as floriſſhynge,
for by grace we floriſſhe in all vertues. Thyrdly by the
deth of Chriſte we be made enheritours of the kyngdome of god
noted in theſe wordes: Rex iudeorum: The kyng of Iues that is
of all faithfull people that truely confeſſe god / and by this kyng
we all ſhalbe kynges in glorie. And when many of the Iues had
red this title / and perceyued that it was to theyr infamy & ſclaunder:Ioh. 19. D.
ſayd to Pylate, Noli ſcribere: r
                        •
                     x iudeorum: ſed quia ipſe
dixit: rex ſum iudeorum: wryte not thus, the kynge of Iues: but
that he ſayd: I am the kyng of the Iues then Pylate ſayd: Quod
ſcripſi ſcripſi: That I haue writen: I haue writen, as if he ſhuld
ſay: It is true that I haue writen / and therfore I wyl not chaūge
it / I wyll not corrupte the trueth thoughe ye loue falſhed. And
thoughe Pylate ſpake thus not knowynge the truth that he ſayd,
yet that ſame was prophecied before by the prophet Dauid in the
lvii. pſalme,Iuxta .lxx. interpretes which ſpeaketh of the paſſyon of Chriſt and diuers
other before, whiche haue this title or inſcription: Ne corrumpas
tituli inſcriptionem: Deſtroy not or chaunge not the inſcription
of the title. And therfore ſaynt Gregorie ſayth, this tytle
was immutable, not for that Pylate wrote it: but for that the
truthe ſayde: I am the kynge of Iues: that is of the faythfull

people and of ſuche as confeſſe & knowlege god to be theyr lorde.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may lerne that whan ſo euer we be inpugned
or troubled by the deuyll: lette vs flye to this title and
lay it agaynſt hym, that is: Ieſus nazarenus rex iudeorum: Ieſus
of Nazareth kynge of the Iues whiche is called the title of
tryumphe or victorie / for it manifeſtlye expreſſethe the victorie
of Chriſte that he had agaynſt the deuyll. And therfore the deuyl
perceyuynge this title fyxed vpon the croſſe: moued the Iues to
requyre of Pylate that it myghte be chaunged / but Pylate wold
not as we ſayd before. And amonges all the actes of the paſſyon
of Chriſte: the deuyll moſt abhorreth and fereth this victorious
title▪ as the deuyll ſhewed and confeſſed to a certen deuoute perſone
by compulſyon in a certen viſyon.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me wolde be diffamed ſcornfully with the
ſuperſcripcyon of the victorious title: graunt to me that
I may ſtrongly lyfe and teyght vnder the banner and victorious
title: Ieſus nazarenus rex iudeorum: That my ghoſtlye enemyes
afrayde by the ſyght or hearynge therof: ſhuld not darre to come
nyghe vnto me. Amen.
               
            
            
               The illuſyon and mockynge of Chriſte crucifyed.
The .lvi. article.
               
                  THe .lvi. article is the mockynge of Chriſte crucified:
and here note that Chriſte was .viii. tymes
mocked on good fryday. Firſte was in the houſe
of Cayphas.
                     •
                   Seconde in the houſe of Herode.
Thyrde in the motehall of Pylate. And the other
v. was when Chriſte was vpon the croſſe, the firſt of them and
the .iiii. in order was in the ſuperſcription of the title: of yt which
we ſpake in the laſt article, an other was done of the men that
paſſed by / there as Chriſt was hyngynge vpon the croſſe. The
thyrd was done by the princes / ſcribes and ſeniours of the Iues.
The .iiii. was done by the ſaugiours, and of theſe .iii. laſt: we
ſhall ſpeake in this preſent article. Of the firſt of theſe .iii. which

is the .v.Mat. 27. E in order: the euangeliſt ſayth: Pretereuntes blaſphemabant
eum: The people that paſſed by that waye dyd blaſpheme
Chriſte,Libro. xiii. and this they dyd for .iii. cauſes, as ſayth Symon de
Caſſia. Firſt for theyr blyndnes and ignorance or want of knowlege
of the truth, and no meruell though they that paſſed by / dyd
blaſpheme hym, for they dyd not tarye or abyde to ſe and knowe
the inuiſible truthe, ſo the Iues do paſſe by / and do not abyde
in the knowlege or ſearchynge of the ſcripture that therin they
myghte fynde and knowe Chriſte, thoughe Chriſte ſayde to
them:Ioh. 5. E. 
                  Scrutamini ſcripturas: Searche your ſcriptures, for they
beare witnes of me. Secondly this was done & ſpoken to ſhewe
theyr incōſtancy or inſtabilitie in good werkes, for they paſſyng
by: do leaue or do not continue in good werkes before god / as in
meditacyon / prayers / werkes of charitie for the pure loue of god,
and ſo they pray not to god that he wolde lyghten theyr vnderſtandyng / 
that they myght fynde the founten of truth, & thoughe
for a lytyll tyme they pray: yet they do not continue / for they be
pretereuntes / that is paſſyng by and not abydynge in any goodnes.
And thyrdly they ſhewe herby that they receyue not the prophet
of his redemption, for they paſſe by hym whome they haue
crucifyed, ſo that nother they haue compaſſyon of Chriſtes paynes
and paſſyon, nor yet wyll take parte of the fruyte of our redemption
which we haue by Chriſtes paſſyon for they abyde not
with hym / but paſſe by mouyng or ſhakynge theyr heades vpon
hym as if they had the palſey or trimblynge in theyr membres.
Theſe .ii. laſt cauſes do morally toche thoſe chriſtians that wyll
not gyue them to prayer & to good werkes, wherby they mighte
obteyne the knowledge and the loue of god, and alſo thoſe that
wyll not remember the paſſyon of Chriſte and therfore leeſe the
fruyte therof, for they paſſe by without fruyte / mouynge theyr
heades and ſaynge:Mat. 27. E 
                  Vah qui deſtruis tēplum dei et in triduo reedificas
illud: ſalua temetipſum: Vah is an interiection of diſpleaſur
or of deriſyon and vpbraydynge, as they myght ſaye: A ſtrawe
for the that wyll deſtroy the temple / and in thre dayes buylde it
agayne, theſe foliſſhe people vſed or ſpake the ſame wordes that
thoſe falſe witnes ſpake before in Cayphas houſe.Artic
                        ••
                     . 13. O ſayde they
ſcornynge Chriſt, if thou coulde do that (that is deſtroy the temple
and buylde it agayne in .iii. dayes) why doſte not thou ſaue
thy ſelfe / if thou be the ſonne of god deſcende from the croſſe and
ſaue thy ſelfe. And not onely thoſe that paſſed by dyd thus blaſpheme
Chriſt: but alſo the princes of the preſtes mockynge hym

                   with the ſcribes and ſeniours dyd ſay: Alios ſaluos 
                        •
                     ecit: ſeipſum
non poteſt ſaluum facere:
                  Mat. 27. E And this is the ſeconde illuſion of this
article / and the .vi. in order, theſe princes and ſeniours ſayde / he
ſaued other: but he can not ſaue hym ſelfe. And in theſe wordes
(as ſaynt Bede ſayth) they confeſſe (thoughe they dyd not ſo intende)
that Chriſte ſaued other,Suꝑ Mar. 15. and ſo theyr owne ſentence condempned
them, for if he ſaued other: he mighte alſo haue ſaued
hym ſelfe if it had pleaſed hym. The ſeniours ſayd farther Si rex
iſrael eſt: deſcendat nunc de cruce: et credimus ei: If he be the kyng
of Iſraell let hym deſcende from the croſſe where as he is faſt nayled / 
and then we wyll beleue to hym. To theſe foliſſhe and blaſphemous
wordes (as holy pope Leo ſaith) all the elementes and
in a maner all creatures make anſwere and with one ſentēce condempne
you,Ser de paſſiōe domini for heuen / erth / the ſonne / the mone / the ſterres declaryng
you to be vnworthy theyr miniſtery and ſeruyce do ſhew
to all the worlde your malicyous blyndnes that wold not knowe
your creatour and kynge, and that they ſhewed (I ſay) by a terrible
and ferefull erthquayke, and by the eclipſe of the ſonne contrarie
to the order of nature, and with many other merueyles as
we ſhall ſhewe herafter in the thyrde parte.In prīcipio Morouer the ſcribes
ſayd: Si filius dei es: deſcende de cruce: If thou be the ſon of god
deſcende from the croſſe. I ſay to you / ye ſhulde haue ſayde thus
bycauſe thou arte the ſonne of god: therfore thou wylte not deſcende
from the croſſe / for thou was incarnate and toke our nature,
for that thou woldeſt be crucified and ſuffer deth for vs, for
no pro
                     •
                  et it ſhulde haue ben to vs to be borne: except alſo we had
bene redemed (Ye ſayd
                     •
                  )Mat. 27. E If he be the kynge of Iſraell: let hym
deſcende and we wyll beleue to hym. Ye lye: ye thoughte not as
ye ſayd. And herunto ſaynt Gregorie ſayth. O folyſſhe blynde
companey of preeſtes and lerned men, was it impoſſible to hym
to deſcende from a lytyll or lawe tree: whiche deſcended frome
the heyght of heuens / or frome aboue them? May thoſe nayles
holde hym faſt whome the heuyns coulde not holde? he came not
to delyuer hym ſelfe for he was not vnder any bondage: but of
his owne fre wyll: to delyuer vs from bondage. Alſo by theyr
wordes ye may perceyue whoſe chyldern they be, for they folowe
the voyce of theyr father the deuyll / he ſayd:Math. 4. A 
                  Si filius dei es mitte
te deorſum: If thou be the ſonne of god: caſt thy ſelfe downe, the
Iues do ſaye: If thou be the ſonne of god deſcende frome the
croſſe, he roſe from his ſepulcre or graue which was moch more
than to deſcende frome the croſſe, why dyd not they then beleue

in hym, but ye maye perceyue they thoughte not as they ſayde.
Not onely they dyd mocke Chryſte: but alſo the ſaugiours dyd
mocke Chriſte / ſaynge:Luc. 23. F. 
                  Si tu es rex iudeorum ſaluum te 
                        •
                     ac: If
thou be the kynge of the Iues: ſaue thy ſelfe. And this is the
thyrde rebube of this article / and the .vii. in order. But thys 
illuſyon of the ſaugiours was of no hatred or malice agaynſte
Chriſte: but of an euyll cuſtome that ſuche perſones done vſe
to rebuke or ſcorne the perſones condempned to deathe / yet we
maye ſuppoſe / that this illuſyon was to pleaſe the Iues, for the
ſaugiours ſeynge that the Iues mocked Chryſte: they thoughte
alſo that by theyr mockynge: they ſhulde pleaſe thoſe Iues. And
therfore they ſayde, ſaue thy ſelfe: if thou haue that vertue and
power that thou haſte ſpoken of thy ſelfe / for thou dyd ſaye / that
thou wold buylde the temple agayne in thre dayes / and that thou
wolde ryſe agayne after thy deathe. If thou haue ſuche power:
nowe ſaue thy ſelfe. And note heare that there ware foure
maner of perſones that dyd mocke Chriſte. Firſte / they that
paſſed by / as men rydynge or goynge by the waye / whiche dyd
blaſpheme hym. Seconde ware the preeſtes and ſenyours
that ſtode there abydynge hys crucifyenge. The thyrde ware
the ſaugiours that ſatte there to keape Chryſte that he ſhulde not
eſcape, and that no man ſhulde put hym of the croſſe, vnto the
tyme that he ware deade. And the fourthe was of the theues
that ware hanged with hym. By theſe foure ar ſignyfyed .iiii.
maner of Chriſtians / that call theym ſelfe Chriſtyans: but they
folowe not the lyfe and wyll of our ſauyoure Chryſte, by the
perſons that paſſed by: ar noted couetouſe men / that folowe and
loue the tranſitorye gooddes of this worlde / and paſſe by the
waye of Iuſtyce / for they kepe it not, by the preeſtes and ſenyours
ſtandynge: ar ſignifyed prowde and hyghe mynded men
whiche ſtande verye prowdlye in theyr owne conceyte by the
appetyte and by the deſyre of theyr owne excellencye. By the
ſaugyours that dyd ſytte / are ſignifyed dylycate and ſlouthfull
perſones gyuen all to the luſt and pleaſure of the wretched
bodye. And by the theuys hyngynge: arre noted impacyente
perſones / and ſuche other as grudge in aduerſitye. But
Chryſte as moſte pacyente and of hys owne naturall goodnes
and myldenes / wolde not anſwere one worde to all theſe blaſphemyes:
but he prayed for theym. And hereunto ſaynt Gregorye
ſayth. This is the propertye of good men, that when they

ſuffer any wronge: they be not moued to wrathe: but rather to
prayer. As ſo was our moſt mylde ſauyour Ieſus, which then
ſpake his firſte worde, that he ſpake vpon the croſſe, and that
was this:Luc. 23. E. 
                  Pater ignoſce illis: quia neſciunt quid faciunt. Father / 
forgyue them, for they knowe not what they do. In this
prayer we be taughte to heare ſhortelye ſuche perſones as aſke any
thynge of vs, alſo to remitte the iniuries and wronges done
to vs, and to deſire no vengeance, and alſo to loue our enemyes
and pray for theym. who hathe ſo harde a harte that wyll not
melte and be made ſofte at this prayer of Chriſte, as the prophet
ſaythe:Pſal. 94. 
                  Hodie ſi vocem eius audieritis nolite obdurare corda veſ
tra: If ye here this day the voyce of god: ſuffer not your hertes
to be indurate or obſtinate. Our lorde ſayde: Father forgyue
them: for they knowe not what they do, for they do moche good
and profytte to me, and greate hurte and euyll to theym ſelfe.
And truelye ſo it is: For he that doth wronge or euyll vnto an other
man: he knowethe not what ſynne and payne he getteth to
hym ſelfe, and what grace and glorie he opteyneth to the perſone
that pacyentlye and gladlye ſuffrethe wronge. Or els they do
not knowe what they do, for they knowe not that I am the ſonne
of god, they knowe that they crucifye one: but whome they crucifye:Suꝑ. Lucā capi. x C.
they knowe not. And here ſaythe ſaynte Bede, that
Chriſte dyd not praye for theym that knewe hym to be the ſonne
of god, and of malyce / pryde / and enuye / dyd crucifye hym:
but he prayed for theym, whiche hauynge a goodde zele of the
lawe of almyghtye god / thowghe it were not wele ordred, dyd
not knowe what they dyd. For there ware ſomme ſymple
and alſo vnlerned perſones, deceyued by the preeſtes of the Iuwes,
the whiche perſewed Chryſte of a zele that they hadde
to the ſame lawe, and for thyeſe he dydde praye, And that
ſame prayer was not in vayne, For in one daye after the aſcencyon
of oure ſauyoure Chryſte there ware conuerted of them
thre thowſande.Actuū. 2. G et. 4. A. and in an other daye, fyue thowſande. And
no dowte that was by the vertue of this prayer of our lorde Ieſu
Chriſte,Eſae. 53. D as the ordinarye gloſe ſaythe vpon this texte of Eſaie:
Et pro tranſgreſſoribus orauit: He dyd praye for his enemyes
and tranſgreſſoures of his lawe. O howe ſwete a melodye
was bytwixte the prayer of our lorde Ieſu Chriſte, and
the knockynge or ſmytynge in of the nayles in to his handes

and fete, thorowe the whiche armony ſo many thowſandes ware
conuerted to Chriſte? And that was no meruell, for Chriſte kepynge
ſo greate myldnes and meakenes in his contumelyes and
rebukes / hauynge ſo great pacyence in his tormentes, and alſo
ſhewynge ſo great benignitie and charitie to his crucifyers: dyd
euidently declare hym ſelfe to be the ſonne of god the father to
whome he prayed for his crucifyers, what miracle can be more
then this charitable pitye.
               
                  ¶A Contemplation of this prayer of Chriſte.
Pater ignoſce illis: Father
forgyue them.
                  
                     THis prayer was a worde of greate pacyence / a ſigne
of great loue and vnſpeakeable goodnes / of greate
ſwetenes and forgyuenes. In this prayer do apere
thre actes or werkes of charitie. Firſte for that he
prayed moſt affectuouſlye for his crucifyers. Seconde,
for to his prayer he added and put to teares / for he wepte.
Thyrde he offred his prayers for them: with great ſheddynge of
teares / and alſo a myghtye or great voyce or crye. Of this prayer
ſaynt Bernarde ſayth:In ſer▪ fer̄. 4. ebdo pen̄
                        
                      Chriſt ſcourged with whippes / crowned
with thornes / crucifyed and nayled with greate groſſe nayles / 
fylled with rebukes / forgettynge all theſe ſorowes / ſayde:
Father forgyue them. Frome this charitable lorde cometh great
mercy to our bodyes and moche more to our ſoules. O good Ieſu
howe moche is thy mercye ſtablyſſhed vpon wicked men. And
howe greate is the multitude of the ſwetenes of thy mercy, for
thou ſhalte make vs that feruently deſire the to drinke of the plentuous
ryuer of thy ſwetenes and pleaſure. Alſo the ſame ſaynte
Bernarde ſayth:In ſerm̄ de paſſion̄ dn̄i. who and of what kynde is that perſon which
in all his tribulations and tormentes wolde not ones open hys
mouthe to compleyne or to excuſe hym ſelfe / to threat or to curſe
his cruell aduerſaryes? and aboue all this: at laſt he opened hys
mouthe and ſpake for his enemyes a bleſſed worde / ſuche a word
as hathe not ben harde frome the begynnynge of the worlde, that
is: Father forgyue them. O my ſoule haſte thou euer ſene any
man ſo myld / ſo pacyent / ſo charytable? Conſider what quietnes
pacyence and charitie was hyd in that moſt ſwete breſt and hart
he wolde not ſhewe his iniuries / he regarded not his paynes

he wolde not ſpeake of his rebukes: but he had compaſſyon of
theym: of whome he ſuffred theſe thynges / he cured theym that
wounded hym, he procured life for them that ſlewe hym / and ſaid
Father forgyue them. O my ſoule hyde or put vp this moſt ſwete
worde of Chriſt in the treaſor of thy hert, that as o
                        •
                     te as thy enemyes
be cruell agaynſt the: thou mayſt remembre the abundance
of this ſwetenes of bleſſed Ieſu, and ſo to lay or put this worde
and prayer of Ieſu as a ſhelde for thy defence agaynſt the aſſaultes
of thyne enemyes, thy ſpouſe and lorde Ieſus doth praye for
his crucifyers: ſhalt not thou pray for thy detractours? let vs yet
repete this prayer, father (ſayth Ieſus) forgyue them. what
name is this father? It is a name of naturall loue. Chylderne
when they wolde haue any thynge or greatly deſyre a thyng / they
be wont to name theyr father, to reduce vnto his mynde the naturall
loue that fathers haue vnto theyr chylderne, that therby they
myght the more ſhortly haue theyr deſyre. So our ſauyour Ieſus / 
pitious and mercifull / pacyence and of moche compaſſion / 
good and louynge to all perſons / though he knewe that he was
euer harde in his peticyons to his father: yet to ſhewe vnto vs
with howe great affeccyon and deſyre we ſhulde pray for our enemyes:
in his prayer he put that name of loue / Father, as if he
ſhulde ſay: I beſeche the for thy fatherly loue: in whiche loue we
be one, to here my prayer and to forgyue them that crucifye me.
Knowe the loue of thy ſonne: that thou mayſt forgyue myne enemyes.Suꝑ Mat. 27.
Alſo ſaynt Hierome ſayth: Al theſe illuſyons and ſcornes
or mockynges ware done to Chriſte by the mocyon of the deules / 
whiche an one as Chriſt was crucifyed they beganne to perceyue
and feele the vertue of the croſſe / and ſo thought that they ſhulde
leſe theyr greate power, and therfore they laboured inſtantelye:
that Chriſte ſhulde deſcende downe from the croſſe. But Ieſus
knowynge theyr falſhed and crafte: wolde continue vpon the
croſſe vnto his death, that therby he myghte deſtroye death and
ſubdue the deuyll. O moſte gentyll Ieſu / howe greate was
here thy pacyence.
               
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may lerne / that when we be in depe contemplation:
in good operation or els in religion / we ſhuld
not deſcende or leaue them / for any rebukynges / mockynges / 

or ſcornynges of any perſons, but continue and pacyently beare
ſuche deſpyſynges for the loue of Chriſte: as Chriſt for our loue
dyd pacyently beare all the forſayd rebukes, and for our example
wolde not deſcende from the croſſe: but there continued vnto his
deth,Iudic. 9. B and this was figured in the boke of iudges. where as the
vyne tre ſayd vnto the other trees (that wolde haue had the vyne
to come to them and to haue ben theyr kynge: Nunquid poſſum de
ſerere vinum meum quod letificat deum et homines. &c. It is conuenient
for me to forſake my wyne that conforteth both god & men,
and come to you to be your kynge? Nay I wyll not. In lyke maner
ſayd the olyue tree and the figge tree. So our very true vyne
tree (that ſayth) Ego ſum vitis vera:
                     Ioh. 15. A. I am a true vyne tree, wold
not leaue the fruyte of his paſſion that gladdeth both god / angel
and man, and come of the croſſe to be promoted amongꝭ ye Iues.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me crucifyed wolde be mocked and deſpyſed
with many rebukefull wordes and yet wolde ſo charitably
pray for thy crucifiers: make me that I neuer deſcend from
my religyon or any good werke, for no ſuggeſtion of the deuyll
or deſpyſynges of man, but that I may continually perſeuer in
thy loue / and that I may for thy loue forgyue all them that do or
ſaye any euyll to me or agaynſte me, and that I maye euermore
praye hertely for them. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the thefe of the lefte hande rebuked Chriſte.
The .lvii. article.
               
                  THe .lvii. article is the rebukynge that the thefe ſpake to
Chriſte, for one of the theues that were hanged with
Chriſt / that is he on the left ſyde of Chriſt, began to rebuke
Chriſt ſayng:Luce. 23. F. 
                  Si tu es xp̄s ſalua temetipſum et nos.
If thou be Chriſte the ſonne of god: ſaue thy ſelfe and alſo vs.
This was the .viii. mockynge of the whiche we ſpake in the laſt
article, and this was more rebuke to Chriſte than the other thre
declared in the laſte article, bycauſe ſo vyle a perſone, wretched
and condempned to deth and furthwith ſhulde ſuffer deth for his
owne ſynnes and myſlyuynge, wold thus ſo ſhamefully rebuke
the auctor of lyfe. And therfore this rebuke is cōueniently made
a ſpecial article. But the other thefe hering hym ſpeake ſo loudly:

dyd ſharply blame hym ſaynge:Luc. 23. F. 
                  Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tu times deum qui in eadem
dampnatione es. &c. Doſt not thou feare god / that arte condempned
to deth as well as he is, and we be worthely and iuſtlye condempned
to deth, for we ſuffer worthy paines for our ſinnes: but
he neuer dyd euyll.Ser. C. xx. de tempore. Of this ſaynge ſaynt Auſten merueylynge
ſayth: who taught this thefe to ſay thus: but he the ſonne of god
that hange by hym / Chriſte was hanged nyghe to this thefe:
but he was more nyghe in his herte,Ibidem. and therfore he turned hym
ſelfe to Ieſus and ſayd: Memento mei domine dum veneris in regnum
tuum: Remember me lorde when thou ſhalte come in to thy
kyngdome, and then Ieſus ſpake his ſeconde worde vpon the
croſſe ſayng: Amen dico tibi: Hodie mecum eris in paradiſo: Trulye
I ſaye to the: this daye thou ſhalte be with me in my glorie.
This confortable promiſſe Chriſte made vnto the thefe, to reioyſe
of the triumphe & victorie that Chriſte ſhuld haue agaynſt
the deuyl.Thōs in cathen̄ ſuꝑ luce. cap
                        •
                     . 23. And herunto Theophilus ſaith: As a victorious kyng
retournynge from his triumphe: doth brynge with hym the beſt
of ſuche prey and goodes as he hathe gotten of his enemyes: ſo
Chriſte ouercommynge the deuyll: dyd ſpoyle hym of his beſte
preys, and one of them / that is / this thefe he brought with hym
vnto paradiſe: that is to the viſion and fruition of god / whiche
fruition the holye fathers beynge in Lymbo patrum / had: what
tyme the ſoule of Chriſt deſcended to them after his deth / for then
they dyd ſe the godhed of Chriſt, which was neuer ſeparate from
the ſoule: after that it was firſt ioyned therunto. Here thou ſoule
beholde howe liberall / yea howe prodigall Chriſte was here,
for he gaue his kyngdome to a thefe / heuen to one that was hanged
vpon a croſſe, and paradiſe to one condempned to deth, and
that at one ſhorte or lytyll peticyon. Alſo the liberalitie of god
dyd gyue to hym more then he aſked / and ſo is he comonly wont
to do. And herin all ſynners haue an example to truſt in god / and
to forſake theyr ſynnes, ſeyng that the thefe ſo breuelye and ſhortly
had forgyuenes of his ſynnes, for ſurely his grace is more redy
then our deſyre or prayer. O good lorde thou dyd ſay vnto the
thefe: This day thou ſhalte be with me in paradiſe, & that was
to put diſparacyon frome our hertes, thou forgaue the thefe: to
ſhewe to vs the fruyte of penaunce / the fountayne of mercy / and
the celeritie or ſpede of forgyuenes. Thou the phiſitien of oure
ſoules, dyd ſaue the thefe accuſynge hym ſelfe and accuſyng the,
callynge for mercy and rebukyng his felowe that blaſphemed the
wherfore thou penitent ſynner / conſider what Chriſte ryſynge

from deth and reignynge in glorie maye gyue vnto the: whiche
gaue ſo great gyftes beynge mortal and goynge to his death? If
he in that extreme captiuitie and thraldome of deth / dyd gyue ſo
large rewardes: what ſhall he gyue: beynge in moſte hygh lybertie
of pleaſure and glorie? And to ſhewe that he wolde do in dede
that he promiſed: he cōfirmed it with an oth ſayng: Amen. truly.
O what vertue and ſwetenes had this floure or worde of Chriſt.
               
                  ¶A contemplation of this ſeconde worde ſpoken by
Chriſte vpon the croſſe. Amen dico tibi. &c.
                  
                     THis moſte confortable worde of our moſt ſwete ſauyour
Ieſu ſpoken vnto the thefe, that is truly this
day thou ſhalte be with me in paradiſe / was of that
vertue / that therby the thefe was forthwith of an
enemie: made a frende / a familier or neyghbour:
of a ſtraunger, where before he was a thefe: he was nowe made
an holye confeſſour of Chriſte. who is he that wyll diſpeyre of
ſo pitious and a gracyous harte, ſo ſwifte a promiſer / and ſo
prompte or redy a gyuer. O good lorde we truſt in the that know
thy name Ieſus, for thou doſt not forſake them that truſt in the
and labour for thy grace. wherfore a moſt benigne Ieſu / we com
to the ſyttynge in the trone of thy maieſtie / with as good a mynde
as we can, humbly beſechynge the that we may be brought in to
the / and by the / vnto that glorie, to the whiche thou brought in
that thefe that confeſſed the vpon the croſſe. But thou ſynner / 
differ not thy conuerſion and penaunce vnto the houre of death / 
truſtynge then to opteyne heuen as this thefe dyd, for though it
be a good and holſome counſell at all tymes to truſt in the greate
mercy of god: yet that a man ſhulde onely truſt therof and not to
be ſory for his ſynnes and labour to amende hym ſelf by penance:
it is a great folyſſhnes and a preſumption, for god is not onelye
mercifull: but alſo iuſt and rightuous. And thoughe this good
thefe and ſome other perſons haue had forgyunes of theyr ſynnes
at theyr laſte ende: yet I ſaye to you that the preuilege of a fewe
perſons: maketh no comen lawe. And ſurely there be very fewe
that be truely penitent at theyr death, when theyr lyfe hath bene
continuallye euyll before, for as it were a monſtruous and merueylous
thynge to ſe a wulfe haue a ſhepes tayle: ſo it is ſeldom
ſene that an euyll lyfe hath a good and holy ende. But of this holy
thefe, we rede that he hadde .iiii. thynges, for the whiche he

opteyned mercy of god. The firſte was that he rebuked his felowe
that blaſphemed Chriſt ſaynge:Luc. 23. F. 
                     Neque tu times deum: Nor
thou doſt feare god. The ſeconde is that he accuſed hym ſelfe ſaynge
we be worthely puniſſhed for our ſynnes. Thyrde / he excuſed
Chriſte ſaynge: This iuſte and good man neuer dyd euyll,
forth: he aſked forgyuenes / ſaynge: Remember me good lorde
when thou ſhall come into thy kyngdome. Of this thefe alſo ſaīt
Gregorie ſaythe:Li. 18. moraliū. ca 25. B There was no thynge in this thefe, at his
awne libertie: but only his tonge and his hert. And he (by ye inſpiration
of god) offered to god all that he had in his liberty and
power to gyue, yt was his hert / wherwith de dyd beleue faithfully
in god to his own iuſtification. and his mouth: wherwith he
dyd confeſſe Chriſt to be god by the ſame fayth, and that was to
his eternal health. He had fayth: for he beleued that Chriſt ſhuld
reigne in glorie as god▪ he had hope: for he truſted and deſyred
or aſked to come to the ſame glorye. He hadde charitye to god
for he defended and magnified Chriſt the ſonne of god, he hadde
charitie to man: for he rebuked his felowe for his iniquitie and
blaſphemye. And alſo he procured grace and lyfe eternal for hym
ſelfe. where ſhall we fynde one that thus doth profyte at the ende
of his lyfe. Beholde here the greate fayth of this thefe / whiche
dyd beleue Chriſte to be god and to reigne eternally: whome he
ſe there dye ſo ſhamefully and miſerably.Ser. C. xxx de tempore. I
                           •
                         ſer. Cxx. And herunto ſaynt Auſten
ſayth: This holy thefe had a great fayth, for nother for feare
of the Iues or ſaugiours there ſtandynge, nor for his awne greuous
paynes / nor for the blaſphemye of the other thefe / nor for
the departynge of the apoſtles from Chriſte, or the denyenge of
Peter, nor yet for that it ſeamed to all men that Chriſte was a
frayle and diſparate perſon not able to helpe hym ſelfe for al theſe
thynges (I ſay) he wolde not let to confeſſe the truth and ſo to
declare his fayth, and therfore he had not onely the remiſſyon of
his ſynnes: but alſo of al paynes due for his ſynnes, for as it appered:
he was more ſory of the payne and paſſion of Chriſt: than
of his owne paſſion, which he knew that he had deſerued. wherfore
I wolde that euery ſynner wolde do as that good thefe dyd,
that is: to knowe hym ſelfe charitably to correct his neyghbour,
to aſke forgyuenes of god, and by his faithful prayers to opteine
euerlaſtyng helth. O thou olde Adam returne ſomtyme to thyne
awne harte / and conſider howe the newe Adam Chriſt dyd ſerch
for the, and where he founde the that is vpon the croſſe. who
was this theſe but Adam, not nowe a thefe: but an holye martyr

and confeſſour of Chriſte / whiche tourned the neceſſitie of hys
deathe into good wyll and vertue, he chaunged his payne in to
glorie / his croſſe and deth into triumphe and victorie wherfore
thou ſynfull ſoule: nowe areyſe vp thy ſelfe in to hope and truſte
of forgyuenes, if ſo be that thou wylte labour to folowe the ſteppes
and example of thy lorde that ſuffred for the.
               
               
                  ¶Here folowe .iii. Leſſons.
                  IN this article we may lerne .iii. leſſons: Firſte is to beare 
pacyently the rebukes of other perſones / thoughe they be
vy
                        •
                     e perſons, for ſo Chriſt bare the blaſphemous thefe. Second 
is / that we ſuffer not the iniuries of god at any tyme but ſharply
to rebuke them: as the good thefe dyd. Thyrde that we neuer 
diſpeyre of the mercy of god / thoughe our ſynnes be neuer ſo greuous / 
or that we haue lyen in them al our lyfe tyme, by the example
of this holy thefe,Ser. C. xxx de tempore. whiche for one worde: was made the enheritoure
of paradiſe, as ſaynt Auſten ſayth.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu which forme wold be ſcornfully rebuked of one thefe
and of the other wolde be honorablye confeſſed to be god:
make me for the glorie of thy name to ſuffer pacyently the rebukꝭ
of euyll perſons when nede requireth, and neuer to ſuffer thy iniuries,
and alſo to poſſeſſe the ioyes of paradiſe with this holye
thefe. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the paſſion that Chriſte had vpon his
mothers ſorowe and heuynes
The .lviii. article.
               
                  THe .lviii. article is the compaſſyon of his mothers ſorowe.
For when Ieſus beynge vpon the croſſe: ſe hys
mother ſtandynge by the croſſe in great ſorowe: he had
great heuynes therof, he ſe his mother (I ſaye) a mother / 
a virgine ſinguler aboue all other mothers / a meake mother
louynge her ſonne, aboue the loue of all other mothers to
theyr ſonnes, and no meruell for ſhe was the mother of god / of
the onely ſonne of god, and therfore ſhe had more ſorowe for the
paſſyon of her ſonne: than all other mothers can haue for theyr

ſonnes, for at his paſſion / the ſwerde of ſorowe dyd runne thorowe
the ſoule of that moſt bleſſed virgyne and mother. O holy
virgine what vehemence of compaſſion and ſorowe dyd almyghty
god lay vpon the and ſo oppreſſe the with heuynes, he made
the ioyfull and delyuered the frome all anguyſſhe and ſorowe
at the virgynall chyldynge or byrthe of thy moſte ſwete ſonne
Ieſus: but nowe he payed the for both / for nowe he put vpon the
all the thrawes and ſorowes of a woman trauelynge with chyld.
And when thou dyd brynge forth thy ſonne / god and man: thou
had great ioye, but nowe when the bleſſed fruyte of thy wombe
was in thy ſight / crucifyed and ſlayne: then was thy ſorow fare
aboue all the paynes and ſorowes of a woman chyldynge. In ſo
moche that thou myght wele ſay that olde Noemy ſayde:Ruth. 1. D. 
                  Nolite
me vocare Noemi: ſed Mara, quia amaritudine valde me repleuit
omnipotens. Call not me Noemy / that is fayre and pleaſant: but
call me Mara / that is bittter or ſorowfull: for almyghtye god
hath fulfylled me with bitternes and ſorowe. For this bleſſed
virgyne and mother of god, conſiderynge and depely weaynge
in her herte all the paynes and paſſion of her ſonne Chriſt / morned
with hym mornyng, ſorowed with hym ſorowyng, ſhe ſtode
nyghe vnto the croſſe, that he myghte be all hole fixed to her in
her herte that was fixed for her vpon the croſſe. This ſorowfull
and louynge mother when Chriſte dyd ſe: he was moued with
great compaſſion vpon her, ſhe had compaſſyon of his paſſyon / 
and he agayne had more ſorowe for compaſſion of her ſorowe.
So bleſſed lady thy ſonne ſhotte at the the ſame arowe or darte
of loue: that thou dyd ſhote at hym, and therfore he ſayth in his
canticles:Cant. 4. C. 
                  Vulneraſti cor meū ſoror mea in vno contuitu oculorum
tuorum: Thou haſt wounded my herte: O my ſyſter / my ſpouſe / 
my doughter and my mother / thou haſte wounded my hert in the
ſight of thyne eyen. And ſhe in lyke maner myght ſay the ſame
to her ſonne. Chriſte knewe wele the great ſorowes of his mothers
hert, he knewe the heuines of her ſoule, and thoſe ſorowes
whiche ſhe felte not at his birth: they were nowe doubled to her
in his paſſyon and deth, for her ſonne in lyke maner ſuffred double
ſorowe vpon the croſſe / that is: for his awne paſſion and alſo
for compaſſion of his mother. And this ſorowe for his mother:
was not his leſte ſorowe, and therfore cōueniently it is aſſigned
as a ſpecyall article of the paſſion of Chriſte, for the compaſſion
of his mother dyd greatly encreaſe the paynes of his woundes
and paſſyon, whome he dyd ſe ſtande nigh the croſſe with a moſt

ſorowfull, with weapynge eyen / great abundance of teares flowynge
frome her eyen / with a moſt heuy countenaunce / with a
lamentable voyce and in all the powers and ſtrengthes of her bodye:
fayntynge for great ſorowe and heuynes. Yet for all theſe
panges: he ſe her ſtande conſtantlye and perſeuerantlye / and
alſo ſtrongly lyke a man neuer flyenge from hym. O howe ofte
(ſuppoſe you) dyd that blyſſed vyrgyne ſighe and ſobbe / ſaynge
in her ſelfe. O my ſonne Ieſus: who maye graunte to me
that fauour that I myght dye for the / or with the. O my ſwete
ſonne Ieſu. &c. as ye ſhal ſe herafter in the .lxiiii. article. O how
ofte (thynke you) dyd ſhe lyfte vp her virginall and ſhamefaſte
eyen vnto thoſe cruell woundes of her ſonne, if at any tyme ſhe
withdrewe them frome the ſight of thoſe woundes, or els if ſhe
myght beholde them for her continuall weapynge. O howe ofte
tymes (beleue you) myghte ſhe haue ſwoned for the vehemence
of her ſorowes / for ſhe ſuffred more cruell ſorowes and panges:
than the panges of deth, and ſo ſhe lyuynge: continuallye was
in dyenge / and yet coulde not dye, for ſhe was preſerued by her
ſonne that ſhe ſhulde not dye for his deth. And thus Chriſt when
he ſe his mother and his diſciple whome he loued ſtandynge / that
is: Iohan the euangeliſt, commended or aſſigned his mother
to his diſciple Iohan ſaynge his thyrde that he ſpake vpon the
croſſe:Ioh. 19. E. 
                  Mulier ecce filius tuus: woman beholde there thy ſonne.
who may heare Chriſt ſpeake theſe wordes without weapynge.
He dyd not name her or cal her mother: for that ſhuld haue moch
more greuouſlye tormented her, after this Chriſte ſayde to hys
diſciple Iohan: Ecce mater tua: Beholde there thy mother. And
when he ſpake theſe fewe wordes: both thoſe .ii. derbeloued / that
is: Marie and Iohan wepe full bitterly / thoſe .ii. holy martirs
kepte ſilence / for theyr ſorowe was ſo greate that they could not
ſpeake. And from that houre forward: this diſciple Iohan toke
Marie as his mother: or els he toke her in to his cure and diligence / 
to prouyde for her in all thynges as for his mother. This
thyrde worde or ſentence of Chriſte: Mulier ecce filius tuus: woman
beholde thy ſonne (this I ſay) was a worde of great dilygence / 
loue and pitie, for as moche as Chriſte beyng in ſo great
anguiſſhe and ſorowes of death / wolde yet remembre his moſte
heuy and ſorowfull mother, and prouyde her of a ſonne or minyſter
to attende vpon her to her comforth. And herin he taught vs
to haue compaſſyon of the afflyccyon of our parentes / and to prouyde
for them in theyr neceſſities. O ſwete lorde Ieſu thy croſſe

and paſſion doth torment the greuouſly / but the compaſſyon of
the mothers ſorowe, is no leſſe payne to the, and no meruell / O
good chylde if thou ſorowe / if thou ſuffer and haue compaſſyon
of the heuynes of thy mother, of her ſeparation from the, of her
commendation to a ſtraunger.In meditationibꝰ vite x
                        •
                     i cap. 79. And here doctours done ſay / and
ſpecyally Bonauenture: that the ſorowe that Chriſte had in the
compaſſyon of his mother / was more intenſe and more greuous
to hym: then the ſorowe of hys awne payne and paſſyon.
               THe mother of Ieſu ſtode by the croſſe / She ſtode for ſhe
neuer fell by ſynne / ſhe ſtode to the great glory and prayſe
of al women, where as his diſcyples that ſhulde haue ben men of
goſtly ſtrengthe & vertue / dyd flye awaye and leaue theyr maiſter
alone. She onely abode with hym conſtantly in all his greuous
panges and paynes / wherin was fulfylled the prophecy of Eſaye
ſayenge in the perſone of Chryſt complaynynge.Eſae. 63. A. 
                  Torcular calcaui
ſolus et de gentibus non eſt vir mecum: I onely haue troden in
the preaſe of the croſſe / & there was nat one man with me hauyng
compaſſyon vpon me, but my mother alone ſhe had compaſſyon
and ſtode by me. And nat onely ſhe ſtode bycauſe ſhe dyd nat flye / 
but alſo for that in ſo great heuyneſſe of herte ſhe dyd nothynge
vnſeamyngly or vnreligyouſly but ordred her ſelfe in moſt godlye
behauour without any miſorder in cryenge or curſynge and
ſuche other lyke / thoughe ſhe ſuffred in her herte all thoſe paynes
that her ſonne Ieſus ſuffred in his bodye outwardlye. And
(as we ſayd before) here ſhe felte and ſuffred all the panges that
ſhe eſcaped at the byrth of her ſonne Ieſus. Of theſe .ii. birthes
or chyldynges ſpeaketh the prophet ſaynge:Eſae. 66. C 
                  Ante
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      parturierat:
peperit maſculum: Before Mary the mother of Ieſus hadde any
panges or thrawes / ſhe brought forth her ſonne, ſo that ſhe had
her ſonne without ſorowe, then it foloweth in the prophet: Nun
quid parturiet terra vna die: aut parietur gens ſimul? Shall the
erth brynge forth with payne all her fruyte in one day, or all the
people ſhalbe brought forth or borne in one day? Note wel theſe
ſaynges. Firſte the prophet ſpake of the birth of Chriſte which
was without ſorowe or payne to his mother and with great ioy.
But nowe at her ſeconde chyldynge where as at the paſſyon of
her ſonne Ieſus ſhe brought forth all the electe chylderne of god
at one birth, ſhe had great panges and manyfolde ſorowes. And
here note that this bleſſed mother of mercy dyd helpe or aſſiſt the
father of mercyes in this moſte hyghe werke of mercye, and ſo
with Chriſte dyd regenerate and redeme al mankynde, and this

generation was to the great ſorowe and payne of them both: and
herunto Albert ſayth though Marye dyd beare her ſonne Ieſus
in greate ioye and without all payne: yet after warde whan ſhe
dyd regenerate al the faithful people in faith that was with moch
ſorowe and of this it appereth that Chriſt dyd communicate vnto
his mother this hygh werke of our redemption / for ſhe ſuffred
with hym his paſſyon in her ſoule as we ſayd before. And note
me well here for I do not ſay that our bleſſed lady dyd redeme vs
bycauſe Chriſt of hym ſelfe was inſufficient, for to ſay ſo it ware
hereſye. But I ſay it pleaſed our ſauyour Chriſt to haue his mother
preſent at his paſſyon / and there to ſuffer with hym in ſoule
as he ſuffred in bodye, that ſo conſequently as he is called the father
of mercy: ſo ſhe myght be honored and called the mother of
mercy, and alſo for other conſiderations as foloweth, Firſt that
our redemption might reanſwere vnto the firſt condempnation,
for in our firſte loſſe and perdicyon both Adam and Eue dyd ſyn,
notwithſtandynge, if Adam had not ſynned we had not ben condempned,
and therfore the onely ſynne of Adam was the cauſe
of our perdicyon, but for aſmoche as Eue dyd perſuade / moue
and counſell Adam to ſynne, therfore we ſay that we ware dampned
by oure firſte mother Eue, ſo in lyke maner though we be redemed
by the paſſyon of Chriſt, yet for as moche as oure bleſſed
lady was conſentynge to that paſſyon and alſo ſufferyde it in
her ſoule: we may ſaye that ſhe redemed vs with Chriſte. Secondlye / 
that as Chriſte redemyng vs by his paſſion: was made
our father, by the whiche paſſyon / the ſacrament of baptyſme / 
wherin we be regenerate / taketh his efficacitie and vertue, ſo
our bleſſed ladye myght be called our mother bycauſe ſhe ſuffered
in her ſoule the ſame paſſion of Chriſte. Thirdly that after
Chriſt: we al ſhulde honoure the gloriouſe virgyn as our modre.
Fourthly for the encreaſe of her merite. And fiftly that ye paſſion
of Chriſt ſhuld be more bitter & paynful to him thorough the preſence
of his modre by whom he ſheweth his moſt hyghe charitie
vnto vs. She ſtode alſo for all other departed from the ſtablenes
of fayth but ſhe onely / and therfore it is ſayde of her thus.
O good lorde thou haſte ſtabliſhed thy teſtament vpon
the heede of Marie al waye virgin, for after the
death of thy ſon thy fayth onely remayned
perfetely in the reaſon of the
ſame virgyn.
               
                  
                  ¶Of the ſorowe and compaſſyon
of our ladye.
                  
                     AS the great clerke Alberte ſayth vpon theſe wordes
of Luke:Luc. 2. E. 
                     Tuam ipſius animam pertranſibit gladius.
The ſwerde of ſorowe ſhal paſſe thorowe thyn awne
ſoule. It is the more true expoſition and ſentence
when this pronowne deriuatyue, tuam / is reſolued
in to his primityue, tui / ſo that this is the true ſentence of the forſayd
wordes of Luke, the ſwerde of ſorowe / that is: the payne
of the paſſyon and deth of thy ſonne (O vyrgyne Mary) which
he ſuffred in his bodye: ſhall perſe and paſſe thorowe the ſoule of
thyne awne ſelfe Marie. So that the ſorowes whiche thou felt
not at the birth of thy ſonne, ſo that therby thou dyd not knowe
thy ſelfe a mother: at his deth thou ſhalt fele them in moſte paynfull
and ſorowfull maner, ſo that thou ſhalte knowe thy ſelf then
to haue had a chylde and to be a mother. Our ſauiour Ieſus her
ſonne was to Marie his mother as her awne herte, and therfore
when he was borne of her: ſhe felte as if halfe her herte had bene
borne and departed from her body. And as that thynge whiche
is halfe without and halfe within, if that parte that is outwarde
be pricked or hurte: the parte inwarde doth fele the payne aſwel
as the outwarde parte. And ſo when Ieſus the ſonne of the vyrgyn
was ſcourged and pricked with thornes, the herce of the glorious
virgyn / was in a maner alſo payned and pricked, and ſo in
lyke maner when her ſonne Ieſus was crucifyed and his herte
perſed with a ſpere: it ſeamed to her as if her awne herte hadde
ben perſed with the ſame ſpere. And therfore god wroughte no
ſmall miracle in that that the gloryous virgyn hys mother woū
                     ded
inwardlye in her ſoule with ſo many greuous and greate
ſorowes dyd not yelde vp her ſpiryte and dye, and ſpecyallye
when ſhe ſe her moſte dearebeloued ſonne hangynge bytwixte
two theues / naked / wounded / ſcorned of all men / crucyfyed / 
and deade, and then his herte perſed with a ſpeare: It was (I
ſaye) a greate miracle that ſhe lyued.Pri. Reg. 4. D. For the wyfe of Phinees
the ſonne of Hely / the Iudge of Iſrael hearynge that the arke
of god was taken / ſhe beynge greate with chylde: ſodaynlye
felle to traueyllynge. and for the greate and vehement ſorowe
the whiche that ſhe hadde for the takynge of the arche of god:
ſhe chylded and dyed, and yet her ſorowes and greate paynes

ware no thynge ſo vehement and ſo greate as the ſorowes of the
bleſſed virgyne Mary, nor ware to be compared to the ſorowes
of the mother of Ieſu / whiche dyd ſe the bodye of her ſonne (ſignifyed
by that arche) crucifyed by hys enemyes / and ſo put to
the moſte ſhamefull death / whiche vyrgyne alſo the ſame nyght
after that her ſonne was buryed: goynge thorowe the cytye of
Hieruſalem / weapte ſo bitterlye and pitiouſlye / that all bothe
men and women that ſe and herde her: ware prouoked to ſorowe
and mournynge. Alſo that moſte encreaſed her ſorowes: that
ſhe dydde ſe hym at his deathe, ſo bette / wounded / in greate
thyrſte or dryneſſe / and coulde not helpe hym, and namelye ſo
cruellye racked vpon the croſſe / there nayled / and after his deth
his herte perſed with a ſpeare. Theſe ware her ſorowes / and
aboue thyeſe ſhe was compelled to entre in to an other mannes
houſe, and there to continue in ſorowe and mournynge. And
ſo the mother of god / the quene of heuen / and the ladye of all
the worlde was ſuſteyned with the almes and charitye of other
men. But why wolde oure lorde ſuffer her to haue all theſe tribulacyons?
bycauſe he intended to exalte her after her deathe aboue
all creatures in glorye, whiche excellente / ſingular and vneſtimable
gyfte, he wolde not gyue to her for the merites of any
other perſone (for the rewarde of glorye / ſhalbe gyuen after a
mannes awne merytes and deſeruynges, and not for any other
mannes merytes) And therfore he wolde haue hys bleſſed mother
ſubdued to harde lobours / paygnes / and ſorowes in her
ſelfe, in the moſte hyghe pouertye / in extreme vilytye and deſpection / 
in the moſte profounde mekeneſſe / moſte pure chaſtytye / 
moſte perfyte charitye / and in other lyke vertues and paynes,
and ſpecyally in ſufferynge of paynes and ſorowes (that
ſhe myghte go by the ſame waye / that her dearebeloued ſonne
Ieſus dyd.
               
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we maye lerne to haue compaſſion of the afflyccyon
of our parentes, and to prouyde for them in theyr
neceſſityes accordynglye to the commaundement of god,Exod. xx. B honor
thy father and thy mother: and thys oure ſwete ſauyoure Chryſt
taughte vs by his example.Suꝑ Iohn̄ 
                        
                           •
                        rac. C. xix. And herunto ſaynte Auſten ſayth:
The tree of the croſſe vpon the whiche the mēbres of Chriſt ware

nayled at his deathe, this tree (I ſaye) was alſo a chayre wherin
our doctoure and mayſter Chryſte 
                        〈◊〉
                      and taughte vs. And
a man to conforme hym ſelfe to this article ſhulde haue compaſſyon
of the mother of Chriſte, or as I maye ſaye: of his owne
dearbeloued lady and mother / our bleſſed lady Marie, as Chriſt
hadde compaſſyon on her, and then praye thus.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche for me crucifyed / hauynge compaſſyon of
thy mothers ſorowe and compaſſyon / wolde diligentlye
commende her to thy dearbeloued diſciple Iohan, and alſo commende
hym to her, I commende me vnto the and alſo all myne
in that faythe and loue that thou commendeſte them togyther:
meakelye beſechynge the, that for the tendernes of ſo great loue:
thou woldeſt make me to come truelye and perfytely to thy loue,
and thoroughe theyr prayer and commendacyon I maye be preſerued
and kepte frome all aduerſytye and peryll, in the perylles
and daungers of this worlde and lyfe. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe the manhode of Chryſte compleyned hym
ſelfe to be forſaken of god
The .lix. article.
               
                  THe .lix. article is / when Chryſte ſayde hym ſelfe
to be lefte and alſo forſaken of god.Mat. 27. E As the euangeliſte
ſaythe frome the ſyxte houre of the daye vnto
the neynth houre, that is / frome .xii. of the clocke
vnto thre at after none, there was a greate derkenes
ouer all the erthe, For the ſonne was in an vniuerſall eclypſe,
whiche was agaynſte the naturall diſpoſycyon and order of
the ſonne for that tyme, and therfore it was done by miracle,
and by the onelye power of god.Li. 3. de 
                        •
                     iuitate dei. ca. 15. B. And hereunto ſaynte Auſten
ſaythe for as moche as the innocente lambe Chryſte / the true
ſonne of Iuſtyce dyd ſuffer the eclypſe of deathe, therfore thys
viſible ſonne / the moſte clere lyghte of all the worlde, hauynge
compaſſyon of his creatoure and maker: withdrewe the beames
of his lyght and hyd hym ſelfe / as thoughe he durſt not or wolde

not beholde his maker hyngynge vpon the croſſe, nor ſe his moſt
vyle and bytter death. And then about the .ix. houre of the day
our ſauyour Ieſus cryed with a greate and lowde voyce. And
that was (as Symon de Caſſia ſayth) for he ſuffred greate tormentes
and paynes.Libro. xiii. Alſo for that he ſuffred greate wronge and
iniurie. He cryed with a great voyce of the bodye / but that was
more by the vertue and power of his godhed: than of his manhed.
He cryed with a great voyce for the great paynes that he ſuffred
myght not preuayle agaynſt hym: but at his awne wyll. He
cryed with a great voyce that they myght heare hym and knowe
hym hyngynge vpon the croſſe, and at the poynt of deth: whom
they wolde not heare ſwetely and deuoutly preachynge: but rather
with a froward & obſtinate mynd euer deſpyſed hym. Ieſus
cryed with a great voyce and ſpake his .iiii. word vpon the croſſe
ſaynge:Mat. 27. F 
                  Heli heli lama hazaſtani: Theſe be wordes of Hebrewe
and thus they be ſpoken in latyn: Deus meus deus meus: vt quid
dereliquiſti me? My god my god: wherfore haſte thou left or forſaken
me? Theſe be not the wordes of the godhed of Chriſt: for
that ſuffred no payne it is vnpoſſible, as if the ſonne beame ſhuld
ſhyne vpon a tree, and one perſon toke an ax or hatchet and dyd
kut that tree: the ſonne beame ſhulde in no thynge be hurte therby,
and ſo in lyke maner though the body and manhod of Chriſt
ſuffred great paynes and deth: yet the godhed therin was in nothyng
hurte / ne yet ſuffred any payne, but Chriſt ſpake thus for
his manhod whiche then ſeamed to be forſaken of god / for it was
ſubdued to intollerable paynes and moſt ſhamefull deth. Chriſt
was lefte in great paynes / that therby and for thoſe paynes we
myghte be conforted of god. It was done by a greate miracle
that the glorie whiche was in the hygher porcyon of the ſoule
of Chryſte / dyd not deſcende and redounde in to lawer parte of
the ſoule: but was ſuſpended and letted: ſo that the lawer parte
ſuffred all paynes aſmoche as is poſſible any creature to ſuffer
without death, for it was hollye lefte to it ſelfe without all comforthe,
whiche was not in the holye martirs in theyr martirdom
and deth, for the comforth that they hadde in the hygher porcyon
of theyr ſoule: dyd redownde vnto theyr ſenſes, ſo that theyr martyrdome
and paynes was no greate payne to theym, but with
greate ioye they ſuffred them, as it appereth in the lyues of ſaynt
Laurence / Vincente and many other. But oure ſauyoure
Ieſus hadde none ſuche conſolation in his ſenſes: no helpe of

any perſone, but all lefte to ſuffer what ſo euer was put to hym,
and that to the extremitie. And therfore he compleynethe hym
ſelfe to be forſaken of god / whiche myghte not in dede be lefte of
god / for the godhed was euer ioyned bothe to the ſoule and alſo
to the bodye: but this he ſpake for vs / for he knewe that many of
his electe membres ſhulde come to ſo greate tribulation: that it
ſhuld ſeame to them that they were vtterly forſaken of god. Now
bleſſed be our dearbeloued and moſte mercyfull ſauioure Ieſus,
whiche fyrſt in his awne bodye for vs / and nowe alſo in vs and
with vs it pleaſeth hym to ſuffer our tribulation: for the tribulation
that we ſuffer for iuſtyce and for god, he reputeth it as hys
awne tribulation for he ſaith:Pſal. xC. 
                  Cum ipſo ſum in tribulatione: I am
with the good perſon in his trouble, and that is / that we ſhulde
more ſurelye and faythfully truſte in hym. This payne when he
ſayd hym ſelfe to be forſaken of god: was moſte greuous payne
to hym aboue al the other, for without this leauyng: there ſhuld
haue ben no payne, for who ſo is conſorted by god: there is no
torment that can be paynfull to hym. Chriſte ſayde twyes: My
god, and that was to ſhewe the vehemence of his ſorowe both in
ſoule and in bodye. And herunto ſaynt Bonauenture ſayth. He
cryed with a great voyce for he felte great ſorowe / and ſpecyally
for the great vnkyndnes of man, for though he ſuffred for al man
kynde: yet there were very few preſent there that toke fruyte therof
at that tyme, as the thefe that hange on the ryghte hande / and
the glorious virgyne that was full heuye there by the croſſe, ſo
that our lorde myght wele ſay: why haue I ſo vaynly and with
out fruyte ſubdued my ſelfe to ſo many great paynes and to deth?
O bleſſed lady what ſorowe had thou when thou harde thy ſonne
crye ſo? He cryed alſo with a great voyce / for the ſynne was great
whiche was the cauſe of all that miſerie, thoſe paynes and deth.
For as ſaynt Ambroſe ſaith: He wepte and ſorowed for the ſynne
and miſerie of them: whoſe nature he had taken.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may lerne howe to haue a recourſe to our
lorde in all our tribulations, and by our prayer compleyne
and ſhewe to hym our deſolation / that it wolde pleaſe hym to beholde
our troubles and helpe vs, for ſo our ſauyour Chriſt in his
troubles and ſorowes / cryed vnto god his father / ſaynge: My
god my god why haſt thou forſaken me,Suꝑ pſal. 21. whiche as the gloſe ordinarie

ſayth) was not onely a compleynte: but alſo a prayer, as
it appereth in the pſalme of the whiche theſe wordes be taken / for
there it is ſayd thus:Pſa. 21 iu
                           ••
                         lxx. in
                           •
                        pre
                           •
                        . 
                     Deus deus meus reſpice in me quare. &c. O
god my god beholde me / why haſt thou forſaken me. Alſo ſaynte
Paule ſpeakynge of the prayer of Chriſte:Hebr. 5. B. ſeameth to ſpeake of
this prayer ſaynge: Qui in diebus carnis ſue preces cum clamore
valido et lacrimis offerens: exauditus eſt pro ſua reuerentia: Oure
ſauiour Ieſus in the dayes and tyme of his mortalitie offerynge
prayers to his father with a greate crye and with teares: was
harde for his reuerence.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Lorde Ieſu Chriſte the ſonne of the lyuyng god whiche at
the .ix. houre of the day for me moſt wretched hyngynge vpon
the croſſe / cryed to thy father with a great voyce ſayng: He
li heli lamahazaſtani: That is: My god my god why haſte thou
forſaken me: graunt to me that in all my trouble and anguyſſhe
I may cry to the my lorde god with the greate voyce of my herte
that ſo thou neuer ſuffer me to be reproued / as lefte and forſaken
of thy mercy. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe they gaue hym to drynke: vinegre
or aſell. The .lx. article.
               
                  THe .lx. article is the drynkynge of vineger, for Ieſus after
all the forſayd paynes and labours beynge thurſtye
or drye (for then all that was written of Chryſte in the
lawe of Moyſes or in the prophetes / ware fulfylled,
excepte one / that was writen in the pſalme:Pſal. 68. 
                  In ſiti mea potauerūt
me aceto: In my thyrſte they gaue to me vineger to drynke) therfore
Ieſus to fulfyll all the ſcripture: he ſayde: I am drye. Not
ſo to be vnderſtande, that Ieſus therfore was thirſty / and therfore
they gaue to hym vineger to drynke: bycauſe it was ſo wryten
before by the prophet: but bycauſe god knewe longe before / 
that Chryſte ſhulde be drye, and alſo that the Iues or the ſaugiours
ſhulde gyue hym vineger to drynke, therfore our lord wold
haue it writen by the prophet, and ſo in this thirſt of Chriſt that
ſcripture was fulfylled,Iohan. 19. and ſo in lyke maner vnderſtande all
the other propheties of Chriſt. Chriſte ſayd: Sitio: I thyrſte.
And this was his .v. worde that he ſpake on the croſſe, for after

his longe and continuall labour and payne had all the nyght before
and alſo that ſame day vnto .iii. of the clocke at after none,
alſo for his effuſyon and ſheddynge of ſo moche blode, and for
hangynge ſo longe vpon the croſſe in the heate of the day, it was
no meruell thoughe he ware drye, and of this the prophet alſo
ſayth in the perſon of Chriſte:Pſal. 21. 
                  Aruit tan
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      teſta virtus mea: et lingua
mea adheſit faucibus meis: My vertue or ſtrength of my body
was as dry as a ſhell / and my tonge clyued faſt to my chekes
for drynes, and therfore he myght wele ſaye: Sitio. I thriſt. For
they that be let blode: be more drye then other men, but our ſauyoure
Ieſus was let blode that daye, both in ſcourgyng / beatyng
crownyng with thornes and crucifyeng, beſydes his ſweatyng,
therfore it was no meruell if he were drye. Saynte Bernarde
entreatyng this article ſayth: O good Ieſu why doſt thou crye
and ſay: Sitio. I am thriſty. Doſt not thou knowe that thyne aduerſaryes
wyl miniſtre and gyue vnto the: vinegre for thy drynk
where as thou gaue them drynke in the deſerte when they were
thriſtie?Num̄. xx. B And he anſwereth in the perſon of Chriſte ſaynge: I
thriſte and feruently deſire the conuerſyon of ſynners, the teares
of penaunce / of compunction / of compaſſion / and of inwarde
deuotion. I thyrſt your helth and the redemption of all ſoules.
Therfore that Chriſte dyd here expreſſe his greate drynes / was
not without great miſterie. For he dyd not ſay: I thyrſt, for that
he deſyred any wyne or yet vinegre / whiche he knewe that they
ſhulde gyue to hym. But what drynke (ſuppoſe you) dyd he deſyre,
whiche is the founten of the lyuely and holſome water, the
veyne of lyfe / the ryuer of all pleaſure / the floode wateryng the
heuenly paradiſe. Surely he thriſted and deſyred our helth / that
is: by his thyrſt he deſyred our thirſt, that is / that we ſhulde deſyre
and thyrſt god the well of lyfe. Alſo I thyrſt (ſayth Chriſt
by ſaynt Bernarde) all you that goeth by this way / that ye wold
attende and ſe / if there be any ſorowe lyke vnto my ſorowe / that
by compaſſyon ye myght kut your hertes / for this day my herte
was opened for you. O good Ieſu, thou complayneſt of thy
thyrſte: but thou ſpeakes not of thy croſſe: thou ſuffreſt pacyently
the crowne of thornes, thou forgetteſt all thy moſte greuous
woundes and deſpyſynges, the Iues and the gentylles / they
thirſted thy blode and therfore they crucifyed the / but thou thyrſted
theyr helth / and therfore thou wold dye for them, as if Chriſt
ſhuld ſay the helth of your ſoules doth more tormente me: then
all the paynes of my bodye. But whan Chriſte ſayd: Sitio. I

thriſt, anone they gaue to hym no good nor holſome drynke: but
vinegre, for as the euangeliſt ſayth:Ioh. 
                        •
                     9. F. 
                  Erat ibi vas aceto plenū. &c.
There was a veſſel ful of vinegre, and they fylled a ſponge with
the vinegre / and wonde it aboute with yſope / and faſtened it to
a rede and ſo put it to his mouth. This they dyd firſt / for ther
by was the ſcripture fulfylled that ſayd:Pſalm. 68. In my thirſt they gaue
me vinegre to drynke. Secondly to ſignifye the malice of the
Iues whiche went out of kynde from theyr olde holy fathers / for
as ſaynt Auſten ſayth:Suꝑ Iohn̄ trac. C. xix. C. The Iues ware as vinegre declynynge
frome the good wyne of the patriarkes and prophetes, in to vynegre / 
that is in to malice and crueltye, hauynge craftye / deceytfull
and malicyous hertes. Theſe Iues ware conueniently ſignifyed
by that veſſell full of vinegre / for they were full of iniquitye / 
hauynge theyr hertes lyke to a ſponge full of poores or hooles,
ſo theyr hertes ware full of many falſe deceytes and malycyouſenes.
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we may lerne to beware that we do not offer
vnto Chriſte to drynke bytter wyne or mixte with gall.
For as then the Iues and ſaugiours dyd to Chriſte: ſo do nowe
a dayes euyl chriſtians gyue to Chriſt a bitter drynke: for where
as Chriſte thirſteth and deſyreth the helth of theyr ſoules, they
offer to hym the bytternes of theyr ſynfull lyfe. Tho chriſtians
that beleue wele and werke or lyue euyll: they gyue to Chryſte
wyne mixte with gall, for they mixte the wyne of true fayth with
the mirre or gall of euyll conuerſacyon, in as moche as by theyr
euyll lyfe: they ſclaunder the church and ſpecyally nowe a dayes
euyll prelates, our lorde amend them. This mixtyng of drynke
may be alſo taken in a good ſenſe. As ye ſhall ſe in the prayer folowynge.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche thirſtynge our helth wolde haue vinegre and
wyne mixte with mirre and gall offred and gyuen to the to
drynke: make me worthelye to offer to the the wyne of deuotion
mixte with the mirre of mortifycacyon of my ſenſualytie / and
with the gall of contricyon for my ſynnes, & that I neuer drynke
of the vinegre of infidelitie or of ſclaunder / thoughe I taſte of

any ſclaunder, that is: ſuffer wrongfully any ſclaunder. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶The conſummacyon and end of the paſſyon
of Chriſte. The .lxi. article.
               
                  THe .lxi. article is the end and conſummacyon of the hole
paſſyon. for when Ieſus had taken or taſted of the vynegre.Ioh. 10. F.
He ſpake the .vi. worde vpon the croſſe ſaynge:
Conſummatum eſt: It is done or ended, as it in the taſtynge
of that vinegre the fulnes of his paſſyon and paynes was
conſummate and ended, or els that taſtynge done: all that was
prophecyed of Chriſte that he ſhulde ſuffer: was ended, onelye
deth excepte. And therfore as our heed and capteyne Chriſt ſufferynge
the bytternes of his paſſion for oure ſynnes perſeuered
and continued pacyentlye vnto the ende / that is vnto that al that
was ſpoken by the prophetes and ſcripture that he ſhulde ſuffer
ware fulfylled, ſo we (if we wyll be the membres of this heade)
ſhulde continue in perſeuerant pacyence in all oure aduerſytyes
and troubles / ſo that we myght come to the ende of all our troubles,
our moſt benigne ſauiour Ieſu beyng our guyde, and that
we myght ſay with Chriſte:
                     Scd a Tim̄. 4. B. 
                  Conſummatum eſt: That is: With
thy helpe Ieſu and not by my vertue, I haue faught a good batell
or feyght. I haue ended my courſe and kept my fayth. Then
a thynge is ſayd to be conſummate: when all together is perfytly
ended and gathered to gyther as it ware in a ſomme. So our
ſauyour Chriſt after that he had ſuffred all the paynes that be ſpoken
of before, in the. lx articles, ſo that there was no more to be
ſuffred but death, then he gathered all them togyther as it ware
in one heape or ſomme, and ſo offred them al to his father ſayng:
Conſummatum eſt: That is to ſay: What ſo euer ſcripture ſayde
that I ſhulde ſuffer: I haue done it / perfourmed and ended it.
The werke of my paſſyon is ended whiche I offer to my father
for the redemption of man kynde. Nor this conſummacyon was
without naturall payne, as if a man hadde paſſed many greate
perylles / daungers / and paynes / he can not lyghtly remembre
and recompte them without a grudgynge to the bodye / thoughe
on the other parte he be glad that he hath ſo eſcaped them. Suche
a paynfull horror and grudgynge had Chriſt at this remēbrance
and no meruell / for he was as yet hangynge vpon the croſſe / to
his no ſmall payne, and alſo this remembraunce and conſummacyon
conteyned in it ſelfe virtually al the forſaid articles of the

paſſyon of Chriſt / whiche all in ſumme he noted when he ſayde:
Conſummatum eſt: It is ended. And therfore this conſummacyon
doth conueniently make a ſpecyall article.
               
                  ¶Of this .vi. worde: Conſummatum eſt.
                  
                     THe .vi. worde that Chriſt ſpake vpon the croſſe, that
is Conſummatum eſt: It is ended, was a worde of
greate perfeccyon / notynge therby (as we ſayd before)
that he had done and ſuffred all thyngꝭ which
he ought to do or ſuffer for the redemption of man.
And that is declared by this example, a good phiſicyen wyl thus
order his pacyent, whoſe helth he intendeth. Firſt he wyll gyue
or aſſigne to hym his dieat. Seconly he wyl caſt hym in a ſweat.
Thyrdly if theſe be not ſufficyent: he wyll let hym blode, to correcte
the euyll humors. And fourthly he wyl gyue hym a pocyon
to auoyde all the euyll mater that is the cauſe of his ſekenes So
our lorde Chriſte that he myght cure vs from the infirmitie and
ſeakenes of ſynne: he fyrſte kepte a dyeat / for he faſted .xl. dayes
Secondly he ſwet blode for vs. Thyrdly he was let blode in all
the partes of his bodye / when as he ſhedde his blode without
weyght or meſure / ſo that his bodye hangynge vpon the croſſe:
was as drye as a fyrebrand. Fourthly and laſt, not content with
all the other medicynes: he toke a moſt bitter pocyon, when for
to cure oure ſynfull ſekenes, he toke vinegre and taſted therof,
and therfore he ſayd conueniently: Conſummatum eſt: All thynges
be fulfylled that I ſhulde ſuffer for the helthe of man. And
thus after that he had ſuffred in all the membres of his bodye the
ſharpe dartes of moſte bytter paynes and paſſyon, he myghte
well ſay the wordes of the prophet:Tren̄. 3. B. 
                     Repleuit me amaritudine: inebriauit
me abſinthio. He hath fulfylled me with bitternes, he
hath made me dronke with wormewod, and ſo in his paſſyon he
dranke a bytter pocyon / and that to cure vs.
               
               
                  ¶A Leſſon.
                  OF this article we maye take this leſſon / that in the ende of
euery good werke that we do, whiche hath diuerſe actes
and partes: we ſhulde gather them togyther as it ware in a ſōme
and ſo offer that good werke to god, and ſo comonlye we vſe in
all the ſeruyce of the churche for euer in the ende: we conclude

with a collecte, whiche is ſo called for aſmoche as in that prayer
all the office or ſeruice ſaid before, is as it ware virtually gadred
and conteyned in that oriſon or collect as in a ſumme. And ſo this
worde. Conſummatum eſt, is as it were the collecte of the hole paſſion
of Chriſt vnto his death. And a man to conforme hym ſelfe
to this article: ſhuld remembre breuely as it were in a ſumme all
the forſayde artycles of Chryſtes paſſion, and ſo gyue thankes to
all myghtie god for them, and pray as foloweth.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu whiche, offeryng the conſummacion of thy hole paſſion
as it ware in a 
                        •
                     ume / 
                        •
                     o god thy father for we, dyd ſay,
Conſummatum eſt. it is ended▪ grant to me that I may dewly conſummate
and ende all the good werkes and paynes that it ſhall
pleaſe thy grace to werke in me and by me, and ſo ended: to offre
them with due thankes vnto god the father, by the. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the yeldyng vp of his ſoule or of the
death of Chriſte The. lxii article.
               
                  THe .lxii. article is the death of Chriſte, for when Chriſte
had ſayde It is ended: then he criynge agayne with a
greate voyce ſayd (or no neceſſite, but for our example)

                     
                        〈…〉
                      tuas cōmendo ſpiritum meum. Father, I
commend my ſpirite in to thy handes.Luce. 23. F This was the .vii. and laſt
worde that he ſpake vpon the croſſe. And by this ſayng, he wolde
declare vnto vs that the ſoules of holy ſayntes: be in ye handes of
god after theyr departyng from the bodye, wher as before yt tyme
all the ſoules ware in the hande & power of hell. And by this his
commendacion he commendeth to his father all his electe people
for we be his membres as ſaynt Paule ſayth. Omnes vnum ſumus
in Chriſto ieſu.
                  Gala. 3. D. We be all one in Chriſte ieſu. Which in the dayes of
his mortalitie offerynge prayers to his father with a greate crye
and teares:Hebr. 5. B. was hard for his reuerence. And this worde ſayd and
prayer made: he bowed downe his heade, and ſo gaue vp his ſpirite.Hiero ſuꝑ Mar. 15.
In criyng, weapyng, and praing / As the gloſe ſayth, we that
be erthly or made of ye erth: do dye or giue vp our ſpirite / with out
any voyce / or at moſt / a ſofte or ſmall voyce. But Chriſt yt camme
from heuen: he at his death exalted his voyce, and cried with a
great and lowde voyce / He that is not moued with this voyce: is

more heuy than the erth, more harde than ye ſtone, and more cloſe
and ſtynkyng than dead menes graues / for all theſe ware broken,
moued and open by this voyce. And note here that amonge al the
paynes that Chryſt ſuffered: this payne of death was moſt ſharpe
and paynefull for as the Philoſopher ſayth.3. Ethi. Ca. vi. Death is the moſte
terrible of all terrible or fearefull thynges / and that is for the naturall
inclinacion that the ſoule hathe to the bodye. But there is
a more ſpeciall cauſe in Chriſte for as Damaſten ſayth.Lib. 3. Ca. xxvii. His godhed
was vnit and knyt, bothe to the ſoule / and alſo to the bodye,
and therfore, that ſeparatiō of his ſoule from his body: was moſt
paynfull to hym. Chryſte enclined and bowed downe his heade:
to ſhewe vnto vs. iiii. thynges, that is. Fyrſte the greuouſe and 
heuy burden that was laid vpon him. A man that is ouercharged
or oppreſſyd with a heuy burden: is wonte to ſtowpe and bowe
downe his heade. But Chriſte was oppreſſid with the heuy burden
of our ſynnes as ſait Petre ſayth.Pri. Petri. ſedo. D. 
                  Peccata noſtra ipſe pertulit
in corpore ſuo ſuper lignum. Chriſte bare our ſynnes in his bodye
vpon a tree, that is the croſſe. Alſo Chriſte ſayth by the prophet.
Conuolute ſunt iniquitates et impoſite collo meo.
                  Tren̄. prīo: E. The iniquites or
ſynnes be folden or lappid vp to gether, and laid vpon my necke,
and therfore no meruel though he bowid downe his heade to ſhew
vnto vs what heuy burden he bare. Secondely he enclined his 
heade to ſhewe his pouertie, for Ieſus the ſon of god at his death
was ſo pore that he had no place where to reſte his head, and therfore
he bowyd it downe. Thyrdly to ſhewe to vs that meaknes is 
the way to glorie euerlaſtyng. Herunto Hugo ſayth. We ſhall returne
vnto the heuenly cuntre: by the waye of meakenes. And the
wiſeman ſayth.Pro. 4. B. 
                  Viam ſapientie monſtrabo tibi. &c. I ſhall ſhewe to
the the way of wiſdom, and I ſhall lead the by the pathes of equitie:
which when thou arte ones entred in to: thy feet ſhall not letted
nor thou runnyng ſhal haue any let or obſtacle. This waye is
the vertu of meakenes,Luc. 18. C. for as Chriſt ſayth. Qui ſehumiliat: exaltabitur.
He yt meaketh hym ſelfe ſhalbe exalted, & as ye ꝓphet ſayth.
Non habitabit in medio domus mee qui facit ſuꝑbiam.
                  Pſal. C. The prowde
perſon ſhall not dwell in my houſe. Forthly Chryſte enclyned his 
heade to gyue thankes to his father for the victorie he had, for by
his death: he diſtroyed death. And hereunto ſaynt Paule ſayth.
Abſorpta eſt mors in victoria.
                  1. Cor. xv. G. Death is deſtroyed by the victorie
and triumphe of Chryſt.Ibidem. And in the ſame place. Deo gracias qui fe
cit nos vincere in domino noſtro ieſu Chriſto.
                  Beda. li. vi: Suꝑ. Lucā capi. x C. Thankes be to god
that hath gyuen to vs the victorie ouer death by our lorde Ieſu

Chriſte. And note here after ſumme doctours, that the ſame houre
that our fyrſte adam dyd ſynne / our ſeconde adam Chryſte gaue
vp his ſpirite, and ſo the ſame houre that the fyrſte adam by his
ſynne ſubdewed hym ſelfe and al his poſteritie to death, the ſame
houre this ſecond adam by his death diſtroyed death eternall ſo
that none of his electe chylderne ſhalbe ſubdued there vnto. And
the ſame houre that paradiſe was ſhyt frome our fyrſte adam: the
ſame houre Chriſte openyd paradyſe to vs.
               
                  ¶A compaſſion and a contemplacion
of the death of Chriſte.
                  SAynt Bernard entreatynge this artycle ſayth on this maner.
I am ſory and haue cōpaſſion vpon ye my lorde, kyng / 
mayſter and father yea my good brother and moſt belouyd Ieſu,
more amyable and to belouyd aboue all women whoſe arowe or
dart hath not turne backward / thyne arowes ben very ſharpe / 
thy doctrine is valiant and myghtie,
                        Scdo. regū primo. D. thy ſermon and worde is
quicke and leuely of moche efficacitie and vertue,Pſal. C. xix more perſynge
than any two edged ſwerd / entryng thorough,Heb. 4. C. euen to the deuidyng
a ſonder the ſoule & the ſpirite. Alſo thy ſhyld neuer declined
from the batell, for thou haſte crowned vs with the ſhylde of thy
grace and of thy good wyll. The ſpear of thy prayers neuer turned
bac void, for yu prayed for thy enemies yt they ſhuld not periſh.
How more then doſt thou praye for thy fryndes and ſaruauntes.
Thou art ſtronger than the lion,Apoc. 5. B. yea thou art ye lion of the tribue
or ſtocke of Iuda,Prīa. Pe
                           •
                        . 5. C. that haſte ouercumme the raumpyng lion that
runnyth all ouer, ſearchyng whom he myght deuoure. Thou art
more ſwyfte than the egle.Pſal. xviii. For thou as a giant had great ioy to
runne in the waye / to fulfyll the miſterie of thy incarnation, vnto
the tyme yt thou as an egle dyd prouoke thy byrdes to flye. Thou
ſpred the wynges of thyne armes abrode vpon ye croſſe, and fliyng
ouer vs: thou toke vs / lefted vs vp, and bare vs vpon thy ſholders
with greate ſtrenght: vnto thy holie habitacle / vnto the houſhold
of thy father,Luce. 15. B where, for the fedyng of thy ſhepe and drāme, that
was loſte, and by thy paſſion founde agayne? thou madeſt a great
feaſt and ioyfull to thy fryndes and neyghboures, thy holy aungels,
makyng to them greate ioy for the conuerſion of a penitent
ſynner. And though thou be ſuche a myghtie and noble ꝑſon yet
thou waſt condempned vnto the moſt ſhamefull death, and ſo thy
ſpirite commendyd in to the handes of thy father, and thy heade

enclined and bowed downe: thou gaue vp thy ſpirite. O all ye
that deſyre to ioy in our lorde cumme I beſeach you and ſorowe
with me. Take hede and behold our myghtye and ſtrong Dauid,
how he is all to rent with wheppys behold hym, whom we moſt
deſire, and whom the aungelles deſire to behold, how he is ſlayn
in our batell. Wher is thy red roſy colour? where is thy beautie?
where ſhall thou fynde fayrnes in thy brouſed bodye? Behold, our
dayes haue decayed and fayled, the dayes (I ſay) of our moſt benigne
Ieſu which onely is the day without all derknes. And his
bones haue waxed drye as a fier brande,Pſal. C. i. he is cut downe as the
graſſe: and his hart hath wydred away, he was lyfted vpon the
croſſe and very greuouſly hurt and brouſed. And though he was
thus ſhamefully and vilenouſly arayed outwardly: yet he kepte
his beautie and fayrnes in wardly. Therfore faynt not for hym in
thy trobles, for the Iues and gentylles that ſee this perſon hangyng
vpon the croſſe (which in hym ſelfe was more beautyouſe
than all the chylderne of men) they (I ſay) onely beholdyng outward
thynges:Pſal. xliiii. ſee hym / hauyng nother beautie ne yet fairnes, for
his face was more lyke to a lepre than a clene man, and all the diſpoſicion
of his bodie was then very deforme and foule to beholde,
yet of that deformytie of our redemar: dyd eſſew and flew out / 
the price of our beautie / of our inwarde beautie I mean / In parte
we haue ſhewed vnto you now the deformitie & blaknes or fowlnes
of the bodie of moſte amyable Ieſu, but his inward beautie
there is no man that can declare / for in him reſtith and inhabiteth
the hole diuinitie or godhed / let vs therfore be contented to be deformed
in our bodie outwardly with our ſauiour Ieſu ſhamefully
deformed / let vs conforme our ſelfe in our bodye to the body of
our true vine Chriſt: that he myght reforme the body of our mortalitie
vnto the bodie of his clernes and glorification.
                  
                     O death moſt to be belouyd. O paſſion of Chriſt, moſt to be deſired.
O meruelouſe miſteries, what is more meruelouſe thā that
death ſhuld gyue lyfe? wondes: ſhuld cure and heale, blode ſhuld
purifie, and that ſorowe: ſhuld enflame and kyndle loue? The
openyng of his ſyde: doth cople & ioyne hert vnto hert. Alſo what
is more meruelouſe than that the ſonne in the eclipſe or darked by
clowdes ſhuld ſhyne more clere and bryght? the fier extincte, doth
more enflame and kyndle the hert / the ſhameful paſſion doth glorifie
and make gloriouſe, thirſt or drines: maketh one dronke.
Nakydnes: doth cloth with the garmentes of vertue / the handes
faſt nayled: doth louce vs / his feet nayled: done make vs to rūne,

Chriſt yeldyng his ſpirit: doth gyue to vs lyfe / he diyng vpon the
tree: doth call vs to heuen / the ſonne of god is lead to death, he is
ſmiten / buffetid and beat: that is our victorie, he is crowned with
thornys: that cam to breake the thornys of our ſynnes / he was
bownd: that lowſeth them that be bounde, he was hanged vpon a
tree: that reyſeth them that be fallen downe / the well of lyfe: hath
vinegre offeryd to hym for his drynke / health is wounded / lyfe:
dieth, pitie is ſcourged for the ſynner / wiſdom is mocked lyke a
fole / treuth is ſlayne as a lier / Iuſtice is dapned for a wicked perſon / 
mercy is vexed for an infidell, ſwetnes is made dronke with
gall, life is deade for the deed man. All this is the ſayng of faynt
Auſten.Sermone. C. xiiii. de tꝑe. By the premiſſes ye may perceyue that Chriſte ſuffred
death / he iuſte and ryghtuouſe: for vs vnryghtuouſe, he ſuffred
death, for vniuſte perſons, by vniuſte perſones, with vniuſte perſons,
for vniuſte cauſes / and vnder vniuſte iudges / and alſo with
vniuſte paynes and tormentes. Beholde therfore thou deuote
ſoule in to the face of thy ſauiour Chriſt, and ſee in hym / how he
dyd beare and ſuffre the payne of the croſſe that thou ſhuld folow
hym in bearyng the croſſe / his bodie was naked, for our example
that we ſhuld make our confeſſion openly or plainly and nakedly
to our goſtlyfather without all clokyng or hydyng and excuſyng
of our ſynnes / his armes was ſpred abrode vpon the croſſe redy
to embrace the in a token that he wyl gladly receyue the vnto his
grace, if thou forſake thy ſynne, he was faſt nailed both in handes
and feet: that thou ſhuld perſeuer and continue in his loue and
ſeruice / his hart was alſo openyd, for the effuſion of the price of
our redemption / As ye ſhall ſee in the next article.
               
               
                  ¶Here folow .iii. leſſons.
                  THe fyrſte leſſon of this article is that we ſhulde dye with
Chriſte, that is from the worlde and ſynne if we wyll lyue
with hym in glorie eternall.
                        Scda Tim̄. 2. C. And here vnto ſaynt Paule ſayth.
Si commortui ſumus cum Chriſto: et conuiuemus. If we dye
with Chriſte we ſhall lyue with Chriſte. And in an other place.
Mortui enim eſtis et vita veſtra abſcondita eſt cum Chriſto in
deo.
                     Coloſ. 3. A. 
                     ❧ 
                     ✚ ☞ Ye be deade fromme the worlde and all

vayne or tranſitorie thynges, and your lyfe is hyd with Chriſt in
god. The ſecond leſſon is, that it is very good and profitable, to 
ſay deuotely thoſe .x. pſalmes, cōmonly called the pſalmes of the
paſſion, which Chriſt ſayd in his prayer hangyng vpon ye croſſe
for without doute, who ſo reades or ſayes them deuoutly ſhal finde
great conforthe. Thyrdlie euery chriſtian at his death ſhulde vſe 
and keape the forſaid .v. thynges, that Chriſt dyd at his death, he
dyd pray, crie, weape, commendyd his ſoule to his father, and
gaue vp his ſpirite. So we at our death ſhulde pray / crye to our
lorde for his helpe, at leſte in hert, wepe for our ſynnes by trewe
contricion / commend our ſoule to god, and to gyue vp our ſpirit,
that is with a good will to dye and ſo to conforme our wyll to the
will of god. A man to conforme hym ſelfe to this article: may ofte
remembre theſe leſſons with ye premiſſes ſayd in this article / and
pray as foloweth.
               
               
                  ¶A Leſſon
                  
                     O Bliſſed Ieſu which for me, dyeng vpon ye croſſe, dyd commend
thy ſoule to thy father: graunt to me that I may ſpiritually
ſo dye to the and with the in this life: that it wold pleaſe
the at the houre of my death to haue my wretched ſoule recōmendyd
to the, which liues and reignys with god the father and the
holy ghoſt world without ende. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶The openyng of Chriſtes ſide and hert
with a ſpere the .lxiii. Article.
               
                  THe .lxiii. Article is the openynge or wondyng of
Chriſtes hert with a ſpere.Mat. 27. F▪
                   For at ye death of Chriſt
there ware ſhewed many miracles, as ye derknes of
the ſōne, ye cuttyng of ye veyle in ye temple, ye rentyng
or breakyng of the ſtonys, the openyng of the monumentes
or grauys, the conuerſion of the noble man and capiteyn
Centurio / the conuerſion of the thefe & of many other, that ſeyng
theſe great thynges that ware done, knocked vpon there breſtes / 
in ſygne or token of penaunce, and returned homewardes, his
moſte heuy mother there abidyng with a fewe women with her.
The Iues then bicauſe it was the ſabboth euyn, that the bodyes
ſhulde not remayne vpon the croſſe on the ſaboth day (for that ſabboth
day was an high day and feſtfull with them) they I ſay beſoughtIoh. 19. F.
                  
Pilate that theyr legges myght be broken and ſo taken
downe of the croſſe / then camme the ſawgyours and brake the
legges of both the theuys. And when they camme to Ieſus, and
ſaw that he was deed alredie: they brake not his legges, for as the
legges of the paſchall lambe ware not broken: no more ware the
legges of Chriſt, that is the true lambe of god / and in that was
the ſcripture fulfylled that ſaith.Exo. xii. G 
                  os non comminuetis ex eo. He
ſhall not breake a bone of hym.Ioh. 19. F. But there cam one of the ſawgiours
with a ſpere / and dyd thruſt Chriſt in to the ſide and forthwith
there came out blode and watre. This ſawgior was called
Longius and he was blinde or at leſt his ſight was but weke and
what tyme he had thruſt Chriſt to the hert with his ſpere: ye blode
runnyng downe by the ſpeare vnto his handes, he (not knowing
the vertue therof) touched or rubbed his yen with his blody hādes
and ſo had his ſyght clerely gyuen to hym. Alſo of this blode and
watre; all the ſacramentes of ye churche haue theyr efficacitie vertue
and ſtrenght,Super diſt. 2. 4. ſen
                        ••
                     . as by theyr meritoriouſe cauſe. As the mayſter
of the ſentence ſayth and all doctours. And though at that tyme
the deed bodye of Chriſt could feale no payne: yet ye Iues did this
thing of a great malice and to the great rebuke of Chriſt, for they
ware not 
                     •
                  aciate and content with the obprobries / rebukes and
paynes that they put hym to in his lyfe: but that alſo they wolde
put hym to more and ſo perſew hym after his death. And for that
cauſe this wondyng of Chriſtes ſyde is taken here for a ſpeciall
article of Chriſtes paſſion / for all ye cruelties / ſhames and deſpites
that be done to ye deed corpes or corſe / be acompted as if they ware
done to the perſones lyuyng. As ſomtyme the bodyes of deed perſones:
be drawen / hangyd / headyd, quarteryd, or burned: for the
correction and puniſhment of ſuche defawtes as thoſe perſones
dyd in ther liues. And though Chriſt that tyme deed, felt not that
wounde of his ſyde: yet the bleſſyd virgyn his mother felt it, for
that ſpere then dyd perſe her moſt ſorowfull ſoule / as ſaynt Bernard
ſayth, truly. O bleſſid mother, than the ſwerde of ſorow did
perſe thy ſoule: when that cruell ſpere openyd thy ſon ſyde, after
his death. His ſoule then was not preſent with his bodye. But
thy ſoule myght not be departed from it, for ye ſoule is rather there
where it louyth: than where it gyuith life / & ſo not without great
cauſe, we ſay that thou art more than a martyr, for the effecte of
compaſſion in the: dyd exceade the fealyng of all bodilye paynes.
               
                  ¶Of the miracles that ware done at this tyme: we ſhall
ſpeake, in the begynny
                        •
                     g of the thyrd parte of this
myrrour / boke or / treateſſe.
                  
                     
OF this wounde of the ſide of our lorde / the deuote and holy
ſaynt Bernard ſaith thus. O good Ieſu, thy ſide was woū
                     ded
and openid: that we myght haue entrance or a way to cumme
to the. Thy hert was woūded: that we abſolued from al outward
trobles and buſines myght reſte and abyde therin. It was alſo
wounded: that by that viſible wounde: we myght ſee the inuiſible
wounde of thy loue / for who ſo euer feruently louith, he is wounded
with loue. And how myght his burnyng loue be more clerelie
and openly declared to vs: but in that yt he wold not onely haue
his bodie outwardly woundyd: but alſo haue his hart wounded
with a ſpere / therfore this bodely wounde: doth ſhewe to vs his
ſpiritual wounde of loue. Ariſe therfore thou ſpouſe of Chryſt, as
a doue buyidyng thy neſt and reſtyng place in the deapnes of this
hole or wounde there watche cōtinually as a ſparow fynding thy
neſt! there hyd thy birdes of chaſte loue with the turtyll. Ioyne
or put thy mouth to that wounde: that thou may ſucke or drawe
the watre of helth from ye foūtayns of our ſauiour. This is ye wel
that ſpryngeth in ye myddeſt of paradiſe / whiche doth make frutefull
the deuoute hertes and plentiouſly doth watre all the world.
This is the doore that was made in the ſide of the arke of Noe / 
by the which dyd entre all tho beſtes & men that ware ſauyd from
the vnyuerſall flode. Studie and laboure therfore with all thy
diligence to haue a recourſe vnto the holes of this ſtone and vnto
the caue or den in this ſtony wall both now in this life and alſo at
thy death / there to reſt and hide thy ſelfe / that thou myght eſcape
the daunger of the wode lion the deuyl, and alſo that thou myght
fynde there plentiouſe paſture and fode to thy eternall comforth.
¶And here note that Chriſt dyd ſhedde his blode .v. tymes this
day for vs. Fyrſt in his prayer, when he ſwet blode. Second, in
his ſcourgyng. Thyrd, in his crownyng with thornys. Fourth,
in his naylyng to the croſſe, and. Fyfth, in the openyng of his
ſyde as ye haue herde before.
               
               
                  ¶Here folow .ii. Leſſons.
                  FYrſte leſſon of this article is this, that whan we be deade
with Chriſte from the worlde and from all ſynne then alſo
we ſhuld be wounded in our hert with the ſpere of charitie ſo that
we myght ſay with ye ſpouſe in her canticles.Canti. 2. A. iuxta. 70. 
                     Vulnerata charitate
ego ſum. I am wounded with ye ſpere of charitie. Saynt Auſten
alſo deſired to be wounded with this ſpere ſayng. I beſech the my

lord and kyng, my moſt ſwete Ieſu for thy moſte holye wondes,
which thou ſuffered vpon the croſſe for our health, from ye which
that moſt preciouſe blode ran out wherwith we be redemyd.
I beſech the (I ſaye) to wounde this my ſynfull ſoule for the
which it pleaſyd the to dye. Wounde it I beſech the, with the
fiery dart of thy moſt myghtie loue and charitie. Nayle faſt my
hert to the with the nayle or dart of thy loue, that my ſoule may
ſay vnto the, I am wounded with charitie / and ſo ſore wounded:
that from this wounde of thy loue there myght runne the full riuers
of teares / both nyght and day, both of cōtricion / compaſſion
and deuocion. Smyte I beſeach the good Ieſu this moſte hard
flynt my ſoule, with the myghty and ſharpe ſpear of thy loue: that
it may myghtilie entre in to ye inwardnes or deapnes of my hard
 hart. The ſecond leſſon is that we ſhuld receyue the ſacramentes
of the churche with that intent and deuocion: as if they cam then
from the ſyde and hert of our lorde, for that wounde of his ſyde:
was as the doore wherby ye ſacramentes of the churche com from
Chriſt to vs.Augꝰ ſuꝑ. For as of the ſyde of our fyrſt Adam ſleapynge, his
wyfe Eua was formed and made:Ioh. tract. Ca. xx. ſo of ye ſyde of our ſecond Adam
(that is Chriſt) ſleapyng by death vpon the croſſe was formed the
churche / the ſpouſe of Chriſt. By this woūde as by a dore of loue
ſaynt Auſten dyd entre when he ſayde,In Manuali. Ca. 23. Longyne hath openyd to
me the ſyde of Chriſt with a ſpear / and I haue entred therin and
there I ſurely and quietly reaſt. The nayles and the ſpear crie to
me that I am truly reconſiled to Chriſt: if I loue hym.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu which for me wold haue ye ſyde of thy deed bodie openyd,
from whens cam plentye of blode and watre for our
health & comforth: wounde (I beſeach the) my hert with the ſpear
of thy charitie, yt I may worthely receyue thy ſacramētes, which
flowed out of that thy moſt holie ſyde. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶How the bodie of Chriſt was taken downe
of the croſſe the .lxiiii. Article.
               
                  THe .lxiiii. article is the takyng downe of Chriſtes bodie
from the croſſe. For after that our ſauiour Ieſus had
gyuen vp his ſpirite vpon ye croſſe: that was about the
ix. houre of the day: the bodie of Chriſt hang ſtyll vpon
the croſſe vnto euenſong tyme / and there abode and taried our

bleſſid ladie and other .iii. women ſittyng by the croſſe / and not
knowyng what to doo, they wold haue taken downe the bodye / 
and haue buried it: but they had no ſtrenght therunto, nor yet
ſuch inſtrumentes as ware neceſſarie for that purpoſe. And to departe
leuyng the bodie vpon the croſſe: they durſte not / and there
to tary or abide ye nyght drawyng nygh: they myght not. Behold
and conſidre (thou deuote ſoule) in what proplexitie they be in and
haue compaſſion on them with all thy herte. And as they ſat thus
in troble and heuines there cam Ioſeph of ye citie of Aromathya
ſomtyme called Ramatha, where as Helchana and Anna the parentes
of the prophet Samuell dwellyd.Prīo regū. pri. A. This Ioſeph was a
riche man and of noble blode and alſo he was a ſenatour / and had
great office in ye courte of the emperour, a good man in hym ſelfe
and in ye ſyght of god, iuſte to his neyghbour, a diſciple of Chriſt,
but ſecreate, for feare of the Iues, he had a truſte to come to the
kyngdome of god for he dyd in no thyng conſent to the cowncell
and thoſe maliciouſe actes of the Iues.St Math. Ca. 27. And as ſaynt Hierom
ſayth ye fyrſt pſalme was made of hym. Beatus vir. &c. This holie
Ioſeph ſtrenghthed thorow theffuſion of Chriſtes blode (all feare
ſet a part) went boldly vnto Pilate, not fearyng the malice of the
Iues, nor yet the powre of Pilate, and aſked of hym the bodie of
Ieſu, for a great treaſure, for he preferryd that bodye aboue all
erthly treaſures though they be neuer ſo preciouſe. Pilate meruelyd
that Ieſus was ſo ſoon deed, and called to hym a capten of an
hundreth men, and aſked of hym if Ieſus ware deed / and whan
he knew the treuth by that capteyn: he gaue the bodie to Ioſeph.
And then Ioſeph bought a fayre lynyn clothe for to wrap Chriſtꝭ
bodie therin. And ſo Ioſeph came, not now as a ſecreat and preuy
diſciple of Chriſt: but an open diſciple of Ieſu. And alſo there
cam with hym. Nichodemus, which bifore tyme cam priuely vnto
Ieſus in the nyght for feare of the Iues, but now all feare ſet
a parte he cam with Ioſeph and brought with hym / of myrre and
aloes about an hūdreth pownde weight, to anoynt and dreſſe the
bodie of Chriſt before his buriyng. And when they cam nyghe to
the place where Chriſt hang: they kneled down / and dyd worſhip
our lorde. And our ladie perceyuyng that they cam to take downe
her ſōnys bodie (as riſyng frō death) her ſpirit began to quicken,
and ſo our ladie receyuyd them at theyr cōmyng reuerently. And
furthwith they prepared them ſelfe: to take down the bodye, and
our ladie healped as moch as ſhe myght. One drewe the nayles
out of his handes / an other ſuſteyned the bodie that it ſhulde not

fall downe, our Lady ſtandyng: lifted vp her armes on heyght,
redy to receyue the body when it ſhuld com downe, and as ſhortly
as ſhe myght touche hym: ſhe drew his heade and his handes vpon
her ſorowfull breſte embraſyng and ofte kyſſyng his wondes
wherwith ſhe culde not be ſaciate, and what tyme the bodie was
taken downe: this bleſſed Lady toke his heade and his ſhulders
in to her lappe, and Mary Maglene, toke his feet, remembryng
what grace and comforth ſhe founde by them and all the reſidue
that ſtode about: greatly lamentyd and morned his death.
               
                  ¶The lamentacion and mournyng of our Lady.
                  
                     SAynt Bernard ſpeakyng of this lamentacion of our
Lady / ſayth.In libro de plāctu virginis. She lifted vp her handes on height, embraſynge
and kyſſynge the body of her ſonne / but her
ſonne dyd not embraſe her agayne for his armes ware
to ſtiffe or ſtarke therunto. And then that bleſſid virgyn
ſeyng ſhe culd haue none other ſolace dyd kyſſe with a great
and faruent deſire his woundes and the blode that ran from his
woundes. In ſo moch that the face of this ſorowfull Lady was
made all blodie with the blode of her ſonne ſlayne which thyng in
it ſelfe was very pitifull and moch lamentable to behold, that is / 
that ſo noble a bodie ſhuld be ſo ſhamefully entreated, as though
it had ben the moſt vile carion / and yet in truth: that bodie myght
neuer fall to corrupcion, for the godhed was continually ioyned
therunto / which keapte it from al corrupcion. And for this cauſe / 
this article is nowmbred among the articles of Chriſtes paſſion
though this bodye when it was deed felt no payne, but yet this
bleſſid virgyn at this time ſuffred the payne for ſhe was there preſent
with other deuote women. And then Ioſeph meakly deſired
our Lady / that ſhe wolde ſuffre ye body of her ſōne to be anoynted
and wrapped in the lynen clothes, and ſo to be buried, but ſhe refuſyd
to be ſo ſhortly departed from her ſonne, & when they wold
haue buried hym: ſhe wold haue retayned hym, and ſo there was
a godly and a pitiouſe cōtencion bitwixt them. And at laſt though
not gladly: yet reuerently, ſhe ſuffred them to take the bodie at
theyr pleaſure. Then this bleſſid virgyn weapt without comforth,
and ſo ſuch aboundaūce of teares flowed from her ien, that
it myght be ſuppoſed▪ that all her bodie ware turned to watre.
She waſhed her face with tearis and alſo the deed bodie of her
ſonne & ſpecially his woundes, and alſo the ſtone vpon the which

the bodie was layd when it as waſhed. And it is ſayd that her
teares don yet appere and may be ſeen vpon yt ſame ſtone which
is in the entraūce of the churche of the holy ſepulcre. She waſhed
and dried his blody woūdes, and kyſſed them and oftymes ſhe beheld
his moſt holie face / his woūdes and his heade, and there ſhe
ſee the prickynges of the thornys, and how the heare was pulled
from his berde and alſo his heade / ſhe beheld his face (I ſay) how
it was defoyled with blode and the ſpittynges of the Iues and ſo
ſhe culd not be ſaciat with ſeyng and weapyng / her ſorow myght
be perceiued: but it culd not be declared as it was: but ſhe felt it to
the extremitie.
               
               
                  ¶Here folow .iii. leſſons.
                  THe fyrſt leſſon of this article is that the faythfull people 
receyuynge the bodie of our lorde in the ſacrament of the
aulcer: be compared to them that toke hym of the croſſe / and it is
more, to take him in the ſacrament of the aulter: than downe from
the croſſe, for they that toke hym of the croſſe toke hym onely in
there armes and handes, but we receyue hym in to our mowthes
and hertes. And as they dyd weappe that bodye in a fayre lynon
cloth: ſo ſhulde we receyue hym in to a pure hert and clene conſcience.
The ſecōd leſſon is, that when we be com to that perfection 
that we be deed to the world, and to all ſynnes, ſo that our bodie
be deed (as ſaynt Paule ſayth of Abraham and Sara) then we
may ſumwhat releaſe of the rigor of our penaunce and croſſe,Ro. iiii. D. ſo
our lorde wold not diſcend from his croſſe in the tyme of his lyfe:
but when he was deed he ſuffred his body to be taken downe. The
thyrd leſſon is, that we ſhuld gladly take Chriſt of the croſſe with 
Ioſeph. Aſlong as the ſynner continueth in ſynne: as moch as is
in hym he byndeth Chriſte and nayleth hym faſt to the croſſe. For
our ſynnes ar the cauſe why Chriſt was crucified. But as ſhortly
as we be turned by true penaūce vnto chriſt: we lowce him & take
him of the croſſe and receyue hym bytwyxt our armes and hādys
as Ioſeph dyd. And as ye ſee, that he which hath an other man
bitwixt his armes may doo with hym what it ſhall pleaſe hym, if
the other man reſiſte not: ſo the penitent ſynner embraſing Chriſt
in his armes of loue: may doo with Chriſte, and get of hym what
ſo euer he requireth to his ſoules health. For Chriſt wyll not reſiſte
the penitēt. For he is more redy to giue grace: than the other
is to receyue it. And a man to conforme hym ſelfe to this article
ſhuld ofte remembre theſe leſſons, and pray thus.
               
               
                  
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu which for me a wretched ſynner, after thy death wold
haue thy bodie taken downe from the croſſe by Ioſeph and
Nicodemus, and ſo be anoynted and dreſſed with ſwete oyntmētes
and ſpices, wold be wrapped in fayre lynen clothes: graūt
to me worthely to receyue thy bleſſed very leuyng bodie in the ſacrament
of the aulter, as if I ſhuld take hym of the croſſe, and ſo
to anoynte hym with the oyntmentes of vertues, that I may continually
keape hym in a pure hert and chaſte bodie. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the buriyng of Chriſtes bodie the .lxv. Article.
               
                  THe .lxv. and the laſte article is the buriynge of the
bodie of Chriſt. For after it was taken of the croſſe / 
and dreſſyd with ſpices and ſwete oyntmentes and
alſo wrapped in fayre lynen clothes as we ſayd before:
then they went aboute to bury hym. And the
time paſſing: Ioſeph meakely deſired our Lady that ſhe wold
ſuffre the bodie to be buried before that the ſaboth day ſhuld entre,
for then it ſhuld be vnlawfull for them to doo any ſuch labour
or buſynes. And then our lady very gently and diſcreatly ordred
hyre ſelfe to them, and ſo croſſyng and bleſſing that body though
with great ſorow: yet reuerētly ſhe ſuffred them to take the body
and bury it.Ioh. 19. D. And as the Euangeliſt ſayth. Erat in loco vbi crucifixus
eſt: ortus, et in orto: monumentum nouum. &c. In the place
where Ieſus was crucified: there was a garden, aud in that garden:
a new ſepulcre or graue cut or hewen out of a rocke of ſtone,
and it apperteyned to the ſame Ioſeph.Math. 27. G. And in this new tumbe:
they buryed the bodie of Ieſu. And here ſayth Simon de Caſſia,
that Chriſt praynge dyed, and after his death: he was put in a
garden,Li. xiii. in fine. that by his prayer and death: there myght ſprynge to vs
the plantes of vertues of his inuiſible garden / and that therby
we myght deſerue to entre the garden of heuenly pleaſures,
moch more pleaſaunt than that garden of paradiſe that was prepared
of god for our fyrſt parentes in the eſte part of the worlde.
This new ſepulcre alſo was conuenient for our new Adam,I
                        •
                      ibidem. that
his buriyng myght reanſwear to his incarnacion. For when he
was incarnate: he was put in to the wombe of a virgyne, where
neuer man was before / nor ſhuld be after hym and ſo was he put
in a new graue where as neuer man was put before. Alſo he was
buried in an other mānys ſepulcre for he had none of his owne / 

nor wold haue. For he yt came to gyue hym ſelfe to the comforthe
of man: wolde haue no erthly thyng propre to hym ſelfe. It was
not conueniēt for hym that cam to gyue vs heuenly thynges, that
he ſhulde labour for any propertie in erthly thynges, and therfore
he made poore for vs from his natiuytie vnto his death: dyd kepe
a poore li
                     •
                  e,1. Cor. x. A. and free from all propertie in worldly thynges. He
was alſo buried in a ſepulcre of ſtone,Math. 16. C. this ſtone ſignified Chriſt,
vpon the which ſtone is ſtabliſhed ye ſure foundacion of our faith.Nu. 20. B.
Alſo he was buried in a ſtone: for many miſteries. This is the
ſtone that gaue watres plentiouſly vnto the people of god in the
deſert. This is the ſtone that gaue furth riuers of oyle vnto Iob.
This is the ſtone vpon the which a man is exalted and fixed in
the tribulacions and anguiſhes of his hert,Pſal. lx. to his great comforth
and defence,Pſal. C. iii. if he cum therto by ſure fayth. This is the ſtone that
is the refuge and comforth vnto penitent ſynners / that be full of
prickes (that is,Pſal. 139. contricion for theyr ſynnes) as the hurchen is full
of prickes. This is alſo the ſtone: agaynſte or vnto the which the
yong ſpryng of our ſynnes be caſte and all to cruſhed and broken
or deſtroyed, that is, our euyll cogitacions / at the begynnyng of
them, or fyrſt mocion before they encreaſe in vs they ſhuld be caſt
agaynſt this ſtone, remembring the death and burying of Chriſt,
and ſo auoyde and deſtroy them. In to this ſtone they put the body
of Chriſt which was the lorde and gyuer of lyfe.Math. xxvii. G. And when they
had buried hym then Ioſeph rolled or put to the dore of the ſepulcre
a great ſtone and ſo departed.Li. xiii. in fine. As Simon de Caſſia ſaith, this
ſtone put to the doore of the ſepulcre: doth ſignifie the infidelitie
of the Iues, and the hardnes of theyr hertes, for nother they wold
ceaſe from theyr euyll workes, nor yet leaue theyr obſtinate and
froward hertes. This ſtone was put to the ſe
                     •
                  ulcre: by ye handes
of men: but it was remouyd by aungelles / to ſignifie that by his
owne euyll deades a mam may fall to obſtinacie and heardnes of
hert. But that can nat be remouyd but by the pouer and vertue of
god. If the queſtion be mouyd why this article is nombred among
the articles of the paſſion of Chriſte / ſeyth Chriſte beynge
deed ſuffred no payne therby? It may be anſweryd that one of the
miſeries of our corrupt nature is, that the body will putrifie after
the death, and therfore it muſt be buryed. And though this reaſon
haue no place in Chriſt, for his body ſhuld neuer haue ben putretfied / 
as the prophet ſayth.Pſal. xv. 
                  Non dabis ſanctum tuum videre corruptionem.
Thou ſhall not ſuffre thy holie ſonne to ſee the putrefaction
of his bodie: yet for aſmoche as the Iues had brought this

body of Chriſt to that cōdicion, that it ſeamed neceſſarie to bury
it, and alſo that the Iues wolde nat haue ben otherwiſe conten
                     •
                  ,
excepte it had ben buried: therfore it is cōueniently accompted as
an artycle. And alſo for that, there folowed this buriyng .ii. great
thynges / that is the lamētacion and mournyng of our Lady and
the other women, and alſo ye watche and keapyng of the ſepulcre.
Fyrſt (I ſay) for the lamentacion of the bleſſyd virgyn and other
women, by whoſe lamentacions ware fulfylled the lamentacions
that the prophet Hieremy wrote vpon the death of the good kyng
Ioſias. The ſorowful mother of god myght fyrſt direct her wordes
to the father of heuyn and ſay.In libro. Treno
                        
                           
                        
                        rum
                     . Alas, my lord god, why haſt
thou gyuen to me a ſon to die ſo miſerably, and ſo to leaue me behynd
hym al deſolate and ful of ſorowe and heuines. &c? Secondly
ſhe myght ſpeake to Gabriel ye archaungell. O Gabriell where
is the glad tidynges that thou ſhewed to me? I fynde no ioy: but
moſt bitter ſorow. Thyrdly ſhe myght ſpeake to Iohan the euangeliſte
and to other women that ware with her, and ſay / if ye loue
me, if ye haue any compaſſion of me: I charge you that ye bury
me with hym. Theſe and other like, this ſorowful mother myght
haue ſayd. The ſecond thyng that folowyd this buriyng: was the
watche and keapyng of the ſepulcre by the ſaugiours. And hereof
the euangeliſt ſayth thus.Math. xxvii. G. 
                  Altera autem die que eſt poſt paraſceuem
dixerunt principes ſacerdotum et phariſei ad Pilatum. Domine recordati
ſumus ꝙ ſeductor ille. &c. The next day after good friday / 
the princes of priſtes and the phariſeis cam to Pilate and ſayd.
Lord, or ſir, we remembre that this deceyuer ſayd, whyle he was
yet aliue. After .iii. dayes. I wyll ariſe agayne. Commaunde
therfore that the ſepulcre be made ſure and keapt vnto the thyrd
day, leſſe paraduenture his diſciples come and ſtele hym a waye
and ſay to the people that he is ariſen from death. And then the
laſte erroure ſhalbe worſe than the fyrſt. This the Iues dyd fyrſt
to ſhewe the malice of theyr hertes. And therefore Symon de
Caſſia ſayth.Li. xiii. in fine. This is a great iniquitie of men, a great enuy of the
Iues, that they do nat ceaſe to perſue and falſly accuſe ye innocent
deed, callyng Chriſt after his death, a deceyuer / and that alſo they
ſpake before the iudge, which had prouyd the contrarie / they had
don to moche before in yt they falſly accuſed hym in many thyngꝭ
and moreouerby theyr importune clamoures and criynges had
made hym to be cōdempned vnto a moſt ſhameful death.Ibidem. Secondly,
they dyd thus for theyr owne excuſaciō. For as ye ſame Simon
de Caſ. ſayth. It is ye cōdicion of an enuiouſe ꝑſon: euer to ſpeke

euyl of that perſon whom he hateth, and though he haue ſlayne or
hurte that perſon whom he ſo hateth: yet he wyll neuer ſpeake of
hym, but with obprobriouſe and euyl wordes, that therby he may
be Iudged to be good and ryghtuouſe: for aſmoch as he ꝑſe weth
that perſon that was euyll and vnryghtuouſe, and ſo he cloketh,
hideth and coloreth his enuy by falſe crymes that he putteth vpon
the innocent. But for al that, the conſcience of ſuch euyl perſones
be euer more in feare for they knowe that they do euyll / but bycauſe
they wyll not haue theyr malyce knowen: they ceaſe nat to
falſly accuſe theyr enymy alſo after his death. And ſo theys falſe
Iues euer repete theyr falſe accuſacions: bycauſe they wold nat
be noted as confounded. O blynd malyciouſe people. In all theyr
euyll deades agaynſt Chriſte they go to the Iudge Pylate, that
theyr iniquitie and ſynne ſhuld ſeme as iuſtice: bycauſe it is doon
by auctoritie. And they called hym Domine, that is lorde, but they
wold neuer obey to hym with theyr good wyl. It is the propertie
of maliciouſe and froward perſons to prayſe hym byfore his face
whom they hate in theyr hertes,Math. xxvii. G. and that is to brynge theyr purpoſe
to paſſe. Then Pylate ſayd to them. Habetis cuſtodiam. Ite
cuſtodite ſicut ſcitis. Ye haue there the watche men, take them and
goo and make the ſepulcre as ſure as ye can. As if he ſhulde ſay
after Rabanus.Thōs ſuꝑ. It myght be ſufficient to you that I haue cōſentyd
vnto the death of this innocent,Math. 27. from hens fourth do what ye
wyll, your errour ſhall reſte vpon your ſelfe. And then they went
and made the ſepulcre ſure with watch men and ſealyd the ſtone.
This was doon for .ii. cauſes. Fyrſt to ſhew the foliſhenes of the
Iues.Super. Math. in fin
                        •
                     . And herunto ſaynt Hillarie ſayth. The feare that the Iues
had of the ſteylynge of Chriſtis body, the watche men and the
ſealyng of the ſtone: be a teſtimonie and a witnes of ye infidelitie
and folyſhues of the Iues. Was it not a great foliſhnes of them / 
to watche and ſeale his ſepulcre that a lytil before that tyme commaūded
a deed man to riſe out of his ſepulcre / the which was .iiii.
dayes buried? Secondly this was doon for the more ſure teſtimony
of the truthe that is of the reſurrection of Chriſt. And herof
Criſoſtome ſayth.Thōs ſuꝑ. Conſidre and note well here how the Iues agaynſte
theyr owne myndes doo labour to ſhewe and proue the
truth agaynſt them ſelfe. For this theyr acte is a manifeſte and
ſure proue of ye reſurrection of Chriſt. And thus we may proue it.
The ſepulcre was ſealed and ſurely keapte wt ſaugioures: ergo / 
there culd be no crafte or deceyte. If theyr ware no deceyte: ergo
Chriſt is ſurely riſen / for there is the ſepulcre, & the body is gon.
               
                  
                  ¶Here folow .iii. leſſons.
                  
                      FYrſt Leſſon is that we ſhuld be the folowers of Ioſeph, in
that, that when the bodye of Chriſte is receyued of vs and
wrapped as we ſayd before: then we ſhuld lay it or put it in a new
ſepulcre cut out or hewen out of a ſtone / that is we ſhuld put it in
our ſoule deckyd and beautiſed with the ymage of god, renewed
and ſtabliſſhed in Chriſt,Can
                           •
                        . 3. B. which is the ſure ſtone, ſo that we may
ſay that is wrytten in the canticles. Tenui eum nec dimittam. I
 haue hym I holde hym and I wyll not leaue hym. The ſeconde
Leſſon is this that as our lorde was tormentyd crucified / deed,
lamentyd or mournyd and alſo buryed: ſo we ſhuld lament hym
 by compaſſion and compunction. Thyrd leſſon is for riche men,
which by the example of Ioſeph ought to couer the nakydnes of
Chriſt in the poore men, and ſo bury Chriſt in the ſepulcre of his
herte by charitable werkes doyng to the poore people.
               
               
                  ¶A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu which for me at the houre of complen wold be buryed
in a ſepulcre lamentyd and keapte: graunt to me that thou
my lord god may be buryed in the ſepulcre of my hert and there
lamentyd and keapt that I buried with the: may deſerue to com
to the glory of thy reſurrection. Amen.
               
            
            ¶Here endyth the ſeconde parte of this
Glaſſe or Myrour.
         
         
            ¶Here foloweth the thyrd parte / that is the concluſion
of this Myrrour, Which is diuided
in to .xi. Chaptres.
            
               ¶Fyrſt we ſhall declare vnto you certen Myracles, & ſpecially.
x. that were done, ſom of them at the death of our lorde,
and ſom of them after his death.
The fyrſt Chapitre.
               
                  ¶Of the fyrſte Myracle.
                  
                     
                     THe fyrſt Myracle was theclipſe or derknes of the
ſon / and of this,Math. 27. E. the euangeliſte ſaith thus. A ſexta
autem hora tenebre facte ſunt ſuper vniuerſam
terram vſque ad horam nonam. From the ſexte
houre vnto the .ix. houre of the daye there was
derknes ouer all the worlde or erthe. And this
derkenes or eclipſe was nat naturall, but onely
by miracle. And that we may proue by .iiii. reaſons. Firſte by 
reaſon of the long enduryng of the ſame for the eclipſe of the ſon
naturally may neuer endure by .iii. cōtinual houres as this was.
Second reaſon is bicauſe it was ſo vniuerſal for naturally there 
can be no eclipſe of the ſon ouer all the erth, for the mone that lettyth
the lyght of the ſon from vs for the tyme of the eclipſe: is not
of ſo great quantitie as is the ſon nor yet as the erth and therfore
it can nat take away ye lyght of the ſon from all partes of the erth,
but this derknes or eclipſe was ouer all the erth, ergo it was nat
naturall. Thyrd reaſon is for the age of the mone, the mone at 
that tyme was encreaſyd .xiiii. dayes, and ſo it was almoſt at the
full mone. But it is impoſſible that there ſhuld any eclipſe of the
ſon naturally in the oppoſicion of the mone or it beyng at the ful / 
for then the mone is in the Eſt when ye ſon is in the Weſt. And alſo
euery naturall eclipſe of the ſon is the coniuncion or chaunge
of the mone. Forth reaſon is this, for in this eclipſe: the mone at 
nyght turnyd and mouyd toward the Eeſt,Gloſa īter
                        
                           ••
                        earis. ſ
                           •
                        
                        ̄ Math. 27. 1. and the ſon towardes
the Weſte, which can neuer be naturally / ergo this eclipſe was by
miracle. But for what cauſe / god wolde ſhewe this miracle then:
doctoures done aſſigne .v. cauſes. Fyrſt for the compaſſion of the 
elementes, which myght nat beare or ſuffre to ſee the iniurie that
was done to there creatour and maker. Secondly to ſhewe that 
Chriſt was the gouernar of all creatures. And here vnto ſaynt
Gregory ſayth. This wondre or miracle was ſhewed / that it
ſhulde be knowen that he which ſuffred death was the gouernar
of all thynges. Thyrdly. It was to ſhewe the blyndnes of mānys 
reaſon,Libro. xiii. and here vnto Simon de Caſſia ſayth. Derknes was
brought ouer all the world: to ſhewe ye ignorance of all the world,
for the world wold nat knowe the ſon of god. Forthly for the obſtinacie 
of the Iues.Ibidem. For as the ſame Simon ſaith, the Iues ſuffred
horrible derkenes, for they blynded in theyr hertes by malice:
condempned the ſon of god. Fyſtly, for the cōtemplacion of many 
ſecreat miſteries.Ibidem. And therfore ſaith ye ſame Simon This darknes
beſides that / yt it ſhewed outwardly: it alſo mouyd the mindꝭ

of men to conſidre higher thinges, for our lord wold meruelouſly
compaſſe ye ien of men with thycke derknes: that theyr ſyght ſhuld
not be wanderyng about outwarde thynges, but that they ſhuld
entre in to theyr owne hertes & there cōſidre deaply ſuch thynges
as waxe don to the ſon of god and in the ſon of god, and ſo he turnyd
the day in to the nyght yt they myght more diligently cōſidre
the heuenly myſteries.
               
               
                  ¶Of the ſeconde Myracle.
                  
                     THe ſeconde Myracle was cuttyng or rentyng of the
vayle of ye temple,Math. xxvii. F. which was immediatly after the
death of Chriſt. Of the which Mathew ſayth thus.
Ecce velum templi ſciſſum eſt in duas partes a ſummo
vſque deorſum.
                     Math. xxvii. F. Behold the vale of the temple was
rent in to .ii. partes fro the top vnto the bottom. This vayle deuidyd
the part of the temple that was called holye: from that part
which was called holieſt of all, as we myght ſay in our church it
deuided, the body of the church: from the quere. And this veyle
 was rent for many cauſes. Fyrſt for the contamination / or (as we
ſay) ſuſpenſion of that holieſt place of all other.Tho. in cathena ſuper Luce. xxiii. For where before
no man myght entre in to it but the highe byſhop ons in the yere:
now it was made open, and ſo was gyuen to the power of the Romanys
 to be contaminate and defoiled by them.Omelia. xxxv. Secondly, for to
ſignifie the reuelacion and declaring of miſteries. For as Origen
ſayth.Super. Math. In the paſſion of our lord, when the veyle was rent: the ſecreat
miſteries was pobliſhed and opened, which vnto that tyme
 was reaſonably hydde and couered.ſuꝑ. Math. in fine. Thyrdly for the ſeparacion / 
diſperſion and diuiſion of the Iues. And hervnto ſaynt Hillary
ſaith, therfore the veyle of ye temple is rent: for that after this, the
people of the Iues ſhuld be deuided in partes, and ſhortly after:
they ware diſperpled ouer all the worlde. Alſo the honour and
glorie of the temple with the cuſtodye of aungelles ware taken away.Libro. vii. de bel. Iuda ico. Ca. xii.
Ioſephus ſaith, that there ware ſtirrynges mouinges and
voyces hard in the temple, ſaiyng & cryenge. Let vs departe from
 this place.Super. Mar. xv. Fourthly, to ſygnifie ye openyng of heuyn which vnto
that tyme was ſhut. And herto ſaynt Hierom ſaith. The veyle of
 the temple was rent, that is, heuyn is openyd. Fyftly: to ſignifie
the curaciō of our ſynnes / Herunto Theophilus ſayth.Thomas. Super. Mar. xv. The body
of Chriſt is ye temple whoſe veyle and garment: is his fleſhe, and
this veyle or fleſhe was rent for ye curing of our ſinnes. Or thus.

Our fleſhe or bodie is the veyle of our temple that is our ſoule,
the vertue and poure of this fleſhe was rent in Chriſtes paſſion,
from the toppe vnto the bottom, that is from Adam the fyrſt man
vnto the laſte man that ſhalbe in the ende of the worlde for Adam
was made hole by the paſſion of Chriſt, and his fleſhe is not now
vnder the curſe of god or of the lawe, and after the general reſurrection
we all ſhalbe honored with incorrupcion & inmortalitye.
               
               
                  ¶The thyrd Myracle.
                  
                     THe thyrd Myracle was the erth quake / and therfore
the euangeliſt ſaith.Math. xxvii. F. 
                     Et terra mota eſt. And the erth was
mouyd or dyd quake. And that was for .iii. cauſes.
Fyrſt to ſhewe that it was not worthy to receyue in to 
it this lorde.Super. Math. in fine. And therfore Hillarius ſayth, the erth dyd quake: for
he was not able to take this deed body in to it. Seconde cauſe is
for the malyce of the Iues. Herunto Symon de Caſſia ſaith. It 
was cōuenient that the erthe ſhulde quake:Libro. xiii. when the maker of the
erth dyd ſuffre death in his corporall bodie. The erth dyd quake
at the gyuyng of the law, to make them afraied to whom he gaue
the law and which ſhuld breake the law. The erth dyd alſo quake
at the death of Chriſt: that his vniuſt death ſhuld be knowen or
felt thorowe out all the world. Thyrd cauſe was to inſtructe the 
myndes of all faithful people, that they ſhuld feare god and know
and beleaue: that the iuſte perſon ſuffred death for the vniuſte, the
godly: for the wicked / the holy perſon: for ſynners, and the ſon of
god ſuffred death in his mortal bodie, for the redempcion of man.
               
               
                  ¶The forth Myracle.
                  
                     THe Fourth Myracle was the rentynge or breakynge of
the ſtonys.Math. xxvii. F. For the euangeliſt ſayth. Et petre ſciſſe ſunt.
And the ſtonys ware rent or broken. And that was for
iiii. cauſes. Fyrſte for therby was verified the ſayng of
the prophet Zachary.Ca. xiiii. A. 
                     Scindetur mons oliuarum ex media parte ſui
ad orientem et occidentem. The mount of Oliuete ſhalbe rent or
broken for the myd parte of it from the Eſte to the Weſt. Second
cauſe is to ſignifie the great vertue of the worde of god. And here
vnto ſaynt Hillary ſayth.Super. Math. in fi
                           •
                        e. E. The worde of god and the powre of his
eterne vertue doth diuide and breake all ſtrong & hard or myghty
thynges.Libro. xiii. Thyrd cauſe, was to confoūd the Iues. For as Simon

de Caſſia ſayth. The breakyng and rentyng of ſtones: is na open
crye and an accuſacion of the inſenſible thynges agaynſte the
Iues, that the gyuer of life and maker of all thynges is vniuſtly
dampned. The Iues dyd crie with lowde voice, crucifie hym, but
now the ſtonys on theyr maner dyd crye by theyr partes broken
as by theyr open lippys, that the Iues did wrong and ſo wher as
the reaſonable men wold not anſwere for the truthe in this falſe
condempnacion of Ieſu: the ſtonys rent or broken in theyr maner
ſpake. The .iiii. cauſe was to enflame the hertes of ſynners. For
as the ſame Symon ſayth.Ibidem. The ſtonys rent or broken in theyr
maner dyd prouoke the hard hartes of men, that they ſhuld be
broken by contricion and alſo remembre hym that ſuffred ſuch
paynes and paſſyon for them.
               
               
                  ¶The .v. Myracle.
                  THe .v. Myracle was the openyng of the ſepulcres or
graues.Math. xxvii. F. And therfore theuangeliſt ſayth. Et monumenta
aperta ſunt. And ye ſupulcres or graues ware openid.
And this was for .iii. cauſes. Fyrſt to ſhew that the priſon of hell
was openyd,ſuꝑ. Math. in fine. for as ſaynt Hillary ſayth. Then was the clauſures
of death openyd. Secondly for the example of our reſurrection.
For this was a token or ſigne that deed men ſhuld riſe agayne accordyng
to the ſayng of the prophet.Ezech. 37. D. 
                     Ego aperiam tumulos veſtros.
I ſhall open your grauys. Thyrdly for our ſpirituall inſtruccion.
For hereby we be lerned that we ſhuld open the ſepulcres of
our conſcience / by true and playne confeſſion that the carion and
filthynes of our ſynnes may be ſeen and caſt out. And here note
that the myracle before the death of Chriſt: was ſhewed aboue in
the heuyns. For by fore his death: Chriſte was in a maner onely
knowen in heuyn. But the myracles after his death ware ſhewed
and done in the erth, for then began the knowlege of Chriſt to be
ſpred abrode vpon the erth.
               
               
                  ¶The .vi. Myracle.
                  THe .vi. Myracle was the riſyng agayne of deed men.Math. xxvii. F.
And therfore theuangeliſt ſayth. Et multa corpora ſanctotum
qui dormierant: ſurrexerunt. &c. And the bodyes
of many ſayntes which ware deed: aroſe, and cam out of theyr
graues after Chriſtes reſurrection, and cam into the holy citie of

Hieruſalem, and apperyd to many. This teſtimony of the riſyng
of deed men is conuenient. Fyrſt for theyr nombre, for they ware
many. Secondly, for theyr condicyon, for they were holy and the
bodyes of holy ſayntes. Thyrdly for the noueltye, for they aroſe
after theyr death and buriyng. Alſo for the tyme, for it was after
the reſurrection of Chriſt, for he was the firſt that roſe. Fyftly for
the holy place for they cam into the holy citye. And alſo for that
they apperyd to many perſones.
               
               
                  ¶The .vii. Myracle.
                  
                     THe .vii. Myracle was the cōuerſion of moch people.
Of the which the euangeliſt ſayth.Math. xxvii. F. 
                     Centurio et qui
cum eo erant cuſtodientes Ieſum viſo terre motu et
hijs que fiebant: timuerunt valde dicentes. Vere filius
dei erat iſte. When Centurio (which was a capteyn
of a .C. men) and they that were wt hym, watchyng and keapyng
Ieſus, ſawe the erth quake and thoſe thynges which happened
then: they fearyd greatly and ſayd, of a ſuerty this was the ſon of
god. This Centurio and his compaygney confeſſyd Chriſt to be
the ſon of god, and this was don for .v. cauſes. Fyrſt for that he
ſaw ſo many great myracles don, which mouyd hym to this confeſſion
and fayth. Second was for the callyng of the paganes or
gentylles to the fayth.Libro. xiii. Behold (ſayth Simon de Caſſia) a great
miſtery, that in the Natyuitie or byrth of our lorde, and alſo at
his death: the gentylles dyd preuent the Iues and cam to the faith
before them. For at the byrth of Chriſt the .iii. kynges and greate
wyſe men which cam from the Eeſt to worſhip Chriſte: dyd preuent
the Iues at that tyme. And now at his death this Centurio
with his compaigney of Rome, that cam from the Weſte: dyd alſo
firſt beleue. Thyrd reaſon was to reuok his errours. For now
Centurio dyd glorifie god: that ſo had ordred his ſon to ſuffre
death. He beleuyd in to god and glorifed hym beyng ſory that he
had obeyd to the preſident Pylate in ſo cruelly tormentynge the
ſon of god and openly with his mouth he confeſſyd Chriſte to be
iuſte and innocent: whom the maliciouſe Iues had falſly cōdempned
as vniuſte and worthy death. In lyke maner dyd his compaigney
ſayng the ſame with great feare & wondre, and ſo commyng
to the knowlege of true fayth: deſeruyd forgyuenes of theyr
errours and infidelitie by the merit of the prayer of Chriſt, when
he prayed for his crucifiers and ſayd. Father forgyue them: they

know nat what they doo. Forth reaſon is for to confounde the heretikes.Super. Math. 27.
And therefore ſaynt Hierom ſayth. Note here that Centurio
a gentyll and pagane ſeyng Chriſte put to moſt ſhamefull
death, yet for all that ſeyng ſuch Myracles confeſſyd Chriſt to be
the ſon of god, and Arrius a chriſten man. And a preſt or doctor
in the churche of Chriſte, dyd blaſpheme Chriſte and ſay that he
was a creature & not the natural ſon of god. Fyfth reaſon was for
the informacion of vs chriſtians.Sermone. xiii. de paſſione. d
                           •
                        i. Herunto ſayth the holy pope
Leo. Euery man ſhuld tremble and be afraed in ye remembraunce
of the paſſion of his redemar Chriſt as Centurio was in ye ſyght
therof the hard hertes of men ſhuld be broken as ware the ſtones,
and they that be buried in the cuſtom of ſynne: ſhuld caſt away all
obſtacles & cuſtoms or occaſiōs of ſyn and without tariyng aryſe
vp, and com vnto the holy citie / that is to the church & there be reconſyled
and ſo appere to many perſones, that they may ſe and
know you truly riſen from ye death of ſynne vnto the life of grace,
and ſo that which was doon corporally at the paſſion of Chriſte,
may now be doon ſpiritually in our hertes and ſoulys by the remembraunce
of the ſame paſſion.
               
               
                  ¶The .viii. Myracle.
                  
                     THe .viii. Myracle was the very blode and very watre
ranne out of Chriſtes ſyde after his death. For as the
euangeliſt ſayth.Ioh. 19. F. 
                     Iudei autē quoniam paraſceue erat. &c.
The Iues bycauſe it was the ſabboth euen, that the
bodyes ſhuld not remayne and contynue vpon the croſſys on the
ſabboth day (for that ſabboth day was an hygh day and ſolempne
feſt with them) they (I ſay) beſought Pylate that there legges
myght be broken and ſo taken downe of the croſſe. The Iues dyd
make this deſire to Pylate for .iiii.Libro. xiii. cauſes, of the which Symon
de Caſſia maketh mencion. Fyrſt, for the reuerence of there feſtfull
day. It was a meruelouſe ſuperſticion of the Iues (ſayth he)
that thought yt theyr ſabboth day ſhulde be violate and defoyled:
if the bodies of thoſe which ware condempned to death: ſhulde
hyng that day vpon ye croſſe, but they had no conſcience nor wold
ſe the cōtaminacion and defoylyng of theyr owne ſoulys, whiche
for enuy condempned the innocent falſly to death. Secondly it
was for the vnquietnes of the people, that the Iues alledged for
them to Pilate ye reuerence of the ſabboth day (but in theyr hertes
was hyd great malice) for they pretendyd that they wold haue his

body taken downe, leſſe the people ſhuld be truobled and vnquieted
vpon the ſabbot day which is a day of quietnes / but it was for
the great ſignes and miracles that ware ſhewed at his death and
after his death, and they thought that if the people ſhuld ſee the
bodie hyng vpon ye croſſe: that therby they remembryng all theſe
ſignes: ſhuld ſhortly be mouyd to inſurrection and agaynſt them
that condempned hym to death. Thyrdly for that they wold haue
no mo myracles ſhewed. For they ware afrayd that if he contynued
long vpon the croſſe: that there ſhulde haue ben many momyracles
ſhewed. Forthly they dyd it to auoyde perilles, for
they councelynge to gether: decreyd wiſely for them ſelfe corporally:
that the bodies of the deed perſones condempned to death
ſhulde not be ſuffred to hyng long, for the auoydyng of many perillys
that myght hap. It is the cuſtome of wyſe gouernars of
any cōmynaltie to remoue or a voyde that perſon quicke or deed
by whome they feare any troble to com. And therfore the princes
of the Iues deſyred Pylate, that theyr leggꝭ myght be broken, and
ſo taken downe. And then the ſawgioures cam & brake the leggꝭ
of the .ii.Suꝑ. Ioh. tractatu. C. xx. theuys, that was (as ſaynt Auſten ſayth) yt they myght
the more ſhortly dye, and alſo for the commaūdement of the lawe / 
but when they cam to Ieſus and ſe that he was deed all redy: they
brake nat his legges.
                        Deut. 21. D And that was for .ii.Ioh. 19. F. cauſes after Symon
de Caſſia.Libro. xiii. Fyrſt for verifiyng of the figure, for here of we had a
figure bifore in the paſchall lambe, of whom it was commaūdyd
that they ſhuld breake no bone of it.Exodi. 12. G. Nat ſo to be vnderſtand that / 
that figure or commaundement was the cauſe that Chriſt bonys
or legges ware nat broken: but contrary wiſe / bycauſe that god
had ſo prouided that no bone ſhuld be broken in Chriſt: therfore
it was commaundyd and keapt in the paſchall lambe that was a
figure of Chriſte. Secondly it was to ſygnifie a thyng in the
miſticall body of our ſauiour Chriſte, that is, that the bonys of
this miſticall body, which be the perfite men, ſhuld nat be broken
or ouercum by īpacience in any tribulacion or aduerſite / but that
they ſhulde continue and abyde vnſuperable / redy to ſuffre all
thynges vnto the death. And though ſumtyme they be ouercum
in body / that ther body is taken and put to priſon and paynes: yet
in mynde and good maners they be neuer ouercum nor broken.
And therefore they brake nat Chriſtes legges. But one of the
ſawgiours with a ſpeare dyd thruſt Chriſt to the hert, and furth
with there cam out watre and blode. This man was claled Longius,
and he dyd thus for the pleaſure of the Iues which wold be

certified of his death. This Longyne was then a cruell and a
wicked man, but afterward he was conuerted and dyed an holy
martyr. It is ſayd that his ſyght was very feble, and as the blode
ran downe by the ſpeare from the hert of Chriſte by chaunche it
toched his yen: and furthwith he had his ſyght clerly, and ſo he
beleauyd in Chriſte, lefte his ſawgiourſhyppe, and enſtructe by
the apoſtles in the fayth of Chriſt: he leuyd an holie monaſticall
lyue by the ſpace of .xxxviii. yeares in the citie of Ceſary in the
county of Capadoce, and after that he had cōuerted moche peop
                        •
                     e
to the fayth of Chriſt by his holie word and good example: at laſt
he was put to death for the fayth of Chriſte. And that watre and
blode cam out of the ſyde of Chriſte: it was done for .iii. cauſes.
Fyrſt for the multiplicacion of myracles. It was a boue nature / 
and a very myracle that pure and very blode / and pure and very
watre ſhuld com out of any deed bodie. And note here that this
blod and watre cam not myxte to gether: but fyrſt, very pure blod
and after that very pure watre.Libro. xiii. As Symon de Caſſia ſayth. Secondly
it was done for the vertue of the ſacramentes.
                        Tract. 120. For of this
wounde they had theyr efficacitie and vertue. And herunto ſaynt
Auſten ſayth ſuper Iohannem / the euangeliſt vſed here a very
good and a diſcreat terme ſayng. Aperuit latus eius. Non percuſſit
nec vulnerauit. Saynt Iohan ſayth that the ſawgiour with his
ſpear dyd open the ſyde of Chriſt, he doth nat ſay that he ſmote or
wondyd it / but opened it, that he myght ſhew that, that wounde
was as the dore of lyfe, from whens all ſacramentes haue theyr
vertue (as we ſayd in the .lxiii. article) with out the which ſacramentes
no man may entre in to ye eterne life, ſpecially if they may
be had. Thyrdly this was done to enflame our loue. And herunto
ſaynt Auſten ſayth. One of the ſawgioures dyd open Chriſtes
ſyde with a ſpeare: that by yt open wounde we myght ſe and know
the loue that Chriſt had in his hert to vs, and ſo therby loue hym
the more ſtrongly and faythfully.
               
               
                  ¶The .ix. Myracle.
                  
                     THe .ix. Myracle was the buriyng of Chriſt, for it was a
meruelouſe rare and a thyng neuer hard or ſeen: that a
perſon ſo vilely and rebukfully hangyd vpon the croſſe
as Chriſt was ſhuld be ſo honorally buryed of great and
deuote perſons / as he was. Of this buriyng, ſaynt Iohan ſayth.
Poſt hec rogauit Pilatum Ioſeph ab Aromathia. &c.
                     Ioh. 19. G. After that

Chriſt was deed: Ioſeph of Aromathy deſired Pylate to graunt
and gyue to hym the bodie of Ieſu. This peticion he made, for
iiii. cau
                        •
                     es.
                        Omel. 84. Fyrſt, for (as Criſoſtome ſayth) Ioſeph ſuppoſed that
the malice of ye Iues that they had agaynſt Chriſt / had ben endyd
ſeyng that they had crucified hym,Suꝑ. Ioh. and therfore he went boldly to
Pylate and aſked ye body. Secondly: bycauſe of his familiarytie
that he had with Chriſt, for he was the diſciple of Chriſt thoughe
then it was nat openly knowen.Libro. xiii. ꝓpe finem. Thyrdly, Ioſeph was a good
man and therfore he fearyd nat to do a good dede. Of his goodnes
Symon de Caſia / ſayth. We may nat iuſtly reproue this Ioſeph
in any thyng: whome ſo ſeriouſly the euangeliſt Luke commendith
ſayng.Luce. 23. G 
                     Ecce vir nomine Ioſeph qui erat de curio, vir bonus
et iuſtus. Hic non conſenſerat conſilio et actibus eorum. &c. Behold
(ſaith Luke) a man called Ioſeph which was a noble man worldly,Beda ſuꝑ. Lucam. Ca. 91.
for he was of the ordre of the court / or of the councell of the emperour / 
a good man to god & iuſte to his neighboures. This Ioſeph
dyd nat conſent to the counſell and actes or deades of ye Iues
agaynſt Chriſt / he dwellyd in Aromathy a citie of Iurie, and he
truſted alſo and wayted for the kyngdom of god. Som ſayth he
was decurio bycauſe he was a captayne ouer .x. men. And this
office agreith to a miſtery, for he keapt the .x. commaundementes
of god, and thus for his goodnes he was bolde to aſke of Pylate
the body of Ieſus. Forthly it was for his dignytie, for as we ſayd
before, he was a noble man and riche, and well accept with Pylate,
and therfore he went the more boldly to Pylate: where as a
poore mean man durſt nat be ſo bolde. And therfore we may ſay
that it was done of the prouiſion of god that Ioſeph ſhuld haue
that riches and noblenes wherby he myght the more honorably
burye the body of our ſauiour Ieſu. &c. Of this we ſpake in the
.lxiiii. artycle.
               
               
                  ¶The .x. Myracle.
                  
                     THe .x. Myracle or meruell was the watche & keapyng
of the ſepulcre, for ye Iues deſyred of Pylate, that they
myght haue ſawgiours to watch and keape the ſepulcre,
which was a rare and a meruelouſe thyng, that he
which was put to ſo vile and ſhamefull death: ſhuld be keapt and
watched. And note, that I do nat take a Myracle here properly
and in his moſt propre ſignificacion: but largely, as euery rare
and vn wonte thyng yt is meruelouſe may be called ſo a myracle.

And of this maruell, we ſpake ſufficiently in the .lxv. article, of
the ſecond parte. Of other myracles that ware ſhewed that tyme:
ye ſhal ſe hereafter in the treates of Bernardyne of the .xii. merulouſe
frutes of the tree of life, and of the wonderouſe miſteries of
the moſt holye croſſe. Alſo ye haue lyke myracles in the fyrſt parte
of this boke in the fyrſt chapiter of the .v. particle. &c.
               
            
            
               ¶Why Chriſt wold ſuffre ſo many and ſuch
greiuouſe paynes for vs. Capi. ii.
               HEre ſum doctours aſſygne diuerſe reaſons / as it ware
by a manere of recapitulation, or reherſynge of ſuche
thynges as haue ben ſpoken byfore of the paſſion of our
lord, ſayng that Chriſt ſuffred ſo many, and ſo greuouſe paynes
for vs: for that, that he wold by euery one of them / take from vs
ſom euyll, and gyue to vs ſom good thyng. Which thyng is to be
diligently attendyd / and ſtrongly & alſo continually to be infixed
and prynted in our hert. We deſeruyd by our ſynnes: eternall heuines,
agaynſt the which our lord Ieſu in the begynnyng of his
paſſion after his laſt ſupper did wyllyngly take ſo great heauines
that he his ſelfe ſayd vnto his diſciples.Math. 26. D. 
                  Triſtis eſt anima mea vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
ad mortem. My ſoule is heuy vnto the death. And this heuines
he toke vpon hym, that by it which he ſuffred īnocently: he myght
take frome vs that euerlaſtyng heuines which we had deſeruyd
for our ſynnes, and alſo that he myght gyue to vs / eternal ioy and
gladnes. Alſo we by our ſynnes deſeruyd to be perpetually ſubdued
vnder ye power and thraldom of the dyuell and ſo to be committed
to the eternall priſon of hell. But our lorde in his bleſſyd
paſſion ſuffred hym ſelfe to be taken priſonar, that he by his ſufferyng
innocently that captiuitie: myght therby delyuer vs from
the power and captiuitie of the dyuell and alſo preſerue vs from
that moſt darke priſon of hell, and reſtore vs vnto the libertie of
the childerne of god. Moreouer we by our ſynnes deſeruyd to be
perpetually aſſociate and accōpanyed with the dyuels and other
dampned ſoulys. Agaynſt this our ſauiour Ieſu wold be aſſociat
with theuys and wold be accompted as one of thē: that he myght
bye vs from the cumpaygnie of dampned ſoulys and from the
feloweſhyp of dyuels, and ſo to make vs the chyldern of god and
felowes of aūgells. He to whom al the glorie of heuyn doth ſerue
and which only of hym ſelfe is all beautie and glorie wold ſuffre
ſhamys rebukes and mockynges: that he myght redeme vs from

confuſion and etarnall deriſion of dyuels and theyr rebukes, and
alſo that he myght reuoke and bryng vs agayne to the glorie of
heuyn which we loſt by our ſynne. He that onely hath power to
louce and bynde, of his great mercy wold be bounde for vs: that
he myght louce vs from the bondes of our ſynnes, and from al the
paynes yt we deſeruyd by our ſynnes. And at laſt he ſuffred death
innocently: that by his death he myght deſtroy our eternall death
and alſo gyue to vs eternall lyfe in glory. And thus ye may vnder
ſtonde of all other paynes of Chriſte. For vniuerſally to ſpeake
ther was no thyng vayne, no thyng vnprofitable ī al his paſſion,
but euery payne that he ſuffred, was ordenyd to take away from
vs ſum perpetuall euyll that we had deſeruyd by our ſynnes, and
to merite and gyue to vs ſum eternal goodnes that we had loſt by
our ſynne. And therfore ſaynt Auſten ſayth, Chriſt ſuffreth to my
profit / he is heuy for me, he ſoroweth to my cōforth. And the cauſe
of theſe is this, for he hath louyd vs eternally, and hath deſired to
be louyd of vs agayne, for loue can nat be recompenſyd but by
loue.Suꝑ. Cāti. Serm̄. xi. And hereunto alſo ſaynt Bernard ſayth. Myght nat our
creatoure and maker repare his creature agayne or redeme hym
without that gret difficulty & hard paynes of his paſſion? Yes he
myght haue done it without payne, if it had ſo pleaſed hym. But
he wold rather do it with his great iniurie and payne: to wyn the
loue of man and to gyue hym many and great cauſes of loue. For
this great difficultie and greuouſe paynes that he ſuffred for our
redemption ſhuld moue that perſon to gyue hym thankes, which
lityll regardyd the werke of his creaſion, bicauſe it was done ſo
eaſly. What (thynke you) ſayd the vnkynd man, of his creacion? I
was create and made lyghtly and frely, without any payne or labour
of my creatour and maker, he onely ſpake the worde: and I
was creat, as al other thynges ware. So the wicked vnkyndnes
of man lytyll regardyng the werke of his creaſion: ſhewed there
matter of vnkyndnes: where he ſhulde haue taken cauſe of loue.
But now the mouth of thoſe wicked men be ſtopped. For now it
is more clere than the lyght, what payne and labour thy lord god
had (o vnkynd man) for thy redempcion. Of a lorde: he becam a
ſeruant, where he was riche: he was made poore / he beyng god:
toke vpon hym a mortall body, and the ſon of god: deſpiſed nat / 
for the to be made ye ſon of man. Remembre therfore (thou vnkynd
man) though thou were made of nought: yet thou wart nat redemyd
of nought. In .vi. dayes god made all the worlde, and the
(o thou man) amonges them all. But .xxxiii. yere he labored continually

with great paynes to werke thy health and ſaluacion.
What laboure had he in ſoueryng the incommodities of our nature / 
as hunger, thyrſt / heat / colde / and ſuche other. What temptacions
of the deuyll / what ſlaunders / rebukes / deſpiſynges, mockynges,
beatynges with many greuouſe paynes, and at laſt moſt
paynefull and ſhamefull death. Therfore thou man be no more
vnkynd, but loue and thanke god, and haue compaſſion of thy
creatoure / redemar and ſauiour. Amen.
            
            
               ¶How Chriſte deſcendyd vnto the
helles. The thyrd Chapitre.
               
                  AFter that our ſauiour Ieſus had gyuen vp his ſpirit,
and ſo was deed: furthwith his ſoule vnit and knyt or
ioyned vnto the godhed: deſcendyd vnto the helles, vnto
the holy fathers that were there in priſon and there
ſtode with them. Of this deſcenſion: Damaſcen ſayth
thus.Libro. iii. The ſoule of Chriſte ioyned to his godhed: deſcendyd vnto
the helles,Ca. xxix. that as he had bifore, comforted them that were in the
world aboue the erth: ſo he myght ſhyne and comforte them that
ſat in darknes and in the ſhadowe of death. He deſcendyd to comforte
the holy faythers / to glad them and to glorifie them. For as
ſhortly as he preſentyd hym ſelfe to them: they dyd ſe his godhed / 
and ſo then they ware in paradiſe, that is, they had the clere ſyght
of the godhed: which is ioy and lyfe eternall. Of this deſcenſion
alſo ſaynt Auſten in a certen ſermon ſayth thus.Sermone. C. xxxvii. de tꝑe. C. Anon as Chriſte
had gyuen vp his ſpirit: his ſoule knyt to his godhed: diſcendyd
to ye deapnes of helles. And whan he was cum to yt place of derkenes,
as a victoriouſe captayne ſhynyng and terrible: tho wicked
hell houndes and legions of derknes, beholdyng hym: begane to
enquire and ſay. From whens cam this perſon, ſo ſtrong, ſo terrible,
ſo ſhinyng and gloriouſe? That worlde which hath bene
euer ſubdued to vs: dyd neuer ſende to vs ſuch a deed perſon.
He neuer ſent to vs ſuche geſtes before this tyme. What is he,
that ſo boldly entreth in to our iuriſdiction? And nat onely he
doth nat fear our tormentes: but moreouer he dothe louce other
frome our bondes. Beholde and ſee howe they whiche ware
wonte to weape and more ouer vnder oure tormentes: nowe
they rebuke vs and vpbrayde vs of theyr deliueraunce and ſaluacion.
And nat onely, they in nothynge feare vs: but moreouer
they threten vs. There was neuer deed men ſo proud & ſtubbourne

borne agayſt vs as theſe be. Nor neuer myght any perſones in
captiuitie: be ſo glad and ioyfull as theſe be. O thou Lucifer our
captayne, why wold yu bryng this perſon vnto our place? All thy
myrth is paſte, all thy ioy is turned in to weapyng and ſorowe.
Whan thou dyd hang Chriſte vpon the croſſe: thou kneweſt nat
what dammage thou prepared for thy ſelfe in hel. After theſe complaynyng
voyces of theſe moſt cruell tormentoures of hell: there
was a greate multitude of ſayntes weapynge for ioy that ſayde.
Welcome our redemer, welcome our ſauyour, whom we daylye
and of long tyme with great deſire haue loked for and taried thy
cummyng. Thou haſte now deſcendyd vnto helles for vs, forſake
vs nat whā thou ſhalt returne agayne to heuyns. O deuote ſoule.
Conſider here howe tho holie fathers dyd ioy in the cummyng of
Chriſt, how they ware repleniſhed with great gladnes, al ſorow
and diſpleaſure vtterly excludyd.Pſal. C. xvii. And ſo they ſtode in ſonges and
prayſyngꝭ byfore god ſayng. Bleſſyd be he that is com in ye name
of god, our lord god hath ſhyned to vs. Thou art our god / our ſauiour,Pſal. C. vi.
thou haſt dryuen away al derknes from vs, and thou haſt
louſed our bondes yu haſt broken ye braſon gates & the iren barres
thou ī thy great ſtrenght deliuers ye bond priſoners, and yu leades
thy electe people frō priſon, wt great ioy. Therfore now we laude
and worſhip the for euermore, and ſo they fell al proſtrate & worſhypped
him.Pſal. 77. Than anſweryng to them / our lord Ieſu ſayd. Aten
dite popule meus legem meam. O my people attende my lawe.
Peace be to you and eternall ioy. I am your lord god yt brought
you out of Egipte. And many other thynges we may ſuppoſe
that Chriſte ſpake to them, of the which the goſpell maketh no
mencion. Alſo he ſaid, take hede and ſe, for I am your god, which
hath create redemyd and ſauyd you.Pſal. xxxix. It is written of me in the
hede or begynnynge of the boke: that I ſhulde do the wyll and
pleaſure of my father.Pſal. 97. And for your health I haue deſcendyd. I
haue ben poore and in greate laboures from my yong age entendyng
to the ſaluacion of your ſoules. They that ſhulde haue
ben my chylderne:Pſal. xvii. ware made ſtraungers to me, and haue made
falſe lies vpon me.Pſal. 37. My frendes and negboures thought euyll
agaynſt me.Pſal. xxi. All that ſaw me: dyd mocke me. I was ſcourged all
the day,Pſal. lxxii. and my betyng was in the mornyng.Pſal. xxi. They haue diggyd
my handes and my feet,Pſal. 68. and they haue nombred all my bonys.
They put gall in to my meate,Pſal. iii. & they gaue me vinegre to drynke.
I haue ſleapte and ſlumberyd or dyed vpon the croſſe and my

bodye reaſteth in hope of my reſtrreccion,
                     It. lxxxvii. and ſo furth of diuers
other thynges which the prophetes wrote vpon hym.Pſal. lxxi. As ſaynt
Bonauenture ſayth In his meditacions of the lyfe of Chriſt. And
then al the holy ſoules anſweryd, bleſſed be ye name of thy maieſty
for euermore and all the erth myght be replenyſhed with thy maieſtie
and glorie.Pſal. lxxxix Amen Amen.Pſal. x C. 3. For thou art made to vs a refuge
and a comforter for euermore. If thou had nat healpyd vs: our
ſoules ſhuld haue abiden in hell eternally.1. Pet. 1. C. But thou our lord god
haſt remembred vs and haſt redemyd vs with thy preciouſe blode
thou haſt ſhewyd vnto vs thy face which the aungelles in heuyn
deſire to beholde.Pſal. lxv. All the world myght worſhyp the our lord god
and prayſe thy holie name now and euer Amen. In ſuch laudes / 
prayſynges / ſonges and ioyenges: ſtode the holy ſoules in limbo
patrum nygh vnto the tyme of Chriſtes reſurrection, and there
was alſo with them a great cumpaigney of aūgelles ioyeng and
prayſyng god with them. And after this our lord toke thoſe holy
ſoules frō hel wt great ioy, and wt great glory goyng byfore them:
brought them and put them in Paradiſe of pleaſures. And there
a lytyll while abydyng with them and with Enoch and Hely / 
which ther knowyng hym: dyd worſhyppe hym and prayſe hym.
And then our ſauiour ſayd to them. It is time that I go and reyſe
my bodie. I will go and take it agayne. And all the holy fathers
fallyng doune proſtrate: ſayd, go ye our lord and gloriouſe kyng
and retourne ſhortly agayne if it ſhal ſo pleaſe you, for we gretly
deſire to ſe your gloriouſe bodye.
               
                  A prayer.
                  
                     
                        O
                      Good Ieſu, thy vnſpekable pitie and charitie was
nat yet ſaciate and content with thy death, but that
thou wold viſite the clauſures of hell and redeme thy
people there beyng in captiuite, therfore thy moſte
bleſſyd and gloriouſe ſoule knyt to thy godhed, deſcendyd
vnto the helles delyueryng thy elect people from ye derknes
and ſhadowe of death: I beſeach the O merciful Ieſu that thy
grace and mercy myght deſcende vpon the ſoules of our parentes
bretherne / ſiſterne and all our kynſfolkes / alſo vpon the ſoulys of
our familiar aquayntance / benefactoures and al other that we be
bounde to pray for and of al chriſten ſoulys, that thou wold delyuer
them from ye paynes that they haue deſeruyd for theyr ſynnes,
and that thou wold bryng them to eternall glorie. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               ¶Of the reſurrection of our Lorde. The .iiii. Chaptre.
               
                  OUr Lord cummyng with an honorable multitude of
aūgelles very early on the Sonday in the mornyng
and reyſyng his moſte holy bodye from his ſepulcre:
dyd cum furth of the ſame by his owne power & vertue
it beyng cloſſe or ſhut & ſealid as the Iues left it.
And hereof ſaynt Auſten ſayth. Our ſauiour Ieſus after his beatynges
and ſcornynges after the drynke of vinegre and gall, after
the paynes of the croſſe and his woundes, and at laſte after his
death and deſcendyng to hell: in a new fleſhe and body but yet the
ſame: he aroſe from death / the ſecreat and hyd lyfe, and health reſeruyd
in death: dyd riſe and cum agayne more beautiouſe and
gloriouſe after his death.Pſal. C. iii. Then was the age of Chriſte renuyd:Gene. 49. B.
as is in the Egle. Then the Lion dyd reyſe his whelp. Then the
byrd called Fenix dyd lyue agayne.Hebre. 18. A. Then the potter after that his
pottes ware broken, of the ſame erth: made a newe pot, after his
owne pleaſure.Ione. 2. D. Then Ionas cam out of the Whallys belye with
out hurte.Zach. 4. A. Then was the candelſtike coueryd with golde. Then:
(that is at this reſurrection) the tabernacle of Dauid that was
fallen:Amos. 9. C was reyſed vp agayne. Then the ſon ſhone, Which byfore
was in a cloude.Ioh. 12. D. Then was the whete grayne or corne quickned:
which caſt in to the erth was deed.Iudicū. 16. A. Then the Hart toke his hornes
agayn. Then Sampſon toke the gates of the citie and went vnto
the hyll.Gene. 41. C. Then Ioſeph brought out of priſon: was ordeyned
and made the lorde of al Egipt. Then the ſacke that is the body
of Chriſt cut and rent in his paſſion:Pſal. xxix. was now clad with glorie
and ioy. Wherfore this paſchal ſolempnite is very greate and ſolempne.Rōs. 6. B.
In the which Chriſt ariſyng from death / dothe nat now
die, or is nat now deed and death hereafter ſhall neuer haue dominion
or power ouer hym. For god his father hath clothed hym
with the ſtole of īmortalytie and glory. And in this ſolempnitie:
we haue example of our reſurrection, the hope and truſt of the
heuenly cuntre is offred to vs, the clauſures of hell ben deſtroyd,
and the gates of heuyn be openyd to vs. Therfore this is the day
that our lorde hath made.Pſal. C. xvii. Ioy we and be glad therin. For this
day Chriſt hath taken away the burnyng ſwearde, and openyd
the gates of paradyſe, which no man myght cum before, vnto
that Chriſt cam thyther with the holy thefe / ſayng to ye aūgelles.
Open ye to me the gates of iuſtyce and I entred in to them,Pſal. C. xvii. ſhall
prayſe god. This is the day in the which the ſinagoge is deed or
endid / and the church borne or begun. This is the day in ye which

we ſyng Alleluya that is, we laude and prayſe god. Prayſe we
therfore (frendes) our lord god in our lyfe and in our ſpeach with
herte and mouth, with our voyces and good maners for ſo will
our lord god haue Alleluya (that is his prayſynges) ſong to hym,
that there be no diſcorde in the prayſe / that his lite and wordes agrey
in one. O bleſſyd Alleluya, or prayſyngꝭ of god that is ſong
in heuyn, where as is the temple of god, and legions of aūgelies.
There is the moſt hyghe concorde of the prayſers. There is no
repugnaunce in the membres agaynſt the ſpirit. There is no ſtryuyng
for couetiſe / wherby ſhuld periſh ye victorie of charitie. Let
vs here ſyng Alleluya diligently: that there we myght ſyng it ſurely
here in hope: ther in the very preſence of god / here in the way
there in our heuenly contre / let vs here ſyng, nat for that we haue
the delectacion of quietnes: but for the ſolace of our labour / as we
ſe that men goyng or rydyng by the way, be wonte to ſyng, to
comforte theyr labour, to quicken them in theyr iorney and to go
forward merely. And herunto ſaint Bede ſayth. O my ſoule ariſe
with Chriſte from thy filthy ſepulcre or cuſtom of ſyn. Areiſe vp
thy hert vnto the hope and truſt of thy reſurreccion and eternall
lefe. Let vs now dye from ſyn in this preſent life for ye loue of god
that after our reſurrection we may lyue in the life to com, for if
we mortifie our body nowe for the loue of Chriſte: then we ſhall
reygne with him in euerlaſtyng ioy. Let vs ſo enforce ourſelfe to
be preſent and to honoure god in theſe feaſtes in the cumpaigney
of mortall men: that we may deſerue to be preſent at the eternall
feaſtes with aūgelles. For what ſhuld it profite vs to keape theſe
feaſtes temporally, if we be excludyd from thoſe eternal feaſtes?
For theſe preſent ſolemnities ben but a ſhadowe: of the feaſtes to
cum / therfore we keape theſe feaſtes reuerently and yerely: that
we myght cum to thoſe feaſtes that be continuall. When any feaſt
is here keapt at his day aſſigned: our mynd ſhuld be referryd and
occupied with the deſire of that ſame feaſt that is in heuen continually
& eternall. Therfore our hertes thorow the frequentacion
and vſe of ſpiritual ioy in theſe temporall feaſtꝭ: ſhuld be kyndled
and wax feruent to the deſire of eternal ioyes, and ſo we ſhuld vſe
our meditacions here in the ſhadow of ioy: that in very truth we
may here after haue the fruicion of the true and euerlaſtyng ioy.
Amen All this is taken of ſaynt Gregory.
                     Omel. 2 9.
               
               
                  A prayer.
                  
                     
                     O Lord Ieſu Chriſte our eterne and onely ſwetnes, which
breakyng the bondes of death hath glorified thy bodye / 
and hath riſen from deathe in glorie vnſpekable: I pray
the and I beſeach the for thy gloriouſe and floriſhyng reſurrection
to graunt to me, that I riſyng from vices and ye death
of ſoule may euer floriſhe in vertues and ſo walke in the newnes
of good lyfe that I may ſauer and folowe thoſe thynges that be
aboue and heuenly, and nat tho thynges that be erthly and tranſitorie.
Alſo good lord by the vertue of thy clernes: purge my ſoule
from the derknes of ſyn, that by the ſame vertue at the day of generall
reſurrection my bodye may ariſe vnto glory, that I may
ioy both in ſoule and body, eternally with the in thy glory. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Now Chriſt apperyd to his mother
Mary the .v. Chapitre.
               
                  THe ſame houre that Chriſte roſe, the thre Maries,
that is. Mary Magdalene. Mary Iocobe, and
Mary Salome deſirynge licence of our Ladie: of
great deuocion and loue they had to our ſauioure
Chriſt, began to go with ſwete oyntmentes vnto the
ſepulcre of Chriſt to anoynt his bodye. And our Lady remayned
at home, continuyng in weapyng and prayers. And very conueniently,
theſe thre women ware called by one name, for they ware
of one wyll and mynde, and lyke deſire towardes Chriſte. There
be thre ſtates of men that ſhalbe ſauyd, and iche one of theſe dothe
ſeke Chriſte, and without theſe thre ſtates there is no man ſauyd / 
that is, begynners, profiters, and perfite perſones, or elles, penitentes,
actiue / and contemplatyue perſones, which thre ſtates
be ſignified by the thre. Maries which ſought our lord, and that
we may take by thre interpritacions of this worde. Maria. The
ſtate of begynners or penitentes is noted by. Mary Magdalene,
which was a famouſe and knowen ſynner, and afterwarde very
penitent. And thought ſomtyme by her, may be ſignified the contemplatiue
life,Luce. x. G. as in the .x. chapitre of Luke. Yet at this tyme ſhe
may ſignifie to vs the ſtate of penitentes for the euangeliſt ſayth
of her,Math. 16. C. that Chriſt caſt out .vii. deuylles, that is, al vices, frō her.
And alſo in the goſpell of Luke ſhe is knowen to be the capteyn
and example of all true penitentes.Luce. 7. F. And for this cauſe: ſhe is conueniently
called Maria, that is, a better ſee / or elles after the Hebreus
Maria, commyth of Mara, that is, interpreted bitter, And

hereunto the olde woman Ruth:Ruth. 1. D. ſayde. Non vocetis me Noemy
pulchramiſed vocate me Mara. &c. Call nat me fayre: but call me
bitter, for our Lord hath fulfylled me with bitternes. And this
was verefied in Mary Magdalen,Luce. 7. F. when byfore the feet of our
Lorde: ſhe waſhed with her teares the ſpottes of her ſynnes. So
Petre beyng penitent:Math. xxvi. G. weapt bitterly. And ſo to euery penitent
ſoule may be ſayd the wordes of the prophet.Tren̄. 2. D. 
                  Magna velut mare
contricio tua. O thou penitent ſoule, thy contricion is great and
bitter as the ſee. The ſtate of profiters or of actiue perſons is
ſygnified in Mary Iacoby, that was the mother of Iames the
ſelfe. Iacobus is aſmoche to ſay by īterpretacion as a ſupplanter
or a wreſtlar, for it apperteyneth to actiue perſons and profiters
to ſupplante or to ſubdue vice, alſo to wreſtle and laboure in the
ſpirituall exerciſe of vertues. And herunto is alſo conuenient the
ſecond interpretacion of this name Maria, which after ye Sire
tonge or ſpeach: is called Domina. A lady. For ſith theſe profiters
and actiue perſons be in continual datel, for the pronitie that they
haue to vice, and the difficultie vnto all goodnes and vertue: therfore
it is neceſſary that theſe profiters haue the dominion or ladiſhippe
ouer theyr owne paſſions / and that: by reaſon, ſo that they
gyue no place vnto temptacions. And through this ſtryfe or
wraſtlyng whan reaſon hath the dominion ouer ſenſualitie: vertues
be generate and gotten. The ſtate of contemplatiue and
perfite perſons is ſignified by Mary Salome, which was the
mother of Iames the more and of Iohan the euangeliſt.Math. xx. C. This
woman aſked of Chriſt his kyngdome for her ſonnys. So perfite
and contemplatiue ꝑſons ar chefely occupied about the kyngdom
of god, for they haue in them ſelfe the kyngdom of god and here do
partely taſte therof. And hereunto, Salome, is called by interpretacion,
peacefull. For there is no peace to man in this lyfe: but
in contemplacion. And hereunto accordeth the thyrd interpretacion
of this name Maria, that is, illuminate / and therfore it may
be ſayd to euery contemplatiue perſon.Eſaie. 60. A 
                  Surge illuminate Hieruſalem
quia venit lumen tuum. Ariſe thou perfite ſoule and receyue
lyght for thy lyght cummyth. And alſo iche one of theſe thre Maries
had theyr oyntmentes, as ye may ſe in Ludolphe de Vita x
                     •
                  i
2. parte.Ca. lxx. But if any perſon moue this queſtion why our bleſſyd
Ladie dyd nat go to viſite Chriſtes ſepulcre: as the thre other
Maries dyd? Herunto we may aſſigne thre cauſes. Fyrſt, for the
mother of Chriſte myght nat ſe the ſepulcre of her ſon without
great ſor
                     ••
                  , and ſpecially beyng ſo lately buried. Second cauſe,

for ſhe had weapt ſo moche the Friday and Saterday before, and
brought her ſelfe ſo lowe: that ſhe myght nat ſuſteyne and ſuffre
that laboure. And hereunto ſayth ſaynt Bernard. The bleſſyd
virgyn Marie was ſo feble & weake: that ſhe was brought home
from the croſſe: as halfe deed. Third cauſe, for ye forſayd women
thought that the bodie of Chriſte was then liyng in his ſepulcre,
and therfore they wold haue anoynted (as of old cuſtom haue ben
vſed) his bodie, to preſerue it frome corruption where as this
gloriouſe virgyn knewe that it ſhuld neuer corropte, and that he
was riſen from death to life immortall, or els ſhortly ſhuld riſe.
And therfore ſhe went nat with them. But ſhe ſat in a ſecret place
alone very feble and weake in all the powers of her bodie, for ſhe
had greatly tormentyd her ſelfe with great ſorowe / watche and
abſtinence, from that tyme yt ſhe hard ſay that her onely and dere
belouyd ſon was taken and ſcourged, and afterwarde when ſhe
ſe hym crucified / ſmytyng and knockyng with her delicate handes
vpon her tendre breſte. And thus (I ſay) very feble ſat alone in
contemplacion and prayer and alſo weapyng for thoſe miſteries
and paynes that her ſon had ſuffred. And as ſhe was thus in prayer
and ſwete teares of deuotion: ſodenly her ſon Ieſus cam and
apperyd to her in moſt white clothes of glorie and in the newnes
of his reſurrection, beautiouſe and gloriouſe, with a glad and
louely chere comfortyng his deſolate and heuy mother. And therwith
ſhe knelyng downe worſhipped hym, and then riſyng vp:
with teares and vnſpeakable ioy embraced hym and then all the
bitternes of her ſorowe was torned in to ioy and comforth. After
this they both ſetyng to gether: our Ladie beſily and curiouſly be
held hym in his face handes and feet and in al his bodie, whither
he had the printes and ſygnes of his woundes / ſearchynge and
aſkyng whether all his paynes and ſorowe were clene paſte and
gon from hym. And he ſayd, yea my worſhipful mother all my ſorowes
and paynes be now paſt and gon, and ſhall neuer retorne
agayne to me. O with how great ioy (thynke you) was then that
bleſſyd Lady repleat? When ſhe ſe and beheld her ſon immortall
and impaſſible and nat onely that he ſhuld liue euermore: but alſo
that he had the perpetuall dominion ouer heuen and erth and
all creatures in them. And ſo they louyngly and pleaſantly commynyg
and talkyng to gether: made a great ioyfull paſch, or ſolempne
feaſt. And though of this fyrſt aperyng vnto his mother
there be nothyng written in the goſpels: yet we do godly beleaue / 
that Ieſus fyrſt appered vnto his mother Mary. For ſo it was

conuenyent as doctours don ſay that he ſhuld ſo do, and that he
ſhuld fyrſte conforth and glad his mother by his reſurrection,
which louyd hym aboue all other perſones. Alſo bycauſe ſhe had
more ſorow of his death than any other had: it was ſeamyng and
worthy that he ſhuld fyrſt comforthe her. And the church of Rome
dothe ſeame to approue this ſame for fyrſte in the mornynge of
Eſter daye ſhe maketh a ſolempne ſtacion at the churche of our
Lady, called our Lady the more. Maria maior. Mary the more.
Herby notyng that Chriſt dyd fyrſt appere vnto his mother. And
where the euangeliſt ſayth,Mar. 16. C that Chriſte dyd fyrſte appere vnto
Mary Magdalen: is to be vnderſtondyd of theſe apperynges / 
wherby he wold proue his reſurrection. For he apperyd fyrſt of al
vnto his mother, nat for that he wolde therby proue his reſurreccion:
but for to comforth and glad her with his preſence, and do
his dutie and honour her as his mother.
               
                  A prayer.
                  
                     O Mary the mother of god, moſt graciouſe virgyn & comfortar
of al deſolate perſons callyng and criyng vnto the:
I beſeche the for that gret ioy wherby thou was cōforted,
when thou knoweſt that thy ſon Ieſus Chriſte was riſen ye thyrd
day from death vnto lyfe immortall & impaſſible: that thou wold
be a comfortar of my ſoule, that what tyme I ſhall ariſe both in
body and ſoule at the laſt day of iudgement and there appere before
that ſame ſon of thyn Ieſus Chriſt / and there to rendre myne
accompte of al my thoughtes / wordes and deades: it wold pleaſe
thy motherly pitie to healpe me / that by the (o bleſſyd mother and
vigyn) I myght eſcape the ſentence of eternall dampnacion: and
graciouſly to cum to the euerlaſtynge ioy and glorie with all the
electe and choſen people of god. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶How Ieſu apperyd to Mary Magdalen
The ſyxte Chapitre.
               
                  MAry Magdalen ful of bitternes & ſorow, burning in loue
and nat knowyng what ſhe ſhuld do: for wtout her maiſter
Chriſt: ſhe myght nat lyue, and wher he was buried: ſhe
fonde hym nat and where to ſearch for him ſhe knew nat.
Wherfore of great feruore & conſtancy: ſhe ſtode as if ſhe had ben
amaiſed, for the vehemence of her loue: wold nother ſuffre her to

ſit ne yet to lye, therfore ſhe ſtode without in the garden byfore the
holy ſepulcre weapyng & lamentyng for her lorde. Her hert was
ſo feruently kyndled in loue, ſhe was moued with ſo great pytie / 
drawen with ſo myghty and ſtrong bondes of charitie: that forgotten
her owne infirmitie and frayltie: ſhe was nat withdrawen
and letted frome the viſitynge of Chriſtes ſepulcre for the darknes
of the mournyng, nor yet for the crueltie of the Iues, but rather
ſhe abode there weapyng and ſearchyng for her lorde. She
wold nat departe: thoughe the diſciples went from thens, for ſhe
was ſo kindled in the fyre of loue, ſhe was ſo burned with a feruēt
deſyre / ſhe was ſo wounded with inpacient loue: yt nothyng was
pleaſant to her, but onely weapyng, So that ſhe myght well ſaye
the wordes of the prophete Dauid.Pſal. 4. 
                  Fuerunt mihi lacrime mee panes
die ac nocte. My teares ware to me my breade or meate, bothe
by the nyght and the day / whan it was ſayd to me dayly, where is
thy god. She had loſt her mayſter whom ſhe loued ſo ſyngulerly
that beſydes hym ſhe could loue no body, nor truſt to them. She
was ſo drowned in his loue, he was ſo moche in her mynde: that
in a maner ſhe was inſēſible to al other thyngꝭ. Whyles ſhe thus
weapt for the abſence of Chriſtes body: ſhe oftymes inclyned and
bowed downe her body, lokyng in to the ſepulcre, where as the body
was leyd, ſhe had loſt ye lyfe of her ſoule, & therfore ſhe thought
it better for her to dye: than to lyue, for ſhe peraduenture deynge
myght fynd hym:Omel. 25. whome ſhe myght nat fynde lyuyng. And thus
weapyng (I ſay) ſhe loked oftymes into ye graue, for as ſaynt Gregorie
ſayth. It is nat ſufficient for a louer, to loke ones, for the feruour
of loue encreaſeth the deſyre of ſearchyng or lokyng. And at
laſt whan ſhe ſo loked: ſhe dyd ſe with her bodely yen .ii. Angels
ſittyng in whyt garmētꝭ, which ſayd to her, why doſt thou weap?
thou haſt no cauſe to weape: but rather to ioye of Chriſtes Reſurrection,
he is nat here, he is aryſen. Than ſhe ſuppoſyng that they
ware men and nat Angels: ſayd to them ſhewyng the cauſe of her
weapyng, they haue takē away my lorde, and I knowe nat where
they haue put hym,Ioh. 20. C. for ſhe ſe the ſtone takē away / and therfore ſhe
thought that ſomme other body had ſtollen the body of Chriſt
and borne it to ſomme other place. And whan Mary Magdalen
dyd thus contynue in her ſorowe and weapynge and nothynge
regardynge the Angels: her mooſte louynge mayſter
Chriſte: coulde abſente hym ſelfe no lengar from her.

Than ſhe turned her ſelfe about: that ſhe myght ſe Ieſus, for byfore
that, her backe was towarde hym, and that was to ſignifie ye
doutfulnes of her ſoule, for ſhe belyued nat that he was ryſen from
death vnto lyfe, & therfore her backe was towarde the face of our
lorde. But yet for aſmoche as ſhe loued hym / thoughe ſhe douted
of his Reſurrection: therfore ſhe dyd ſe hym: and dyd nat knowe
hym. She ſe hym: but nat in his glorious forme or body: for as
yet ſhe dyd nat belyue that he was ryſen, And ſo he appered to her
after that maner in his body: as he was in her mynde and ſoule,
And than Ieſus ſayd to her,Ioh. 20. D. 
                  Mulier quid ploras, quem queris? woman
why weapeſt thou? whome doſt thou ſeach? he doth nat aſke
this of any ignorance: but yt hearyng her anſwer: he myght more
conueniently inſtructe her in the fayth. And as ſaynt Gregory
ſayth,Omel. 25. He aſked the cauſe of her ſorowe: to kyndle and augment or
encreaſe her loue and deſyre, that whā ſhe ſhuld name hym whom
ſhe loued: her loue ſhuld be more feruēt towardes hym. And note
here that Ieſus appered to her in the likenes of a gardiner, & that
very conueniently, For he was to her a ſpiritual gardyner, for he
labored to plucke out the thornes and weades of infidelite and vices:
and to ſow and plante in the garden of her ſoule, the grene ſeades
of fayth and vertue, by the vertue of his feruent loue. Suche
office / ſuche operation / ſuche exerciſe: and ſuche interpretacion of
her name: is conuenient for begynners or penitentes. For it is cō
                  uenient
that a penitent vſe hym ſelfe as a gardyner / that is, that
he pull out by the rootes al vices / and plante in his ſoule: vertues
and alſo that he haue contricion accordyng to the fyrſt interpretacion
of this name Maria, As we ſhewed in the chapitre next byfore
this.Ioh. 20. D. And than this blyſſed woman (as in a maner dronke in
loue) anſwered to Ieſus: as to a gardyner, Domine ſi tu ſuſtuliſti
eum, dicito mihi Ꝫc. Syr / if thou haſt takē hym away: tell me wher
he is: that I may go and take hym? A meruelous boldnes of this
womā, for ſhe was nat afrayd of ye ſyght of a deed body / and wold
alſo attempte to beare a deed cors: the which far paſſed her power
But ſhe thought that ſhe could do it, for there is nothyng to hard
to a louyng ſoule. And than our lorde Ieſus hauyng cōpaſſion
of her great ſorowe / and willyng no lenger to ſuffre her to weape
called her by her proper name. Bifore that he called her by a cōmē
name / ſayng, mulier, womā, & thā ſhe knewe hī nat, but now whā
he ſaid Maria: furthwith ſhe was turned both hert & ſoule / as ſhe
was byfore turned ī body / & as a good ſhepe: knew ye voice of her

and ſo ſhe reuyued?Ibidem. ſayd to hym with vnſpekable ioy, O Raboni:
O mayſter (for ſo ſhe was wont to call hym byfore his paſſion) yu
art he whome I ſaught / and anon ſhe ranne to hym, and fallynge
downe to his feet, with great loue and deuocion wold haue embraſed
them and kyſſed them as ſhe was wont to do byfore / by an
vnperfyte affection to his manhode, but our lorde as a ſpirituall
gardyner willyng to plante true fayth in her hert / and to lyft vp
her ſoule to his godhed and heuenly thynges:Ibidem. ſayd to her. Noli me
tangere, touche nat me in that erthly maner with thy bodely handes:
whome as yet thou haſt nat touched with true fayth of hert.
And ſo he enſtructe her in the true fayth of his godhed and reſurrection.
Let vs now lerne of this Mary to loue Ieſus, to truſt in
hym / to ſeache hym without ceaſyng, to feare none aduerſities, to
receyue no conſolacion or cōforth but in Ieſus, to deſpiſe al thynges
but Ieſus.
               
                  A prayer.
                  
                     O Moſte ſwete mayſter, o moſte ſwete Ieſu, howe good art
thou to them that be clene in hert, howe ſwete art yu to them
that loue the. O howe happy ar they that ſeache the and fynde the,
howe blyſſed ar they that truſt in the, It is truth, that thou louyſt
all them that loue the, thou neuer forſakeſt them that truſt in the / 
lo lord, this Mary thy true louer of a good ſiple mynd ſhe ſaught
the, and truly ſhe foūd the, ſhe was not forſaken of the, but ſhe had
more of the: than ſhe looked for. I beſeach the lorde, graunt me to
loue the, to ſeache the and to truſt in the, yt I may deſerue to fynde
the and to be loued of the, and neuer to be forſaken of the. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Howe Ieſus appered to his diſciples:
Thomas beyng alſo preſent.
The .vii. Chapitre.
               
                  THe .viii.Ioh. 20. G. day of his Reſurection / our lorde Ieſus appered
to his diſciples / Thomas beyng preſēt with them,
For the fyrſt day of his Reſurrection he appered to his
diſciples,E. what tyme Thomas was there abſent,F. And
whan Thomas was comme to theyr compaigney: the diſciples
ſayd to hym, Vidimus dominum, we haue ſene our lorde and oure
mayſter, and than Thomas ſayd, excepte I ſee the ſygnes or the

pryntes of the nayles in his handes and put my fynger in the holes,Ci
                        •
                     illus 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
and alſo put my hande into his ſyde: I wyl nat belyue. Theſe
wordes ware nat ſpoken of any malyce:Ioh. lib. 12. but rather of ignorance,
and of a great ſorowe & heuynes for that he had nat ſene our lorde
and therfore his louyng and godly maiſter Ieſus wold nat leaue
his louyng diſcyple in that blyndnes and heuynes:Ca. 57. but for to comforth
hym and for to reforme his fayth: it pleaſed hym to appere agayne.Bonauen
                        •
                     . in medita. vite x
                        ••
                     .
Therfore whan his diſcyples ware gadred to gyther in ye
mount of Syon, where as he kept his maūdy or ſupper / and alſo
Thomas beyng with them:Cap
                        •
                     . 74. et. 105. the good ſhepherd and herdman Ieſus / 
diligent to comforth his lytell ſmall flock: cam vnto them the
gates / dores / and wyndowes beyng ſhyt / and ſo ſtode in the myddeſt
of them, that he myght be ſene of them all, and ſayd to them.
Pax vobis.
                  Ioh. 20. G. Peace be to you. And note here that there can neuer be
peace in a comynalty: except the prelate be in the myddeſt, ſo that
he be nat enclyned more to one part: than to the other. A pillar
can neuer ſuſteyne and bear vp the houſe, if it be ſet nygh to ye wal
and nat in the myddeſt, and therfore the erth which is ſet in ye myddeſt
of the world: is vnmoueable, to ſignifie that euery prelate or
herde ſhulde nat be moued by any parcialite more to one perſone
than to an other. Our lorde Ieſus dyd oftymes ſhewe peace vnto
his diſciples / dyd alſo cōmend it and perſwade them to haue it, for
without peace:Pſal. 77. we can nat haue god, the prophete to witnes whā
he ſayth. In pace factus eſt locus eius. His place and abydyng is in
peace,Io. 20. G. Than Ieſus ſaid to Thomas. Infer digitum tuū huc et vide
manus meas. Put in thy fynger here & ſe my hādes, & put forth thy
hande and thurſt it in to my ſyde, and be nat vnfaythfull, but belyue.
Than Thomas toyched the ſignes of Chriſtes woūdes, &
ſo byleued, nat onely with his hert: but alſo confeſſed it with his
mouthe and ſayd.Ibidem. 
                  Dominus meus et deus meus. Thou art my lorde
after thy humanite / for thou haſt redemed me with thy preciouſe
blode, & thou art my god in thy diuinite, for thou haſt create me, I
doute in nothynge nowe,Ibidem. but I am ſure that thou art ryſen from
death to lyfe. Than Ieſus ſaid to hym, Quia vidiſti me Thoma cre
didiſti, beati qui non viderunt et crediderunt. Thomas thou doſt
belyue bycauſe thou haſt ſene me, blyſſed be they that belyue and
haue not ſene. In theſe wordes, is not only affirmed the fayth of
Thomas: but alſo our fayth is moche commended and bleſſed,
and the errour of the heretikes confounded: which ſayd yt Chriſt
had no true body. And here ſe the goodnes and mercy of oure

lorde / howe that he wolde appere and ſhewe hym ſelfe with his
woundes: to ſaue one ſoule. Alſo note here, that the infinite wyſdome
and goodnes of god ſuffred Thomas to doute: that the reſurrection
of Chriſt ſhuld be prouyd by euident and manyfeſt argumētꝭ
or ſignes, therfore Thomas douted: yt we ſhuld not dout.
Herunto ſayth ſaynt Gregory.Omel. 26. āte mediū. It was not of chaunce: but of the
ordynaūce of god that ye welbeloued diſciple of Chriſt, Thomas
was abſent whan Chriſt dyd fyrſt appere, that he hearyng of his
reſurrection: ſhulde dowte, he ſo dowtyng: ſhuld feale and touche
the places of the woundes of Chriſt, and ſo fealyng ſhuld beleaue,
and that: to expell al dowtfulnes from our hertes. And ſo in fealynge
or puttynge in his hande into the ſyde of Chriſte: he cured
in vs the woundes of our infidelite. Alſo the incredulite or doutfulnes
of Thomas dyd more profyt vs vnto oure faythe: that the
prompte and redy beleaue of the other diſciples, for by his dowtyng
and fealyng: our mynd is ſtablyſhed in fayth / all dowtes ſet
a parte. Mary Magdalen dyd leſſe profyt to me by her ſwyft &
redy fayth: than Thomas by his longe dowtyng, for he touched
the pryntes of his woundes: and vtterly expelled from my ſoule
the wounde of doutfulnes. Our lorde of his great goodnes reſerued
the pryntes or ſignes of his woundes in his body after his reſurrection,
Not for that he could not cure thē: for he yt deſtroyed
the power of death: myght alſo haue cured & put away thoſe ſignes
of death if it had pleaſed hym, but he wold reſerue them for dyuers
cauſes. Fyrſt to confirme our fayth, as ye ſe in Thomas,
Secondly, for to ſhewe to his father: whan he wyl pray for vs.
And thyrdly to ſhewe them at the day of dome to the dāpned people
to theyr confuſion. And theſe tokens of his woundes ware in
no thynge to the deformitie of his glorious body: but rather as
Criſoſtom ſayth: to his great beautie, for they ſhone more bryght
than the ſonne.Libro. 22. de Ciuitate dei. Ca. 20. And as ſaynt Auſten ſayth, the tokens of the woū
                  des
that holy ſayntes haue ſuffred here for Chriſte: ſhall in heuen
appere in theyr bodyes not to theyr deformite: but to theyr glory
as a ſtarre in the firmament, as a preſiouſe ſtone in a rynge, as
a flowre in the medowe, ond as the red colour in a roſe, which be
to the fairnes and beauty of theſe thynges, and ſo be tho pryntes
of theyr woundes in theyr bodyes to theyr glory and dignitie. O
thou louyng ſoule, behold now thy lorde and conſydre his wonte
goodnes, meaknes and feruent loue, howe he ſheweth his woundes
to Thomas and to his other diſciples: to put away all blyndnes
& ignoraūce frō theyr ſoules, for theyr profyt and oures alſo.

Our lorde ſtode there with them a lytel whyle: ſpeakyng comfortable
wordes of ye kyngdom of glory. And his diſciples ſtode with
hym ī great gladnes hearyng his godly wordes, & beholdyng his
face full of fauour, beauty and glory. Beholde them howe they
ſtande about hym, And ſtande thou reuerētly with ioy beholdyng
them a far of: if paraduenture our lord moued of pytie and mercy
wyl cauſe the to be called, thoughe thou of thy ſelfe be not worthy
that compaygny. At laſt Ieſus ſayd vnto them, that they ſhuld
goo into Galile and there he wold appere vnto them accordyng
vnto his promiſſe. And ſo he bleſſed them and departed frō them,
And they remayned in great comforth, but yet moche deſyrous to
ſe hym agayne.
               
                  A prayer.
                  
                     O Lorde Ieſu Chriſte which ſhewed vnto Thomas yt douted
of thy reſurrection, the places of the nayles and the ſpear, &
hathe reuoked hym from errour by the puttynge in of his fynger
into the holes of thy hādes, and of his hande into thy ſyde / graūt
to me that I hauyng euer the remembraunce of thy woundes and
paſſion, may expēd and put in my fynger and hand, that is, what
ſo euer good werk or diſcreacion be in me I may put it in and expende
it all holl in thy ſeruice to thy honour, And that I may confeſſe
with Thomas, that thou art my lorde, whiche hath bought
me with thy preciouſe blode, and my god, which hath creat & made
me, And that whiche thou ſayd byfore of our fayth, that blyſſed be
they whiche haue not ſene and yet beleaue: I may haue experiēce
therof in my ſelfe, and that by thy grace: I may be founde blyſſed
in thy ſyght. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the Aſcencion of our lorde.
The .viii. Chapitre.
               
                  OVr lorde Ieſus knowyng that the tyme was come,Ioh. 13. A.
that he ſhulde departe from this worlde vnto his father:
he wold ſhewe, that not onely he loued his choſen
people in this lyfe, or whan he was mortall: but
alſo yt he loued them vnto the ende, or for euer more
and therfore he ſaid to them,Ioh. 14. A. 
                  Vado parare vobis locum, I go to prepare
a place for you in heuyn, yet byfore that he went: he wold cō
                  fort
them, and take his leaue of them, And therfore he appered to

them in the mownt of Syon in that place where as he made his
ſupper byfore his paſſion, for as they ware ſittyng and eatyng in
that place with our blyſſed lady and other frendes of our lorde: he
appered to them and dyd eate with them byfore his Aſcencion as
wel for a ſigne or tokē of his ſpecial loue to his diſciples / as to ꝓue
his reſurrection. And after yt they had eaten: he brought them
all forth, not with hande: but with his worde and byddyng, and ſo
they went from Hieruſalem vnto Bethany, and than he had them
go vnto the mownt of Oliuete, & there they ſhuld ſe hym aſcende,
and ſo he departed and vaniſhed frō theyr ſyght. And at ye mownt
of Oliuete he appered to them agayne.Actu
                        ••
                     . 1. A. And than ſome of his diſciples
ſayd to hym, Domine ſi in tempore hoc reſtitues regnum Iſrael.
Shalt thou lorde reſtore at this tyme the kyngdome of Iſrael,
that is, wyll thou now delyuer the Iues from the ſubiection
of the Romays. &c. our lorde anſwered, It apꝑteyneth not to you
to knowe tho ſecreat tymes or thinges, that my father hath in his
onely power.Bonauen
                        •
                     . And ſo after that Chriſt had ſpoken certen thynges
to theyr inſtruction and alſo comforthe:In meditationibꝰ vite Chriſti. he kyſſed ych one of them
(for as ſaynt Ambroſe ſayeth, he left to them ye token of peace, that
is he kyſſed them),Ca. C. v. and ſo byddyng them fare wel: he lyfted vp his
handes, to offre them all to his father, and blyſſed them, gyuynge
them grace and ſtrenght to defend them from theyr enemyes, and
alſo to werk good and godly werkes, and ſo he aſcēded, And thā
his mother and his diſciples ſeyng hym eleuate and lyfted vp in
to heuen: fell downe proſtrate and worſhypped hym, And for his
departyng: they could not refrayne them ſelfe from weapyng, and
yet they had great ioy and comforth: in that they ſe hym ſo gloriouſly
aſcende. And than there came and met hym all the ordres of
Angels reuerently and in ordre, by dyuers compaygnyes and ordres,
there was not one: but that he cam and dyd his deutye to his
lorde god, And inclynyng to hym with all reuerence: they wayted
vpon hym with Hympnes and ſonges of ioy vnſpeakable. For
as the prophete Dauid ſayth,Pſal. 46. 
                  Aſcendlt deus in iubilo, Chriſt god
and man aſcended in great ſonges of ioy, which is to be referred
not onely to the great ioy of the Angels: but alſo to the ioy of the
holy ſoules redeamed by the paſſion of Chriſt and aſcēdyng with
hym, with a wonderfull ioye. It folowed in the pſalme. Et do
minus in voce tube, And our lord aſcēded in the voyce of the trūpe,
And this is to be referred to the ſowne and voyce of the prechyng
of the apoſtles, whiche preachyng was than enioyned and commaundyd
to them,Math. 19. D. our lorde ſayng to them. Euntes in mundū vniuerſum

predicate euangelium omni creature. Go ye through out all
the world: and preache my goſpell to euery nacion. Whan thus
both the angelles and bleſſed ſoules dyd ſyng: our lorde ioynyng
his handes to gyther deuotely, and lyftyng them vp ſtreyght byfore
his breſt: aſcendyd with a cloude vnder his feet, And ſo al the
blyſſed ſoules reuerently aſcendyd with hym. Nowe for aſmoche
as all the actes of our redempcion ware complete in the aſcencion
of Chriſt: therfore that day is worthely acompted as a hyghe and
a great ioyfull day. For it is the moſte ſolempne feaſt of our ſauiour
Ieſus, for that day he began to ſit on the ryght hand of his father,
in his humanite, and ſo toke reſt of all the labour and payne
that he ſuffred in this worlde. It is alſo the propre feaſt of al bleſſed
ſpirites in heuyn, for than began theyr ruyne and decay to be
repayred. It is alſo the feaſt of patriarches and prophetes and of
all holy ſoules, for that day they fyrſt entred into the kyngdome of
glorie. It is morouer the feaſt of our lady, for aſmoche as than
ſhe ſaw her ſonne Ieſus very god and man aſcend vp vnto heuen
with great glory in the ſame fleſhe and body that he toke of her.
Yet that day is properly our feaſt, for than our nature was fyrſte
exalted aboue the heuyns, and ſo man that byfore was loſt: was
that daye brought agayne by our ſauiour Ieſus vnto the kyngdome
of heuyn and vnto the compaigney of angelles. Therfore
let vs now aſcende in hert and mynde: that whan tyme ſhall come
that we be called from this worlde: we may aſcende in ſoule, and
after the generall reſurrection: aſcende both in ſoule and body.
Chriſt dyd aſcende and withdrawe from vs his corporall 
                     •
                  ſence:
to prouoke our affection and loue, and that we ſhulde deſyre to be
with hym with all our herte.Collo. 3. A. And therfore as the Apoſtle ſayth,
Quae ſurſum ſunt queramus, quae ſurſum ſunt ſapiamus. Let vs ſerch
and labour to knowe tho thynges that be in heuyn, and to taſt or
loue the ſame. Let vs flye all worldly and vayne deſyres, let no
thyng tranſytory pleaſe vs or content vs: whiche haue our father
aboue in heuyn, And though we be here in body and alſo vſe theſe
temporal thyngꝭ for the fraylty and infirmitie of our body: yet let
vs go to god by our loue and deſyre, as we reade of a certeyn deuote
knyght, whiche with great deuocion went vnto Hieruſalem
to viſite al the holy places where as our lorde ſuffred his paſſion
or dyd ony notable thyng in his lyfe / and whan he had with feruent
deuocion viſited all tho places: at laſt he cam vnto the moūt
of Oliuete, vnto the place from whens our lorde aſcended, where
after that he had deuotely prayed: he ſayd with teares. O good

lorde, I haue delygently ſaught the in many places here in erth,
and where now to ſeache the: I knowe not, but in heuē, cōmaūde
therfore ſwete Ieſu my ſoule to departe fro my body: that I may
fynde the in heuen where as thou ſyttes on the ryght hande of thy
father in great glory, And with theſe wordes he yelded vp his ſpirit
without any ſorowe.
               
                  A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu our crowne and glory, whiche ryſyng from death dyd
aſcende vnto the ryght hande of thy father: drawe my ſoule
vnto the: that I myght feruently ſeache and deſyre ye onely, graūt
to me I beſeache the that I maye with all my deſyre and ſtudye
come to that place: to the whiche as I ſtedfaſtly belyue thou haſt
aſcended, And that I beyng here in body: may be with the in loue
and deſyre, that my hert may be there: where as thou art my loue
and treaſure moſte to be louyd and deſyred. Drawe me after the,
that by thy grace I aſcēdyng from vertue to vertue: may deſerue
to ſe the my lorde god in the heuenly Syon. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the ſendyng of the holy ghoſt.
The .ix. Chapitre.
               
                  THe .L. day after ye Reſurrection of Chriſt, and the .x. day
after the Aſcenſion, that is on wytſonday: whan the diſcyples
of Chriſte were gadred to gether in the place of
mount Syon where as he made his ſupper / both men &
women to the nombre of .C.xx. or there about / there contynuyng
in prayer, and abydyng the comyng of the holy ghoſt acordyng to
promyſſe of Chriſt: about the thyrd houre of that ſame daye, there
cam ſodenly from heuen a wonderfull noyſe or ſounde as if it had
bene the commynge of a great wynde,Ac
                        •
                     . 2. A. and it fylled all the houſe,
and there appered vnto them clouen tonges: or dyuyded / as
they had ben fyre. And here note that the gyftes of the holy ghoſt
be not gyuen, but to them: whiche be gadred to gyther by vnite or
one aſſent in vertue, and lyfted vp by deſyre vnto heuēly thynges.
Alſo the .vii. gyftes of the holy ghoſt / be conueniently ſignified or
ſhewed by fyre. Fyrſt for the holy ghoſt doth purge lyke as fyre
doth, and that is by the gyft of feare. Secondly, as the fyre doth
melt: ſo doth the holy ghoſt by the gyft of pytie. Thyrdly, he beautyfieth
and maketh fayre by the gyfte of ſcience or knowlege.

Fourthly, he ſtrenghtheth by the gyft of ſtrenght. Fyftly, he lyfteth
vp the ſoule: by the gyft of councell. Syxtly, he doth illumyne
or lyghten the ſoule: by the gyft of vnderſtandyng. And ſeuently,
he doth make ſwete and pleaſant by the gyfte of wyſdom. And
all that compaigny ware fylled with the holy ghoſt, and ſo began
to ſpeake dyuers ſpeaches or langages, that is, whan they ſpake
ony thyng to the glory of god: euery nacion ꝑceyued that ſpeache
as theyr owne ſpeache / for ſo it ſounded to them, and ſo they ſpake
after the mocion of the holy ghoſt and as he gaue to thē vtteraūce
whiche dyuydeth and gyueth his grace to euery perſon after his
wyll and pleaſure / where he wyl, whā he wyll, aſmoche as it pleaſeth
hym, by what maner he wyll, and to whome he wyll. Peraduenture
thou wyll aſke this queſtion, Syth the ways and operacions
of god the holy ghoſt be vnſerchable and can nat be perceyued:
howe may I knowe that the holy ghoſt is in me? Surely I
may greatly coniecture his preſence in me: by the good mocions
of my hert. Alſo I may aduerte and conſydre the power of his 
                     •
                  
                  tue
in me: by that I auoyde all carnall vyces, and ſubdewe al inordinate
affections, Alſo I may perceyue his wyſdom in me: by
the ofte diſcuſſion of my conſcience, and rebukyng of my ſelfe for
my ſynnes, Alſo I may ſuppoſe his goodnes and myldnes to reſt
in me: by the amendement of my maners and lyuyng. And alſo
by the reformacion & renouation of my ſpirite: I may coniecture
the ſame. Let euery man looke well in his owne hert, If he loue
his neyghbour: it is a ſigne that the ſpirite of god is in hym. Alſo
if he loue peace and vnite, and that in al the membres of Chriſtes
churche through out al the worlde,Ludolphus de vita x
                        •
                     i ꝑce. 2. ca. lxxxiiii. And note here that theſe ſignes
be taken dyuerſly in dyuers degrees of perſons. For the holy
doth inſpire, he doth enhabite, & doth repleniſhe or fulfyll, he doth
inſpire, or come to the begynners, he doth inhabite the profyters,
and he doth fulfyll the perfyt ꝑſons. The ſignes or tokens of the
holy ghoſt, wherby he is perceyued to inſpire the begynners ben
 iii. after ſaynt Bernard. Fyrſt is contricion or ſorowe for the ſynnes
paſte, For the holy ghoſt hateth the fylth ye ſyn, and wyll not
 inhabite nor come to that ꝑſon that is ſubdewed to ſyn. Seconde
ſigne is a firme and a ſure purpoſe to beware and auoyde al ſynne
here after, and this purpoſe is nat had without the grace of ye holy
 ghoſt aſſiſtyng and hel
                     •
                  yng our infirmite and frayltie. Thyrd
ſigne is a diligent redines to do good. For the loue of god which
is the holy ghoſt: is neuer ydle / but always redy to do good.
There be alſo .iii. tokens wherby we may coniecture that the holy

ghoſt doth inhabite the profiters that goo forward in vertue.
Fyrſt is the deligent true and ofte examination of his conſcience,
nat onely of mortall ſynnes: but alſo of veniall ſynnes, for as the
grace of the holy ghoſt is contrary to mortall ſynne: ſo is the feruour
of charite (whiche alſo cōmeth of the holy ghoſt) contrary to
veniall ſyn, and expelleth it out of the ſoule, that in nothynge he
ſhuld deſpleaſe the holy ghoſt, and hynder the ſoule from the ꝓfytyng
in vertue. The ſecond to kē is the mynyſhyng or ſubdewyng 
of the inordinate concupiſcence, for the more that charite is encreſed
in the ſoule of the ꝓfyter: the more is his ſoule remoued from
the loue of temporall thynges. Thyrd ſigne is the diligent keapyng 
of the cōmaundementes of god, which can nat be had without
true loue. There be alſo .iii. other ſignes, by the whiche we
may coniecture that the holy ghoſt doth fulfyl the perfyte perſōs.
Fyrſt is the manifeſtacion or ſhewyng of the godly truthe. For 
ſytghe the holy ghoſt is the ſpirit of truth: it is his propertie to
teache and ſhewe all truthe neceſſarie for man, and therfore wher
he fulfylleth: there he ſheweth all godly truthe neceſſarie for that
ſoule. Second ſigne is, whan a perſon feareth nothyng but god,
for perfyt charite putteth a way all ſeruile or worldly feare. And
therfore ſaynt Paule ſayth.1. Io. 4. D. 
                  Vbi ſpiritus domini: ibi libertas. where
as is the ſpirite of god:2. Cor. 3. D. there is libertie, and no vayne feare. For
liberty can nat ſtande with yt ſeruile feare. Thyrd ſigne is, whan 
a mā of the vehemēt loue that he hath to god deſireth to be deſolued
and departed from this myſerable lyfe: and to be with Chriſt.
Beſyde all theſe tokens: there be other thre wherby a man may cō
                  iecture
yt he hath the holy ghoſt,Math. 3. D. &. 17. A. And for this cauſe the holy ghoſt
appered in .iii. ſimilitudes or lykenes.Itē. Orig. ſuꝑ Math. Omel. 3. Fyrſt in the lykenes of a
douue, and that was at the baptiſme of Chriſt. In the lykenes al
ſo of a clowde: whan Chriſt was transfygured in the mounte.
And in lyknes of fyre vpon the diſciples on Wytſonday.Actu. 2. A. Fyrſte
ſigne (I ſay) wherby we may knowe or coniecture the preſence of 
the holy ghoſt by his grace: is the aboūidaunce of teares, and that
is noted by the apperyng of ye holy ghoſt in ye lykenes of a clowd.
For as the ſouth wynd blowyng the clowdes be reſolued into ruyne:
ſo by the cōmyng of the holy ghoſt our hertes relent into teares.
The ſeconde ſigne is the forgeuyng of iniuries or wronges 
done agaynſt vs, and therfore the holy ghoſt appered in the lykenes
of a doue, that wanteth his gall. Thyrd ſigne is the deſyre of 
heuenly thynges, and therfore the holy ghoſt appered in ye lyknes
of fyre, whiche euer aſcendeth vp ward, ſo the holy ghoſt makethe

our hertes aſſende vpwarde by deſyre of heuenly thynges, which
thynges if thou deſyre: thou muſte forſake and deſpy
                     •
                  e all vayne
pleaſures of the fleſhe / or of the worlde. And herunto ſaynt Gregory
ſayth, If we put awaye the pleaſures of the fleſhe: we ſhall
ſhortly fynde that thyng whiche is pleaſant to the ſpirite. Alſo ſpirituall
perſons or carnall: may be knowen by the wordes of the
Apoſtle ſayng.Ro. 8. A. 
                  Qui ſecundum carnem ſunt: que carnis ſunt ſapiunt.
Ꝫc. they that be carnall: loue carnal pleaſures / and ſpiritual ꝑſons
loue ſpirituall and heuenly deſyres. But than ſpecially a man is
knowen to be ſpirituall: if he as ſone / as ſhortly / and aſmoch wyl
auoyde that place and compaigney where he maye be hurted or
hyndred in ſpirite: as he wyll do yt place where he may be hurted
in body. Alſo if he as gladly wyll heare ſpeake of ſpiritual thynges,
as of the profytes of the body. Thyrdly if he be as diligent to
procure for his ſoule: as the carnall man for his body.
               
                  A prayer.
                  
                     O Ieſu the gyuer of all gyftes whiche ſent the holy ghoſt vnto
thy diſciples in the lykenes of fyre, I praye and beſeache
the O moſte mercyfull lorde, that I (thoughe moſte vnworthy)
myght receyue to my perpetuall helth by thy grace, thoſe gyftes
whiche thy diſciples receyued of thy onely beautiouſe goodnes,
and ſende vpon vs (good lorde) thy ſeruantes ye ſpirite of thy charite / 
and loue and peace: whiche myght vyſite and comforth our
hertes▪ purge them from vyces, lyghten them with vertues, bynd
vs in the bondes of peace and loue / illuminate vs with the lyght
of thy knowlege, and inflame vs with the fyre of thy charite, forgyue
vs our ſynnes, and bryng vs to lyfe euerlaſtyng. Amen.
               
            
            
               Of the Aſſumpcion and prayſe of our glorious
Lady. The .x. Chapitre.
               
                  AFter the ſendyng of the holy vpon the diſciples: the
blyſſed virgyn the mother of Ieſus, aſlong as ſhe lyued:
dyd remayne in the mount of Syon. O ye chriſtians,
I beſeache you, if ye haue any pitie or compaſſion
in you: conſyder what ſorowe ſhe had, how
ſhe was cruciate with loue / how ſhe burned ī great
deſyre: whā ſhe remēbred, and reuolued in her mynde al ſuch thynges
as ſhe had hard / ſeen / and knowē of her moſt ſwete ſon Ieſus.

And nowe to ſpeake of her aſſumpcion: this is the true and vndoutfull
ſentence. We beleaue, that ſhe was aſſumpte and exalted
aboue all the ordres of aungels / though we were ſumtyme ignorant,
whether ſhe was aſſumpte in ſoule onely: or els / both in
body and ſoule. But the church nowe meakly and godly beleuith
that ſhe is aſſumpte both in ſoule and body. And as we beleaue
aungels ware preſent to honoure her, both at her death / buriyng
and alſo aſſumpcion, and all the court of heuyn dyd greatly ioy
therof. For it is to be beleauyd yt all the court of heuyn with theyr
cumpaigneys in ordre: cam gloriouſly to mete the mother of god
and compaſſed her all about with a meruealouſe lyght, and ſo
brought her vp with great prayſynges and ſpirituall longes vnto
the trone, which was prepared and ordeyned for her byfore the
creacion of the worlde. And no doute therof, all that bleſſyd cumpaigney
of heuenly Hieruſalem then reioyſed wt an vnſpeakable
gladnes, then was comforted with an in eſtimable charitie / and
then ioyed with a meruealouſe gratulacion and reioyſyng, for
that feaſt of this bleſſyd virgyns aſſumpcion, which is but ones
in the yere celebrate with vs: is to them a continual feaſt and ioy.
And nat without cauſe,In ſermo. de Aſſūptione Marie ad Paulum & Euſtachi. for as ſaynt Hierom ſayth, our lorde Ieſu
the ſauiour of all, cam with great glory and met with his mother
and with greate ioy to all the court of heuyn: dyd ſet her in a gloriouſe
trone nygh vnto hym ſelfe. O thou gloriouſe Lady, what
may I ſay more? Who ſo laboreth to conſidre and declare the inmenſitie
and hudghnes of thy grace and glory: his tonge faileth,
his wit wanteth, and his reaſon can nat com therto. For as all
ſayntes in heuyn by thy glorification be ineſtimably beautified
and gladded: ſo al creatures vpon erth be vnſpeakably exalted by
the ſame glorificacion. For as god by his power / creatynge and
makyng al creatures, is the father and lord ouer al: ſo our bleſſyd
Lady / by her merites repayryng all thynges: is the mother and
Lady of all. And as almyghtie god the father dyd generate of his
owne godlie ſubſtance his eterne ſon, by whome he hath gyuen
lyfe and begynnyng to all thynges: ſo bleſſyd Mary conceyuyd
and bare hym of her owne body / which reſtored all thynges vnto
the beautie and fayrnes of theyr fyrſte condicion. And as there is
no thyng made or hath his beyng, but by the ſon of god: ſo ther is
no thynge condempned forſaken or put to etarnall dampnacion,
but that perſon whome Chriſte abſolueth frome her ſauiour, or
whome ſhe dothe nat fauoure or defende. Who is he that conſiderynge
theſe thynges with a ryght ſenſe or wit and a pure hert,

may fully know or perceyue thexcellency of this Lady / by whom
the world is erecte and rayſed vp with vnſpeakable grace: from
ſo great a fall and decay? Therfore we leauyng tho thynges that
can nat be ſearched and knowen by our naturall reaſon: let vs labour
to opteyn by prayers that we may deſerue to get that in holſom
and fruyteful effecte: which we can nat perceiue by our vnder
ſtandyng. Hereby we may perceiue that it is vnpoſſible that any
perſon ſhuld be dampned: that is truly turned to her, and whome,
ſhe fauoreth and beholdeth. She is the mother of Chriſte that is
our iuſtifier / and alſo ſhe is the mother of them that ſhalbe iuſtified.
She is the mother of the ſauiour: and of them that ſhalbe ſauyd.
How therfore may we deſpeire ſeth our health or our dampnacion
dependeth of the wyl of our good brother & pitiful mother?
Shall our good brother ſuffre his bretherne to periſhe eternally,
whom he hath redemyd ſo derely? Or may our pitifull mother
ſuffre her chyldren to be dampned, whoſe reademar ſhe bare in
her virginall wombe? Nay ſuerly if we wyll forſake our ſyn, and
cum faythfully to them. Therfore let vs wretches ioy with ye holy
ſpirites and ſoules in heuen and with al creatures as moch as we
may, and let vs ſtudy and labour to laude and prayſe ſo gloriouſe
ſo mercifull a mother and virgyne / as far as our infirme & frayle
nature wyl ſuffre.2. Reg
                        ••
                     . 6. C. The aſſumpcion of this gloriouſe virgyn was
figured in the old lawe, when as the arke of god was tranſlate in
to the houſe of kynge Dauid. At which tyme kynge Dauid dyd
harpe and daunce before the arke of god, and ſo brought it in to
his houſe with great ioy.3. Reg
                        ••
                     . 2. C. It was alſo figured in the mother of
Salomon, for whom he made a trone, next vnto his trone, and
ſet her therin, ſayng, aſke of me what thou wilt. It is nat conuenient
or ſeamyng for me to deny it to the. Alſo it was figured by
the woman which ſaynt Iohan ſpeaketh of,Apo
                        ••
                     . 12. A. in his reuelacions,
ſayng. Signum magnum apparuit in celo. Mulier amicta ſole et luna
ſub pedibus eius. &c. A great ſigne apperyd in heuyn. A woman
clad or coueryd with the ſon, and the mone vnder her feet, and a
crowne of .xii. ſterres vpon her heade. This woman ſignifieth
our Lady, which when ſhe was aſſumpte vnto heuyn: was clade
or compaſſyd about with the ſon that is with the glorie of the diuinitie
of Chriſte. The mone was vnder her feet, for ſhe deſpiſed
the world and worldly thynges, ſignified by the mutable mone.
She had a crowne of .xii. ſterres vpon her heed, for the .xii. apoſtles
ware preſent at her death / or elles. It ſignifieth her vnſpeakeable
glory. For theſe conſideracions: all men ſhulde crie and call

vnto our lady Mary ſhuld name Mary, & ſhulde loue her aboue
all other creatures. Both yong and olde man and woman, euery
profeſſion: ſhulde diligently call vpon Mary. When by our ſyn,
we haue offendyd god the highe kynge of glorie / when we haue
loſt the cumpaigney of all holie aungelles and ſayntes in heuyn,
when alſo we be greuouſe and moch paynfull to our ſelfe, & know
nat what to do and whether to go for helpe: then this onely remedy
haue we wretched ſynners, that we may lifte vp our ien of our
ſoule and body vnto the (o mercifull mother Mary) for counſell
and healpe. Therfore o pitifull Lady, intend to vs, that we may
receyue that profitte and effecte: for the which our Lord god was
made man in thy moſt chaſte wombe, and ſo liuyd here amonges
men, and at laſt ſuffred death for the health and ſaluacion of man.
To the bleſſyd Mary we commende vs: procure for vs and defend
vs, that we do nat periſh euerlaſtyngly. Amen.
               
                  A prayer.
                  
                     O Lord the gyuer of ioy, the graunter of ſolace, the diligent
releuer of the deſolate perſon, the chaſer away of all heuines
and ſorowe, which haſte gladdyd & make ioyfull the moſt bleſſed
virgyn Mary thy mother the glaſſe of thy maieſtie / the ſolace of
aūgelles, the ymage of thy goodnes, the begynner of our helth
(thou haſt gladdyd her I ſay) wt manyfold ioyes both ī heuen and
in erth: I beſeach the graunt to me thy ſuppliant, that I which
preſume to com truſtely and faythfully to her as to the well and
fountayne of ioy in all my ſorowes & trobles: may by her merites
and prayers feale and receyue the effecte of her prayers and comforth
in this preſent life, and finally to cum to that ineffable ioy,
to ye which ſhe aſſūpte ioyeth with ye eternally in heuyns. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the laſt iudgement and of the cummyng of the
Iudge to the ſame the .xi. Chapiter.
               
                  WE reade in ſcripture of .ii. cōmynges of Chriſte.Eſaic. 62. D. 64. A. 
                        〈◊〉
                      zacha. 6. B Fyrſt
is paſt, that was when he cam to be cum man and in
our nature of his manhod ſuffred death for ye redempcion
of man.Math. 24. C. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 25. C. Seconde ſhalbe when he ſhall com to
iudge all man kynd. And the condycions of the iudge
in this commynge:Luce. 21. be contrary vnto his condycions in his fyrſt
commyng, for then he cam in great meaknes / with the cōpaignye

and felowſhyp of very poore people his apoſtles, and in his propre
infirmitie and feblenes. But contrarywyſe, to ye iudgement,
he ſhall cum in great power and maieſtie with the compaigney
of angelles,Suꝑ. Luc. Ca. 76. and in his great dignitie as a iudge. Herunto Beda
ſayth. He that fyrſt cam in the forme and meakenes of a ſeruant to
be iudged and alſo condempned: ſhall here after com to iudge the
worlde: in the great maieſtie of his deitie. And that ſhalbe manifeſtly
and openly, nat hid in a mortal body as byfore, that tho perſons
that contempned hym in his humilitie and mortalitie: ſhuld
now know hym in his power and maieſtie.Math. 25. C. And then he ſhall ſyt
vpon the ſeet of his maieſtie. And there ſhall all people be gadred
byfore him: as byfore theyr iudge, And he ſhal ſeparate and diuide
them a ſondre: as the herd man diuideth the ſhepe from ye gootes.
In the day tyme he keapeth them to gedre in ye paſture / but in the
euyntyde: he doth ſeuer them a ſondre. So in this preſent life, both
the good perſons and alſo ye euyll: ben fedde to gedre in the church
militante, but in the euyntyde of death or of the worlde: Chriſte
ſhall ſeauer the good from the euyll, as ſhepe fro the gootes. In
the ſhepe: is vnderſtand the innocency of good men for theyr ſimplicitie / 
myldnes and fruytfulnes. And in the gootes is noted the
frowardnes of euyll men: for theyr filthynes, ſtynche ſtubbernes
and barennes.Math. 15. C. And Chriſte ſhall ſet the ſhepe or good men on his
ryght ſyde and the gootes: on his lefte ſyde, that by the ſame orderyng
in the ryght or left ſyde: euery perſon may knowe, to whom
mercy ſhalbe ſhewyd: and to whom eternall payne remayneth.
And the good men be conueniently ſet on the ryght hand: for they
at theyr death ware founde on the ryght part, that is hauynge
charitie and good workes. And the euyll men alſo be conueniētly
ſet on the left hande: for they wolde nat folow the ryght parte by
doyng of good werkes for ye loue of god. Tho be on the lefte part:
which here loue temporall & vayne thynges. Tho be on the ryght
parte: which here loue eternall thynges. And then ſhall Chriſte
recounte and remembre the werkes of mercy vnto the good men
on the ryght hande, whiche they dyd to Chriſte in his membres,
and ſo ſhal ſay thus.Math. 25. C. D. 
                  Venite benedicti patris mei. &c. Com ye belſſyd
chylderne of my father, poſſeſſe and receyue ye the kyngdom
prepared for you byfore the begynnyng of the world. I was hungry:
and ye fedde me. I was thriſty: and ye gaue me drynke. I
was without lodgyng: and ye harbored me. I was ſeake: and ye
dyd viſite me. I was in priſon: and ye cam to me. I was naked:
and ye clothed me. Then the good and iuſte perſones (as fliynge

theyr owne commendacions and prayſynges) ſhall aſke, when
they dyd any ſuch thynge to hym. And Chriſte ſhall ſay to them
truly I ſay to you, as ofte as ye dyd any of theſe thynges vnto
one of theſe my leſte bredren: ye dyd it to me. Tho be his bredren:
that fulfyll the wyll of his father in heuyn, they be alſo called the
leſte: for that they be meke and in this life abiecte or diſpiſed. And
note here that though we ſpake here but of .vi. werkes of mercy,
that is bicauſe,Math. 25. D. there be no mo remembred by our ſauiour Chriſt
in the goſpell of Mathewe / yet we ſay cōmonly that there be .vii.
werkes of mercy, and truth it is, for the .vii. is to bury the deed
bodyes,Tob. 1. D. 2. A. & 12. C. which is taken of the boke of Toby, for he vſed the ſame
to his great rewarde and our example. And theſe .vii. werkes be
conteyned in this verſe. Viſito, poto, cibo, tego, redimo, colligo,
condo. So that euery word noteth one werke of mercy. The fyrſt
worde. Viſito, noteth the viſityng of them that be ſeke. Second.
Poto. to gyue drynke to ye thriſty. Thyrd. Cibo, to fede the hungry.
Fourth. Tego. to couer the naked. Fyfth. Redimo. to redeame the
priſoner.Ibidem. Syxt. Colligo. to lodge the harborles. Seuenth. Condo.
to bury the deed.Math. 25. D. Alſo the iudge ſhall ſay to them that be on ye lefte
hand. Diſcedite a me maledicti in ignem eternum. &c. Depart from
me you curſed people in to euerlaſtynge fyre, which is prepared
for the deuyll and his aungelles. I was hungry: and ye wold nat
feade me. I was thriſty: and ye gaue me no drynke and ſo all the
other .vi. forſaid werkes of mercy. Then the euyll men ſhall anſwere.
Lord when dyd we ſe the hungry / thriſty, naked / ſeke / herborles
or in priſon: and we haue nat conforted the? Then our lord
ſhall ſay, when ye wold nat do theſe thynges to one of theſe onys:
ye wold nat do it to me. And here note that this queſtion mouyd
by the good or euyll perſons: doth nat procede of any ignorance / 
for the iuſte and good perſons ſhal know that ye werkes of mercy
done to the membres of Chriſte in his name and for his loue: he
reputeth thoſe good dedes as done to hym ſelfe, & alſo they know
that they ſhall haue a great reward therby. And in like maner the
euyll perſons ſhall knowe / that they ſhalbe dampned for the contrary.
And therfore / they aſked nat that queſtion of any ignorāce:
but it is a queſtion of great admiration and meruell, for ye greatnes
of grace and glorie, whiche ſhalbe gyuen to the iuſte people
for thoſe good werkes, and alſo for the intollerable myſerie and
payne that ſhall fall vpon the euyll perſons for theyr hardnes and
vnmercifulnes.Iaco. 2. C. And ſo hard iudgement without mercy: ſhalbe
done to hym that wold ſhewe or do no mercy. What ſhall they deſerue

that ſteale and rauiſhe other mennys goodes: ſythe they be
eternally dampned, which wyll nat gyue theyr owne goodes in
almoſſe? If the vnmerciful people ſhal ſuffre ſo greuouſe paynes
what ſhall they ſuffre that be cruell?S
                        •
                      Math. omel. 80. And note here as Criſoſtom
ſayth, that the payne of euyll perſons is euerlaſtyng, and ſo is the
rewarde of good men. For as eternall ſynnes don paſſe for ye acte
or doyng after that they be don, but yet there remayneth the gylt
or offence towardes god, which ſhalbe puniſhed. So good werkes
don for the loue of god / don paſſe to ſpeake of the acte or dede:
but yet they remayne in theyr merite & ſo to be rewardyd of god.
Alſo ſaynt Hierom ſayth:S
                        •
                      Math. 25. in fine. thou wyſe reader attende and remēbre
diligently, that both the paynes of hell be eternall, and alſo the
glorie of heuyn, for that life ſhall haue no feare of decay or death.
And therfore the euangeliſt ſayth,Math. 25. D. that the euyll men ſhall go to
eternall fyre, and the iuſte men to euerlaſtynge life / and ioy of heuyn
which was prepared for them byfore the begynnynge of the
worlde, for therunto they ware predeſtinate. And note wele here / 
that the predeſtination of god is nat the neceſſarie cauſe of thy ſaluation.
For the predeſtination of god is euer condicionally, that
there is no thyng predeſtinate but vnder ſom cōdicion, as it was
predeſtinate that the worlde ſhulde be ſauid: but that was by the
death of the ſon of god and by the watre of baptiſme, ſo that they
wold receyue it and liue therafter. Alſo all good and iuſte men be
predeſtinate to glorie eternall, yet with this condicion, if they
contine we in true fayth / charitie / humilitie or meknes, pacience
mercie / pitie, with other vertues & the operacion of them, whom
our lord doth predeſtinate to life euerlaſtyng, he ſeeth & knoweth
byfore that they ſhal haue ſuch vertues, as if in his predeſtinacion
he myght ſay to them. I do predeſtinate you to glorie: if ye haue
ſuch vertues: if ye keape my commaundimentes. &c. Who ſo wyll
nat keape goddes commaundymentes / wyl nat continue in fayth
with charitie and good werkes. &c. he ſhall nat com to the end of
predeſtinacion, that is to the glory of heuyn: for he wyl nat keape
the condicion therof. Therfore do nat ouermoch attend and truſt
to the predeſtinacion of god which thou knowes nat: but rather
attend to the wordes of god, which thou heris, and knowis. For
as god is true, and can nat be chaungeable: ſo his wordes be true
and can nat be chaunged.Ca. 33. C. But let vs here, what be thoſe wordes
of god.Ca. 18. E. G. The prophet Ezechiel ſayth in the perſon of god. Nolo
mortem impij ſed vt conuertatur a via ſua et viuat. Si autem impius
egerit poenitentiam ab omnibus peccatis ſuis, et cuſtodierit omnia

precepta mea: vita viuet. I wyll nat (ſayth almyghty god) the deth
of a ſynner: but rather that he be conuertyd from his ſyn and liue
in grace: for if the ſynner do penaunce or be ſory for all his ſynnes
that he hath don & keape all my preceptes and do true iudgement
and iuſtice, he ſhalliue here in grace & he ſhall nat dye eternally.
Alſo he ſayth.Marci. xvi. 
                  Qui crediderit et baptiſatus fuerit: ſaluuus erit. He
that beleuith and is baptiſed and ſo continueth in that true fayth
and promiſe made at his baptiſme: he ſhalbe ſaued. Alſo he ſayth.
Si vis ad vitam ingredi:
                  Math. 6. B 
                  ſerua mandata. If thou wylt cum to lyfe euerlaſtyng:
keape the commaundimentes. And in an other place
Chriſt ſayth.Math. 19. C. 
                  Si dimiſeritis homnibus pecata eorum: dimittet vobis
pater meꝰ pecata veſtra. If ye forgyue to other men theyr offenſis
don to you: my heuenly father ſhall forgyue to you your ſynnes.
In theſe wordes and many other lyke ſtandeth our predeſtinacion
to lyfe, or our reprouyng to death euer laſtyng. And loke for
none other predeſtinacion. If thou keape theſe ſaynges of god:
thou ſhalbe ſure. Therfore ſay nat as many vnwyſe perſons ſay.
I am predeſtinate of god to be ſauyd, therfore I can nat be dampned,
though I neuer pray, nor do any other good deade. For I
aſſure the, that if thou keape nat the commaūdimentes of god. &c.
thou ſhalbe damned, wherfore be ware of ſuch folyſhe ſaynges,
for the predeſtinacion of god is ſo ordred: that it may be obteyned
and goten by prayers and other good laboures and werkes. And
hereunto ſaynt Auſten ſayth: if thou be nat predeſtinate: labour
that thou may be predeſtinate. For as god ſeeth byfore that a man
ſhalbe ſauyd: ſo he ſeeth ye meane and maner how he ſhalbe ſauyd,
that is he ſeeth how he ſhall for ſake his ſyn, and labour for grace
and keape the wyll of god and ſo be ſauyd.
               
                  A prayer.
                  
                     O Lord Ieſu Chriſte iudge of both quicke and deed vouchſafe
to order and ſet me in the laſt iudgement on thy ryght
hand, and that I may then heare thy moſt ſwete voyce to
my comforth which thou ſhall then ſpeake to thy choſen people,
that is. Cum ye bleſſyd chylderne of my father, & take poſſeſſyon
of the kyngdome of glorie: that was prepared for you byfore the
begynnyng of the worlde. And alſo keape me, that I feare nat the
hearynge of that moſte terrible ſentence / which then thou ſhalt
ſpeake vnto the reprouyd ſynners, ſaynge. Go ye curſed people
in to euerlaſting fyer prepared for the dyuel and his compaygny

O thou onely begoten ſon of god, haue mercy on vs, that we neuer
fele that incurable and intollerable payne, that is, to be excludyd
from the glory and ſyght of god and to be burned perpetually
in euerlaſtyng fyre. O my god my mercy and ſocour: be mercifull
to vs. Amen.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶: Thus endeth this lytell
treatyſe called the Glaſſe or Myrrour of Chriſtes
paſſion. Imprynted at London in Flete ſtrete / at the ſygne
of the George / by me Robert Redman. The yere
of our lorde god. M.CCCCC.xxx.iiii.
The .xii. day of
December.
               ❧Cum priuilegio.
               ✚
               
               
                  RP
                  printer's device of Richard Pynson
               
            
         
         
            
               
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
         
      
   