
      
         
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
            ¶ Here begynneth the boke of Cato both in Latyn and Englyshe.
            
               
                  SI deus est animus nobis vt carmina dicunt.
               Hic tibi praecipue sit pura mē
                  te colendus.
            
            
               
                  ¶ For thy that god is inwardly the wytte
               
               
                  Of man, and geuith him vnderstanding
               
               
                  As dite is sayne, therfore shal thou vnshitte
               
               
                  Thyne hert to thy soueraine lord and king
               
               
                  Principally aboue all other thyng:
               
               
                  Geuing him laude honour and reuerence,
               
               
                  Whiche hath endowed the with exulence.
               
            
            
               Plus vigila semper nec somno deditus esto,
               Nam diuturna quies vicijs alimenta ministrat.
            
            
               
                  A wake my chyld, and loue no slogardie:
               
               
                  In long slepe and loke thou neuer delite,
               
               
                  Yf thou purpose, to worshyp for to stie.
               
               
                  Longe slepe and slouth, to vices men exite,
               
               
                  It makith dull, it makith inperfite
               
               
                  It fosterich vp the filthes of the flesshe,
               
               
                  It wastith eke, and pallith blodes freshe.
               
            
            
               
               Virtutem primam puta, esse, compescere linguam.
               Proximus ille deo, qui sit ratione tacere.
            
            
               
                  Trust well also, the first of vertues alle,
               
               
                  As to be stil, and kepe thy tongue in mewe:
               
               
                  Of tonge vntide muche harme may falle:
               
               
                  Leue me well, this is as gospell trewe,
               
               
                  Who can dalians of tongue esshewe,
               
               
                  And rest with reason, this is the vray texte
               
               
                  To god aboue that man is alder nexte.
               
            
            
               Sperne repugnando tibi tu contrarius esse.
               Conueniet nulli, qui secum decidet ipse.
            
            
               
                  Auyse the well, that thou neuer trauerse
               
               
                  Thyne own sentēce, for therof cometh shame.
               
               
                  Say not one & eft cōtrary reherse,
               
               
                  such repugnāce, wil make thy honourlame
               
               
                  Where stedfastnes, wil cause y• good fame.
               
               
                  For he shal neuer accorde with man alyue:
               
               
                  That we himself, will ay repugne & striue.
               
            
            
               Si vitam inspicias hominum, si deni
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   mores.
               Cum culpas alios, nemo sine crimine viuit.
            
            
               
                  If thou aduertise and beholde aboute,
               
               
                  The lyfe of men, and the maners also,
               
               
                  
                     Bothe of thy selfe, and other there without
               
               
                  In myddell earth, thou shalt fynde, who
               
               
                  That in some part, is to vertu fo.
               
               
                  Blame no man therfore, if thou doe ryght:
               
               
                  Sith in earth lacles, lyueth no wyght.
               
            
            
               Quae no citura tenes, quamuis sint chara relinque.
               Vtilitas opibus, praeponi tempore debet.
            
            
               
                  If y• suppose thinges shall annoye & greue,
               
               
                  Though they be dere & of right great price,
               
               
                  Suche as suffreth not thy profit
               
               
                  If the lust to be ruled, as the wyse
               
               
                  Absteine the frō suche thynges in al wyse.
               
               
                  For it is more wysdome in sothfastnesse,
               
               
                  To preferre profite, than suche rychesse.
               
            
            
               Constans & leuis, vt res expostulat esto.
               Temporibus mores, sapiens sine crimine mutat.
            
            
               
                  It is a good lesson for the nones,
               
               
                  A wyght now to be tēpred with cōffaunce,
               
               
                  And to be mery and glad eftsones:
               
               
                  Not alway sad, ne lyght of countenaunce.
               
               
                  A mans chere may full oft auaunce:
               
               
                  For at eche tyme, as the thyng requireth,
               
               
                  So the wyse man visageth and chereth.
               
            
            
               
               Nil timere vxori de seruis crede querenti.
               Soepe etenim mulier, quem coniunx diligit odit.
            
            
               
                  Geue not credence alway to thy wyfe,
               
               
                  That for her yre, and her vnpacience
               
               
                  With sharper tong, thā is swerde or knife,
               
               
                  Playneth on thy seruaūt, though no offēce
               
               
                  Thou finde in him: lerne wel this sentence
               
               
                  The wyfe wyll hate, & cause for to smerte
               
               
                  Oftimes him, her husband loueth we herte.
               
            
            
               Cum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   mones aliquem, nec sevelit esse moueri.
               Si tibi sit charus, noli desistere coeptis,
            
            
               
                  And if thou warne a wyght of his forfayte:
               
               
                  Although he grudge wt frowing coūtenāce
               
               
                  And in his language; manace the & thrate:
               
               
                  Yet forbere not for all suche displesaunce.
               
               
                  To teache him to amende his gouernaunce
               
               
                  As thou began, corecte that is amysse,
               
               
                  And that is a frendly tuche ywysse.
               
            
            
               Contra verbosos noli contendere verbis.
               Sermo datur cunctis animi sapiencia paucis.
            
            
               
                  Against the wordy folke ay full of wynde,
               
               
                  Striue not at all, it may the not profite:
               
               
                  Such Iayissh people, ben in cōceites blinde
               
               
                  
                     The witlesse worde, auayleth not a myte.
               
               
                  In many wordes, is wysdome oft full lyte.
               
               
                  For to euery wyght, is geuen speche,
               
               
                  And yet the wyse full oft ben to seche.
               
            
            
               Dilige sic alios, vt sis tibi charus amicus.
               Sic bonus esto bonis, ne te mala damna sequantur.
            
            
               
                  Loue other men, and haue them so in chere
               
               
                  That to thy self, thy loue may moste extēde:
               
               
                  Let no persone, be to the more dere
               
               
                  Than thy estate, for thē shalt thou offende.
               
               
                  And hurt thy selfe and other folke amende.
               
               
                  But ay loue other and cherysshe them fo,
               
               
                  That to thy selfe thou be not founden foo.
               
            
            
               Rumores fuge, ne incipias nouus autor haberi.
               Nam nulli tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum.
            
            
               
                  Rumours newe that flyen as the wynde,
               
               
                  Eschue my chylde with all thy diligence:
               
               
                  Be neuer besy, newe tidynges to fynde,
               
               
                  Suche nouelte, causeth oft offence,
               
               
                  It is no wit it is no sapience.
               
               
                  It hurteth not a man to be in peace,
               
               
                  But it doth harme, to put his tōg in preace
               
            
            
               Rem tibi promissam, certain promittere noli.
               Rara fides ideo, quia multi multa loquuntur.
            
            
               
               
                  Make no promyse of other mens behelfe,
               
               
                  Remebre the well, that promesse is vnsure:
               
               
                  And but thou kepe thine, thy name y• sleest,
               
               
                  To serue thy behest do thy besy cure.
               
               
                  Trust not the worde of euery creature,
               
               
                  Some mennes feyth is easy to breke:
               
               
                  For many folke thynke not, as they speke.
               
            
            
               Cum te aliquis laudat, iudex tuus esse memento.
               Plus alijs de te, quam tu tibi credere noli.
            
            
               
                  With wordes faire, whan fauel sedeth the:
               
               
                  Be thou not blind, for al his false flatterie,
               
               
                  Let thine own reason alway, thy iudge be.
               
               
                  And in effecte, if thyne estate be hie,
               
               
                  though fauel wt his craft, wold blinde thine eye,
               
               
                  In all thy lyfe, thou neuer gene credence,
               
               
                  More to thy selfe, than to thy concience.
               
            
            
               Officium alterius, multis narrare memento.
               At
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   aliis cum tubenefeceris ipse sileto.
            
            
               
                  Whan thou seest another mannes deserte,
               
               
                  As for his good dedes comendable,
               
               
                  In euery place prsuie and perte,
               
               
                  Suche a wight, wt thy good word enhable.
               
               
                  And though yu haue ben right amyable,
               
               
                  Of thy good dede, make thou none-auaūce:
               
               
                  And than other mē, shal thy name enhaūce.
               
            
            
               
               Multorum cum facta, senex & dicta recentes.
               Factibi succurrant, iuuenis quae feceris ipse.
            
            
               
                  And thou liuelōg, an olde mā shalt thou be,
               
               
                  Age wyll aproche, maugre in who say nay.
               
               
                  Than aperceyue, beholde about and se,
               
               
                  How aged folke been entreated euery daye,
               
               
                  And so to puruoye for thy selfe assaye,
               
               
                  Into stouping age whan thou art crept,
               
               
                  Thyng may y• helpe, y• in yougth was kept.
               
            
            
               Ne cures si quis tacito sermone loquatur.
               Concius ipse sibi, de se putat omnia dici.
            
            
               
                  Care not, although some men speke softe,
               
               
                  Ne change no chere: for oft it is ful bet
               
               
                  In secrete wyse to speke, than crie on loft
               
               
                  A man should s
                        •
                      alway where he were set,
               
               
                  And after that so should he speake or let.
               
               
                  But to the suspect of harme it semeth,
               
               
                  Men speke of hym, he none other demeth.
               
            
            
               Cum fueris felix, quae sunt aduersa caueto,
               Non eodem cursu, respondent vltima primis.
            
            
               
                  Whan fortune, hath geuen them felicite,
               
               
                  And set the on hie, than ware of a falle,
               
               
                  
                     Than sueth oft, full sharpe aduersite,
               
               
                  Fals fortune turneth as doth a balle,
               
               
                  In her haue thou no sekernes at alle.
               
               
                  Her perilous play, sumtime turneth to gra me:
               
               
                  Thende is woo, of that began with game.
               
            
            
               Cum dubia et fragilis, sit nobis vita tributa.
               In mortem alterius, spem tu tibi ponere noli.
            
            
               
                  Our bretel lyfe, is here so full of doubte,
               
               
                  That in veray surerye no wight may stand
               
               
                  Lo sodeynly crepeth the soules oute,
               
               
                  All aboutes this worlde in euery land
               
               
                  Of yong & olde: for euery wight is bounde
               
               
                  To deth: therfore set not thyne affiaunce
               
               
                  In deth of him, ther may suruine pchaūce.
               
            
            
               Exi guum munus cum det tibi pauper amicus.
               Accipito placide, plene et laudare memento.
            
            
               
                  A lytle gift, geuen with good entent,
               
               
                  Of thy frend y• lyueth in pouerte,
               
               
                  With ryght good chere, suche giftes take & hent,
               
               
                  Supposyng ay, that as good wyll hath he
               
               
                  And more, than many men that ryche be.
               
               
                  Prayse not the gift, ne pondre not the price
               
               
                  Thentent is good and that shal the suffice.
               
            
            
               
               Infantem nudum, cum te natura creauit.
               Paupertatis onus, pacienter ferre memento.
            
            
               
                  Syth nature, that was thy fyrst norice,
               
               
                  Hath brought the hyther all naked & bare,
               
               
                  Though thou can neuer richesse accōplice,
               
               
                  But yu art hold, alwaye in pouerties snare:
               
               
                  Yet no force make neuer to muche care,
               
               
                  Take paciently pouerte for the beste,
               
               
                  Ryches is not of nature, but of queste.
               
            
            
               Ne timeas illam, que vite est vltima finis.
               Qui mortem metuit, quod viuit perdit idipsum.
            
            
               
                  Though deth be fine of euery creature,
               
               
                  And no wyght on lyue, may it escape,
               
               
                  Yet drede not deth with ouerbesy cure.
               
               
                  To lyue in erth, than is it but a Iape,
               
               
                  If thou after death alwaye so gape.
               
               
                  Thinke wel to die, but modifie thy thought
               
               
                  Or elles to lyue, auaileth the right nought.
               
            
            
               Si tibi pro meritis, nemo rn̄det amicꝰ
               Incusare deū noli, sed te ip̄e coherce.
            
            
               
                  For thy desert, if no wyght thanke the,
               
               
                  I meane, whā yu hast done thy force & paine
               
               
                  To other folke frendly for to be:
               
               
                  If they can not to the gramercy sayne,
               
               
                  
                     Withdraw thy selfe, & so thy hand refrayne
               
               
                  Blame not thy god, for their vnfrēdlinesse:
               
               
                  But for such folke, do afterwarde the lesse.
               
            
            
               Ne tibi quid desit, quaesitis vtere parce
               Vt
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   quod est serues, semper tibi deesse putato.
            
            
               
                  Sith y• no riche mā, liueth there any where
               
               
                  If he consume his goodes all and wast,
               
               
                  But y• pouerte shal greue him sore & dere:
               
               
                  Therfore my chylde, such goodes as y• hast,
               
               
                  Let not to s
                        •
                     ne, out of thy hand be raft,
               
               
                  Lest y• thy goodes hereafter wil the fayle:
               
               
                  Holde that thou hast, it may the oft auayle.
               
            
            
               Quod praestare potest, ne bis promiserisvlli.
               Ne sis vētosus, dūvis bonꝰ ip̄e videri
            
            
               
                  Behete no man a thing, to lene him twyse,
               
               
                  And fayle hym, that is but vilany.
               
               
                  If thou may lene, do it in frendly wyse,
               
               
                  Such cheuissaūce, wil frendlynesse bewrie.
               
               
                  Of thy good dedes, clamour not necrie,
               
               
                  Be not wordy ne of wordes breme,
               
               
                  If a good man, the lust to apere and seme.
               
            
            
               Qui similar verbis, nec corde est fidus amicus.
               Tu quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fac simile, sic ars deluditur arte.
            
            
               
                  And if thou finde, the son of doublenesse,
               
               
                  The fals flatterer, if thou espie,
               
               
                  with painted word, & hert full of falsnesse:
               
               
                  
                     Thou maiest in no wise better blere his eie
               
               
                  Than serue him with his owne trecherie.
               
               
                  For wordes faire, & frendlynesse no parte:
               
               
                  Geue him the same, & arte begile with arte.
               
            
            
               Noli homines blandos nimium sermone, probare.
               Fistula dulce canit, volucrem dum decipit auceps.
            
            
               
                  Preue not a mā, with ouer peynted speche,
               
               
                  Vnder faire wordes, is oft couert gile.
               
               
                  The worde is gay, but frēdship is to seche,
               
               
                  And as men say, suche craf is in this yle:
               
               
                  some thinke harme, whā thei her tōges file
               
               
                  The whystling fowler, maketh mery song
               
               
                  And yet the byrdes, begileth he among.
               
            
            
               Cum tibi sint nati, nec opes: tunc artibus illos.
               Instrue, quo possint inopem defendere vitam.
            
            
               
                  Whan ye god hath geuen the children fele,
               
               
                  And riches small, than do you in this wise.
               
               
                  Teche thy children with craftes for to dele,
               
               
                  That by their art, they may thēself cheuise.
               
               
                  If yu do thus, thā workest thou as the wyse,
               
               
                  Craft is good, and craft is lucratife,
               
               
                  By craft, they may defende the nedy lyfe.
               
            
            
               Quod vile est, carū: quod carum est, vile putato.
               Sic tibi nec cupidus, nec auarus nosceris vlli.
            
            
               
               
                  Haue this conceite, for it is often saine,
               
               
                  Thynges dere, shal ofte abate of pryse:
               
               
                  And thynges that of lytle value bene
               
               
                  In tyme comynge, maye to derth aryse,
               
               
                  Remembre this, & it wel aduertise:
               
               
                  Thus shal thou best, ye name of chincherye fleme
               
               
                  And other mē, shal y• no nigarde deme.
               
            
            
               Quae culpare soles, ea tune feceris ipse.
               Turpe est doctori cū culpa redarguit ipsum.
            
            
               
                  Auyse the wel, let reason be thy guyde
               
               
                  Whan other mē thou art about to blame,
               
               
                  That suche defaute be not in the espyede
               
               
                  For if ther be, thā shall thou haue y• shame
               
               
                  Amās honour suche thinges wyl reclame.
               
               
                  It is ful foull whan y•a man wyll teche
               
               
                  Yf his owne dedes, against his wordes preche
               
            
            
               Quod iustū est, petito: vel quod videatur honestū
               
               Nam stultū est petere, quod possitiure negari.
            
            
               
                  Loke thy desyre, be grounded in a right
               
               
                  And that it neuer trauers honeste
               
               
                  For as often tymes as wyght
               
               
                  Desyreth more than right and equite
               
               
                  Than may his request repeled be
               
               
                  And it is clepud nycete and grete folye
               
               
                  To aske oft that men wyl ay denye▪
                  
               
            
            
               
               Ignotum tibi, tu noli praeponere notis
               Cognita iudicio cōstant, incognita casu.
            
            
               
                  Chaūge not thy frēd, that yu knowest of old,
               
               
                  For any newe, in trust y• thou shalt fynde
               
               
                  Better than he: but in thy handes holde
               
               
                  Him, that to y• hath frendly been and kinde:
               
               
                  Suche changes ben full often blynde
               
               
                  Thou wenest to know, & yet knowest yu not a dele
               
               
                  To knowe a frende, it is ful casuale
               
            
            
               Cū dubio incertis versetur vita periculis
               Pro lucro tibi pone diē, quicū
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   laboras.
            
            
               
                  Sithe mannes lyfe is ful of myserie,
               
               
                  Some tyme in myrth, and after in mischiefe
               
               
                  Now in the dale, Now in the mounte on hie
               
               
                  Now man is pore, and oft ryches relefe
               
               
                  The shynyng morow, hath oft a stormy eue
               
               
                  To this polycie, take hede and entende:
               
               
                  Loke thou haue lucre in thy labours ende.
               
            
            
               Vincere cū possis, interdū sede sodali:
               Obsequeo qm̄ dulces retinentur amici.
            
            
               
                  Though yu may be venged, & haue victorie
               
               
                  Of thy frende & felowe, yet yu must forbere,
               
               
                  Refraine thy selfe, be not to haute ne hie:
               
               
                  Irous hastines, ful ofte men doth dere,
               
               
                  where easy softnes, frendes may conquere,
               
               
                  For by good dedes set in holines,
               
               
                  Men ben togyder knet in frendlynes
               
            
            
               
               Ne dubites cum magna petas, impē
                  dere parua.
               Hiis etenim rebus coniungit gratia charos.
            
            
               
                  The lymytour that visiteth the wiues,
               
               
                  Is wyse enough, of him a man may lere,
               
               
                  To geue pynnes, purses, and knyues,
               
               
                  This crafte is good, so doth the sely frere.
               
               
                  Geue thinges smale for thinges y• ben dere
               
               
                  If y• receiue, geue somewhat ay agayne,
               
               
                  And that wil norishe frendes dere certaine.
               
            
            
               Litem inferre caue, cum quo tibi gratia iuncta est.
               Ira odium generat, concordia nutrit amorem.
            
            
               
                  Touile not, ne striue wt him y• is thy frend▪
                  
               
               
                  Beware of y•, make not thy frend thy foo:
               
               
                  A touyllous man may frendship & shende.
               
               
                  These baratours that ben misruled soo,
               
               
                  Entryp them selfe and wrap in much woo.
               
               
                  for Ire of kinde, ēgēdreth nought but hate,
               
               
                  Where as accorde, norysheth loue algate.
               
            
            
               Seruorum ob culpam cum te dolor v
                     •
                   get in iram:
               Ipse tibi moderare, tuis vt parcere possis.
            
            
               
                  Whan thy seruaūt thou takest in defaute,
               
               
                  Though he can not his negligence excuse,
               
               
                  
                     Yet in thyne yre, make not to 
                        •
                     yers assaute:
               
               
                  But with thy haste a while take truse,
               
               
                  Thou shalt finde ease, this fete if y• can vse.
               
               
                  Rule thy passion ay by suche mesure:
               
               
                  That thou saue, that ben vnder thy cure.
               
            
            
               Quem superare pores, interdū vince ferendo:
               Maxima etenim morum est, semper patientia virtus.
            
            
               
                  Sufferaūce doth ease, was said ful lōg ago,
               
               
                  Suffre, and haue all thyne entent,
               
               
                  Though thou may ouercome yet do not so.
               
               
                  Conquere through sufferaūce, & be paciēt,
               
               
                  But to foule cruelte neuer consent.
               
               
                  For it is cleped in vertue excellence,
               
               
                  Awight to lyue in humble pacience.
               
            
            
               Conserua potius quae sunt iam parta labore.
               Cum labor in damno est, crescit mortalis egestas.
            
            
               
                  Be not to scant, be not to prodigall,
               
               
                  Conserue thy thing gotten with laboure:
               
               
                  It is full fayre, to be sayd liberall,
               
               
                  But eschewe wast, and be no surfetoure,
               
               
                  Consume not all thy treasure in an houre,
               
               
                  Whan of thy laboure ryseth none auayle:
               
               
                  Nedy pouerte muste the full sone assayle.
               
            
            
               
               Dapsilis interdum notis et charis amicis.
               Cum fueris foelix, semper tibi proximus esto.
            
            
               
                  Be not lyke zenola, for he woulde ete
               
               
                  With euery man, & at their feest him fede:
               
               
                  But neuer man, might tasten of his mete,
               
               
                  No man to him, but he to al men yede.
               
               
                  Be free of mete, but loke y• largesses lede
               
               
                  The no ferther, than thou may well attain.
               
               
                  be thin own frēd, for this saith cato certain
               
               
                  ¶ Take hede sir, howe holsomly this clerke
               
               
                  Entreateth men by vertuos doctrine
               
               
                  Thys fyrst part of his compendious werke
               
               
                  In worship howthei shal ful clerely shine,
               
               
                  Guyding to renowne streght as any lyne:
               
               
                  whose preceptes obserue if ye list,
               
               
                  And to his good coūsail, your hertes encline
               
               
                  Kight in your welth ful wel it shal be wist
               
               
                  The vertues foure, y• men shold forth cōuey
               
               
                  Lo in this life, as brydel doth a beeste,
               
               
                  That men not erre in this perilous waye,
               
               
                  Stablisshinge him as doth a stedfast reest.
               
               
                  As sikur guydes, y• ben worthyest
               
               
                  Mannes lyuing to sette in gouernaunce,
               
               
                  This sage Cato, full wysely doth regest,
               
               
                  Prenteth his sawes in your remembraūce.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Here foloweth the second booke of Cato.
            
               
                  TElluris si forte velis cognoscere cultis.
               Virgilium legito, quod si mage nosce laboras.
            
            
               
                  If thou my chylde sette thy delyte,
               
               
                  Of earth, to knowe the tilthe and culture,
               
               
                  And if thou wilt of knowledge be perfite.
               
               
                  Why some is areable, and some is pasture,
               
               
                  And why some is spreint wt floure picture,
               
               
                  I counsayle the to musen for a whyle,
               
               
                  In the laureat poete virgile.
               
            
            
               Humanos si forte velis, depellere morbos.
               Herbarum vires: macer tibi carmine dicet.
            
            
               
                  And further more my chylde, if that the list,
               
               
                  The vertue of herbes for to discriue:
               
               
                  It may neuer in earth better be wyst,
               
               
                  Whiche be cōsuming, whiche be nutritiue,
               
               
                  Whiche hote, whiche colde, whiche conseruatiue:
               
               
                  Thā rede Macer, in his olde dite,
               
               
                  Whiche telleth hem in proper qualite.
               
            
            
               Si Romana cupis & punica no scere bella,
               Lucanum quaeras, qui martis praelia dicet▪
               
            
            
               
               
                  And if thou haue destrous fresh courage,
               
               
                  To here of noble Romains worthinesse,
               
               
                  How that thei vanquished theim of cartage,
               
               
                  And many other, through manly prowesse:
               
               
                  Than rede Lucan, full well can he expresse,
               
               
                  who bare him best in towne & eke in felde,
               
               
                  and who did marueiles vnder macers shelde
               
            
            
               Si quis amare libet, vel discere amare legengo.
               Nasonem petito, sin autem cura tibi hec est.
            
            
               
                  And he that lust of louers for to rede,
               
               
                  And in that wyse him selfe to auaunce,
               
               
                  As in y• craft, Naso can teache him spede.
               
               
                  Some loueth song, some harpe, lute & daūce
               
               
                  Some other thynges diuers of pleasaunce,
               
               
                  Some louen secretly & lust not to be spide,
               
               
                  Som wil be knowē for thus writeth Ouide
               
            
            
               Vt sapiens viuas: audi que discere possis.
               Per quae si motum vitiis deducitur aeuum.
            
            
               
                  But yet my chylde if that in aduenture,
               
               
                  Thyne hert be set to no such maner thyng:
               
               
                  Or if it be not all to thy pleasure
               
               
                  That Virgil, Macer, Lucan, & Naso bring,
               
               
                  yet that thou may be wyse in thy liuyng.
               
               
                  If the lust to geue me audience.
               
               
                  I shall the shewe doctrine of sapience.
               
            
            
               
               Ergo ades, & quae sit sapientia, disce legendo.
            
            
               
                  Therfore my chylde, come to me and lere,
               
               
                  And I shal the shew the veray treasure
               
               
                  Of sapience, if the lust to here.
               
               
                  And how thou shalt, in good estate endure,
               
               
                  And lede thy lyfe after goddes pleasure.
               
               
                  Therfore come nere, & lere by this reding,
               
               
                  To be a man vertuous in lyuyng.
               
            
            
               Si potes, ignotis etiam prodesse memento,
               Vtilius est regno, meritis acquirere amicos.
            
            
               
                  There is no wight, that further may report
               
               
                  Of thy good dedes, than the straūger may.
               
               
                  Make him good chere, & shew hī thi disport:
               
               
                  And he shal vtter thy name, this is no nay,
               
               
                  For the vnknowen, sometime doth assay.
               
               
                  Frendes ynowe to haue, is better thyng,
               
               
                  Than is frendles, a man to be a kyng.
               
            
            
               Mitte arcana dei coelum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   inquirere quid sit.
               Cum sis mortalis, quae sunt mortalia cures.
            
            
               
                  Of goddes misterie and his working,
               
               
                  Make neuer my chylde to far inquiraunce,
               
               
                  It is foly to muse vpon suche thyng.
               
               
                  Dispute neuer thy goddes pouruiaunce,
               
               
                  All thyng must be vnder his gouernaunce.
               
               
                  
                     Sithe thou art man clad in mortalite,
               
               
                  Dispute thou thynges suche as mortal be.
               
            
            
               Lingue metum leti, nam stultum est tempote omni.
               Dum mortem metuis, amittis gaudia vite.
            
            
               
                  The drede of death, that is inordinate,
               
               
                  I meane to drede it ay, and neuer to cese.
               
               
                  Beware of that I counseyle the algate,
               
               
                  For this is as gospel doubtles
               
               
                  True, who dredeth so, is ay myrthles.
               
               
                  Whan drede of death a man so aggruggith,
               
               
                  It wasteth life, and his tyme abbruggith.
               
            
            
               Iratus de re incerta contendere noli.
               Impedit ira animum, ne possit cernere verum.
            
            
               
                  For thyng that is to the vncertayne,
               
               
                  Whan thou art wrath, loke y• neuer striue.
               
               
                  Thy pacience easely withdrawe & refrayne,
               
               
                  For there is no persone in earth on lyue,
               
               
                  But that all reasonlesse he is as blyue,
               
               
                  As besy wrath hath kyndled hym on fyre:
               
               
                  And than he can not deme the crouth for yre
               
            
            
               Fac sumptum propere, cum res desiderat ipsa.
               Dandum etenim est aliquid, cum tem pus postulat aut res.
            
            
               
                  As tyme requireth, so make thine expence,
               
               
                  Mesure thy hand, after thy properte
               
               
                  
                     Of thyng, of tyme, and after the presence.
               
               
                  Se that thou spende no more than nedeth y•,
               
               
                  And that to spende, loke thyne hert be fre.
               
               
                  A man shuld do coste, & make his spending,
               
               
                  Considering time, & rewarding the thyng.
               
            
            
               Quod nimium est fugito, paruo gaudete memento.
               Tuta magis puppis, est modico que flumine fertur.
            
            
               
                  To muche is nought of any maner thyng,
               
               
                  The meane is good and moost cōmendable,
               
               
                  Than mā standeth surest here in his liuing
               
               
                  with mene estate that halt him greable.
               
               
                  Plente and pouerte be not souffrable,
               
               
                  For than is the shippe in the sea moste sure,
               
               
                  Whan that the flode excedith not mesure.
               
            
            
               Quod pudeat, sociis prudens celare memento.
               Ne plures culpent id, quod et displicet vni.
            
            
               
                  If yu know ought yt may turne one to shame,
               
               
                  Kepe it secrete for nothing it bewrye:
               
               
                  Be not to besy suche thynges to proclame
               
               
                  And publisshe, as thou knowest priue.
               
               
                  Make not all men, to gare on the and crye,
               
               
                  Lest mo depraue, whā yu thy word has sowe
               
               
                  that was before to other men vnknowe,
               
            
            
               Non putes prauos hoies peccata lucrari:
               Temporibus peccata latent, et tempore patent.
            
            
               
               
                  Yf thou espie and see a surfetoure,
               
               
                  A thefe, a shrewe, of grete mysgouernaūce,
               
               
                  Trust well sumtyme, shal come an houre
               
               
                  whan for his dede, shall he suffre penaunce,
               
               
                  Cursed dede, askyth wreche and vengeance
               
               
                  Though wyckydnesse for time be kept secre
               
               
                  Yet at the last it wol discouerd bee.
               
            
            
               Corporis exigui vires contemnere noli.
               Consilio pollet, cui vim natura negauit.
            
            
               
                  Though sum tyme nature haue ben vnkind
               
               
                  And yeuen a man to be of smale stature,
               
               
                  Yet my chylde Remembre, & haue in mynde
               
               
                  That thou neuer dispice that creature,
               
               
                  For god may send hym fortune and good our
               
               
                  As ofte as thay be wt good counsell allied,
               
               
                  To whō yt nature, hath great strēght denied
               
            
            
               Quem scires non esse parem tibi tempore cede,
               victorem a victo superare, saepe videmus.
            
            
               
                  whan the hapenyth to trauerce or haue ad
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  wt him thou knowest not egal to thy myght
               
               
                  Thyne vttrest power shew not such on vnto
               
               
                  lest that estsones, he haue the in like plight
               
               
                  for it is synne in tournement and in fight.
               
               
                  fortune changith oftene in an hour
               
               
                  And he is discomfet, that erst was victoure
               
            
            
               
               Aduersus notum noli contendere, verbis.
               lis minimis verbis interdum maxima cresit.
            
            
               
                  Of brōdes smale, be made these fires grete,
               
               
                  withdrawe y• brand, the fire shal eke decrece
               
               
                  Agayne the knowen ayre loke yu neuer bete
               
               
                  with wordes fele, for word distour beth pece▪
                  
               
               
                  The man is wyse, that can of wordes cese,
               
               
                  For this is soth as god gas the lyfe,
               
               
                  Of wordes smale, is brad full muche stryfe.
               
            
            
               Quod deus intendit, noli perquirere sorte.
               Quod statuit de te, sine te deliberat ipse.
            
            
               
                  Dele not with sorcery, ne with surquedry:
               
               
                  In goddes hand is all thy sorte and state,
               
               
                  Be not about to calcle thy destyny,
               
               
                  If thou be mysbrous or fortunate.
               
               
                  Let god alone, in him is all thy state,
               
               
                  And that hym list of the for to purpose:
               
               
                  without the, ful well can be dispose.
               
            
            
               Inuidiam nimio cultu, vitare memento.
               Quae si non laedit, tamen hanc sufferre molestum est.
            
            
               
                  Beware of enuy, with her taches felle,
               
               
                  within thyne hert, loke that she not reste:
               
               
                  
                     For it is one of the paynes of helie.
               
               
                  whan she soiourneth in a mans breste,
               
               
                  Than brenneth fenix in his owne neste.
               
               
                  and though she may non other mā mischeue
               
               
                  Yet Ethua ceaseth not her selfe to greue.
               
            
            
               Esto fortis animo cum sis dampnatus inique:
               Nemo diu gaudet, qui iudice vincit iniquo.
            
            
               
                  Enforce thyne hert, with manly suffraūce,
               
               
                  Though iudgement agaynst the procede,
               
               
                  Be not abasshed in worde ne countenaūce.
               
               
                  For the oppressoure, fals may rule and lede,
               
               
                  The lawe, but trust me well without drede,
               
               
                  Long to reioyse acheueth he nat,
               
               
                  whiche by meanes vntrew, his goodes gat.
               
            
            
               Litis praeteritae noli maledicta referre
               Post inimicitias iram meminisse, malorum est.
            
            
               
                  Wrath of olde, that should be out of mynde,
               
               
                  Be not about to make eft alyue.
               
               
                  But the enuious hath that tache of kynde.
               
               
                  Such malice my child, loke yu neuer reuiue,
               
               
                  For yre of old, maketh men to stryue.
               
               
                  and who remembreth olde enemyte:
               
               
                  A wicked man, forsoth my chylde is he.
               
            
            
               Ne te collaudas, nec te culpaueris ipse.
               Hoc faciunt stulti, quos gloria vexat inanis.
            
            
               
                  Thy selfe also, loke that thou not preyse,
               
               
                  
                     Ne dispreyse, but let other men alone.
               
               
                  Alway after prudence thy wordes yu peyse:
               
               
                  For thine own auaūt, honour getest yu none
               
               
                  But a mocke, anone as thou art gone.
               
               
                  A man to preyse him selfe as sayth the scole,
               
               
                  Or dispreyse muche, is token of a fole.
               
            
            
               Vtere quesitis modice, cum sumptus habundat.
               Labitur exiguo, quod partum est tem pore longo.
            
            
               
                  Whan it is time of coste and gret expence,
               
               
                  Beware of waste and spend ay by mesure.
               
               
                  who that to kepe nor spende no difference
               
               
                  Maketh, his goodes may not long endure.
               
               
                  The olde sawe sayth, mesure is tresure:
               
               
                  For in short tyme, thy good may slyp away,
               
               
                  That was begotten in many a sondry day.
               
            
            
               Incipiens esto, cum tempus postulat, autres.
               Stulticiam similare loco, prudentia summa est.
            
            
               
                  It is no wisdome, alway to seme sage,
               
               
                  But sometyme to be nyce, and fayne folye:
               
               
                  who hath this feate shall fynde auauntage.
               
               
                  whan tyme and thyng requireth that espye,
               
               
                  And than to dissimyle it is pollicye:
               
               
                  Sometyme to be vnwyse in apparance
               
               
                  Among the wyse, is called hygh prudence.
               
            
            
               
               Luxuriam fugito, simul et vitare memento.
               Crimen auaritiae: nam sunt contraria famae.
            
            
               
                  Thy filthy fleshe in mouyng bestial,
               
               
                  That fyghteth against the soule within
               
               
                  By force of her entycement sensuall,
               
               
                  Eschew my chyld, & kepe the from her gyn:
               
               
                  That acte, & grace, be set full ferre atwyne.
               
               
                  And fle of auarice the wicked fame,
               
               
                  This two it be, that causen euyll name.
               
            
            
               Noli tu quedam referenti, credere semper.
               Exigua est tribuenda fides, quia multi multa lo quuntur.
            
            
               
                  Beleue not euery wyghtes sawe,
               
               
                  For some reporte thynges all otherwyse
               
               
                  Than it was done, or any man it sawe.
               
               
                  And some haue it of custome and of gyse,
               
               
                  To fede folke with flatteryng and lyese.
               
               
                  Geue litle trust therfore to such spekynges:
               
               
                  For many folke speke many thynges.
               
            
            
               Quod potu peccas, ignoscere tu tibi noli.
               Nam nullum crimen vini est, sed culpa bibentis.
            
            
               
                  If thou surfet in drynke, forget not that,
               
               
                  Auyse the oft thou come not in the snare.
               
               
                  withdraw thy hād, fede not thy throte so fat
               
               
                  Drinke that suffiseth, & otherwhile yu spare.
               
               
                  
                     To muche drynke maketh men of wit bare,
               
               
                  And yet the wyne therof is not to blame.
               
               
                  But the drynker, maketh hym selfe lame.
               
            
            
               Consilium arcanum, tacito committe so dali.
               Corporis auxilium, medico cōmitte fideli.
            
            
               
                  To thy trusty frende that is ay secre,
               
               
                  Shewe thy coūsayl, to hym thy hert bewry,
               
               
                  A trusty frend is chefest of preuete.
               
               
                  But it is hard suche frendes to espie,
               
               
                  Trie out one among a companie,
               
               
                  And of thy body betake the cure:
               
               
                  To suche a leche, as is trusty and sure.
               
            
            
               Successus indignos noli tu ferre moleste:
               Indulget fortuna malis, vt laedere possit,
            
            
               
                  Within thy selfe, agreue the not to sore,
               
               
                  Though thyng amys sumtyme the betyde.
               
               
                  Dismay the not in besy wyse therfore,
               
               
                  Thyne aduenture nedes thou must abyde,
               
               
                  Fortune may not alway be on thy syde.
               
               
                  with harmes to greue, in awayte lieth she,
               
               
                  To reue men of their felicite.
               
            
            
               Prospice qui veniunt hos casus esse fe rendos.
               Nam leuius laedit, quicquid praeuidimus ante.
            
            
               
               
                  In thy selfe compasse about before,
               
               
                  Thynge to perceyue, that after shall befall.
               
               
                  It noyeth not, ne greueth halfe so sore,
               
               
                  That is forsayne, as other thynges shall,
               
               
                  Sodeyne chaunces disseysen moste of all.
               
               
                  It hurteth lesse, and is better plyght:
               
               
                  wherof before a man can haue in syght.
               
            
            
               Rebus in aduersis animum submittere noli.
               Spem retine, spes vna hominem nec morte relinquit.
            
            
               
                  Whan diuers thinges trauers thyne entēt,
               
               
                  And thou art wrapped in aduersite:
               
               
                  wayte for wāhope, thou be not lost ne shent.
               
               
                  Let not dispayre thy wyt bereue the,
               
               
                  Abyde the tyme it may better be.
               
               
                  Hope is she that shall make the a seth,
               
               
                  Hope leueth not man, though mā leue breth
               
            
            
               Rem tibi quam noscis aptam, dimittere noli.
               Fronte capellata, post hec occasio calua.
            
            
               
                  Whan profer is than mekely it receyue,
               
               
                  Take thynges whyle they be in season.
               
               
                  They profre now, y• oft wil thinges weyue.
               
               
                  Plente now, wyl afterwarde be geason.
               
               
                  Take in tyme, for so commaundeth reason.
               
               
                  The balled head, sumtyme full of heres,
               
               
                  Now is made bare without knife or sheres.
               
            
            
               
               Quod sequitu
                     •
                   specta: quod
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   imminet ante videto.
               Illum immittare deum, qui partem spectat vtram
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  .
            
            
               
                  Prouide thy selfe, and haue deliueraunce
               
               
                  By lykely coniecture what may betyde,
               
               
                  Aduertise my chyld in thy remembraunce
               
               
                  Afore and after about on euery syde.
               
               
                  Folowe that god, and let hym be thy guyde,
               
               
                  That all thyng hath in his gouernement,
               
               
                  Future passed and that is present.
               
            
            
               Forcius vt valeas, interdū parcior esto.
               Pauca voluptate debentur, plura saluti,
            
            
               
                  It is a tache, of a deuouryng hounde
               
               
                  To receyue super fiue and done excesse:
               
               
                  Till his receyte frō hym agayne rebounde.
               
               
                  Content thy nature, and fle gredynesse:
               
               
                  Foule lustes ay kepe vnder and represse.
               
               
                  Fede not thy lust withall that she wil craue
               
               
                  If in helth thou lust thy body to saue.
               
            
            
               Iudicium populi nunquam contempseris vnus.
               Ne nulli placeas dum vis contemnere multos.
            
            
               
                  Whan a multitude hath geuen a decre,
               
               
                  Or concluded ought agaynst thyne entent,
               
               
                  Trauerse not against the communete:
               
               
                  For if thou do thou shalt lyghtly be shente.
               
               
                  Despyse not alone the peples iudgements,
               
               
                  In aduenture thou please of them not one:
               
               
                  
                     While thou w
                        ••
                     t enpugne theim euerichone.
               
            
            
               Sic tibi precipue (quod primum cura est salutis.
               Tempora ne culpes, cum sit tibi causa doloris.
            
            
               
                  Take good hede vnto thyne owne estate,
               
               
                  To rule thy body well with good diete.
               
               
                  But loke with tyme, thou be not at debate.
               
               
                  though through thin own misrule & surfete:
               
               
                  Sekenes & sorowe, haue geuen the an hete,
               
               
                  The tyme is good, and no dismale it is:
               
               
                  But man it maketh, for that he doth amys.
               
            
            
               Somnia ne cures, nam mens humana quod optat.
               Dum vigilat: sperat, per somnium cernit idipsum.
            
            
               
                  Drede no dremes, so saith Detronomye,
               
               
                  Though they be caused of complection,
               
               
                  Or els of any nyced fantasye,
               
               
                  Or of a superflue replection:
               
               
                  For dremes be but fals illusion.
               
               
                  Whā men be wakyng, they desire & thinke,
               
               
                  And vpō suche thing, they dreme whan they wynke.
               
            
            
               Lenuoye.
               
                  Museth a whyle, what al these maters mene
               
               
                  Abyde my mayster and go no further yet,
               
               
                  To rede theim, auayleth not a bene:
               
               
                  But if a man the curnel wyll vnknit.
               
               
                  wherfore your hert, & al your mynd vnshit,
               
               
                  
                     And loke what lieth vnder y• boisto
                        •
                     s rinde,
               
               
                  And I dare say, of wysdome and of wyt,
               
               
                  Plente and foy
                        •
                     on, therin shall ye fynde.
               
               
                  Refressheth your selfe, wt this holsome diet
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  That fostereth and kepeth vertue on lyue,
               
               
                  To your parsone me thynketh it full mete:
               
               
                  For to receyue suche a nutritiue.
               
               
                  whiche youre estate, shal ay preserue alyue.
               
               
                  In great honour, & kepe you frō noyssaūce,
               
               
                  Ouc of daunger and vices infectiue:
               
               
                  If ye wyll worche, after this ordinaunce.
               
               
                  And in especiall, loke that your dede,
               
               
                  May bere true wytnesse and testifie.
               
               
                  The mater that ye beholde and rede.
               
               
                  Loke wt your herte, as wel as wt your eye,
               
               
                  Than dare I say, somewhat shal ye espie,
               
               
                  that to this worke shal moue your courage.
               
               
                  wherfore your hert, your eie, & al applie,
               
               
                  your selfe to rule, after this dietes sage.
               
            
            
               
                  ••
               cunda pars finita.
         
         
            
            ¶ Here folowed the third booke of Cato.
            
               
                  HOc quicun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   velis carmen cog noscere lector.
               Hec praecepta feres, quae sūt gratissima vitae.
            
            
               
                  Beholde what wyght, that lust for to rede
               
               
                  In this my diete, somewhat shall he fynde,
               
               
                  where wt, his soule he shall foustre and fede,
               
               
                  with the wyse good, and it frō vices bynde.
               
               
                  Come nere my child therfore & haue in mid,
               
               
                  Suche doctrine to bere away and lere,
               
               
                  As to thy lyfe shal be full good and dere.
               
            
            
               Instrue praeceptis animum, nec discere cesses.
               Nam sine doctrina, vita est, quasi mor tis imago.
            
            
               
                  Thy soule resembleth, a newe playne table,
               
               
                  In the whiche, as yet apperith no picture,
               
               
                  The philosophie saith without fable:
               
               
                  So is the soule but a dedly figure,
               
               
                  Till tyme she be reclaymed with the lure
               
               
                  Of doctrine, and so get her a good habite
               
               
                  To be expert in conyng and parfite.
               
            
            
               Commoda multa feres, sin autem spre ueris illud.
               Non me scriptorem, sed te neglexeris ipse.
            
            
               
                  Enprynte my teching, in thy soule stedfast,
               
               
                  
                     And full profitable thou shalt it fynde
               
               
                  For sake it not, ne from thyn hert it cast
               
               
                  For if thou do exclude out of thy mynde
               
               
                  This lesson, thou art full bareyn and blinde
               
               
                  From vertu, and therfore wyte not me,
               
               
                  Sith the faute my sonne, is then in the,
               
            
            
               Dum recte viuas, ne curas verba malorum
               Arbitrii nostri non est, quod quisque loquatur
            
            
               
                  Yf thou lyue Iustly; keping the vpright
               
               
                  Neuer declining for nede ne fauoure,
               
               
                  Than standest thou in a full holsom plight,
               
               
                  Though mē malingne wt wordes of rigour
               
               
                  Yf thou liue thus, thy good lyfe is thy toure
               
               
                  We may not let, the people to gare & crye:
               
               
                  But doo we wel, if they say misse they lye.
               
            
            
               Productus testis, saluo tamen ante pudore,
               Quantum qūque potes, celato crimen amici.
            
            
               
                  Yf thou be called the soth to testifie
               
               
                  Ay sauing thy worship and honestie
               
               
                  Thy frendes trespas be not about to wrie,
               
               
                  Wher as no shame therof mai growe to the
               
               
                  This requireth ay frendlines pardiè,
               
               
                  In well and woo the treue beniuolence,
               
               
                  Betwix folke is frendship in existence.
               
            
            
               
               Sermones blādos, blesos
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cauere memento.
               Simplicitas viri sana est: fraus, picta lo quela.
            
            
               
                  Make besy warche, & kepe thy soule algats
               
               
                  Beholde aboute, espye the couert trayne
               
               
                  Whē that false fauel knokkith at thy gates,
               
               
                  He menyth gile though outward he fayne.
               
               
                  He can anoynte softly thy eres twayne,
               
               
                  With oyle of pleasaunce plente and toison.
               
               
                  Yet vnder that, kepe the from his poyson.
               
            
            
               Signitiem fugito, quae vitae ignauia fertur.
               Nam cum animus languet, cōsumit inertia corpus.
            
            
               
                  Slouth, slogardy, and dulle ydulnesse,
               
               
                  And lachesse, that causith to vs necligente,
               
               
                  Esch ue my child with all thy besynesse:
               
               
                  For youll body, makith the soule shente.
               
               
                  There is in erth no greater argumente,
               
               
                  For to conclude the body vnapte:
               
               
                  Than that the soule in ydelnesse be wrapte.
               
            
            
               Interpone tuis interdum gaudia curis.
               Vt possis animo quemuis sufferre laborem,
            
            
               
                  Who so lackith rest, may not long endure:
               
               
                  Therfore among take thiu ease and disport.
               
               
                  Delite the neuer in besinesse and cure,
               
               
                  
                     But yet at sumtyme thou maist resort
               
               
                  To play, recreacion, and comforte,
               
               
                  Thou shalte the better laboure at the long,
               
               
                  Whan thou hast mirch, thi besinesse amōg,
               
            
            
               Alterius dictum, aut factum, ne carpseris vnquam.
               Exemplo simili ne te deri deat alter.
            
            
               
                  It is ful hard, to plese euery wight,
               
               
                  Despreyse no mānes dedes, nor them lacke,
               
               
                  Ne wordys, for euen so right,
               
               
                  As thou dispraisist them behind thy backe
               
               
                  Right so wil mē make y• a moppe & a knacke
               
               
                  The contrary, though men had it sworne,
               
               
                  The scorner shall alwaye haue a scorne.
               
            
            
               Quae tibi fors dederit tabulis suprema notata.
               Augendo serua, ne sis quem fama lo quatur.
            
            
               
                  Whan thy last sorte that sum men call fate,
               
               
                  Is good and pleasaunt after thyne enrente:
               
               
                  This meane I loo, whā thou art fortunate,
               
               
                  Receiue the good that god hathe to the sente
               
               
                  Suffre it not rechelesly to be spent
               
               
                  For thā of a wastour, shalt thou haue y• nāe
               
               
                  For our great riot, wil cause a seble fame.
               
            
            
               Cum tibi diuitiae superant in fine senectae.
               Munificus facito viuas, non parcus amicis.
            
            
               
                  Into great age when thou arte crepte,
               
               
                  
                     And yu hast, ryches, & great aboundaunes,
               
               
                  be liberall of good thou hast before kepte:
               
               
                  Thinke thou hast ynough and suffisaunce,
               
               
                  Let not thy good of, the haue gouernaunce,
               
               
                  But gouerne it, and parte it wt thy frende:
               
               
                  When yu goest hēce, it may not wt the wende
               
            
            
               Vtile consilium dominus ne despice serui.
               Nullius sensū, si prodest contēpseris vnquam.
            
            
               
                  Grace is geuen to men in sundry wyse,
               
               
                  Sum haue wisdome, & sumhane eloquence,
               
               
                  Theis pouer solke, sumtyme bene ful wyse.
               
               
                  A seruaunte may be of great sapience,
               
               
                  Though he be had of smal reuerence,
               
               
                  Reward his wit among other while,
               
               
                  For vertue is hid vnder an habite vile
               
            
            
               Rebus et in sensu, non est quod fuit ante
               Facviuas contemptus eo, quod tempora praebent.
            
            
               
                  This worldli welth, ebbing and flowing ay
               
               
                  At no certaine, as doth wantan apryle,
               
               
                  Though yu haue lost it, make no dismay:
               
               
                  Be content wt that thou hast for the whyle.
               
               
                  Sū mē ther be, y• haue nother crosse ne pile.
               
               
                  Now in his warde, and yet good aduenture
               
               
                  Is him ful nere, no mā may knowe his vre
               
            
            
               Vxotē fuge ne ducas sub nomine dotis.
               Necretinere velis, si cepit esse molesta.
            
            
               
                  
                     Wed not a wyfe for her inheritaunce,
               
               
                  For she will cast it ofte in thy berde.
               
               
                  And yf she be noyus and full of greuaunce,
               
               
                  Constrayne her not tabyde in thy yerde,
               
               
                  Of chastise ment she is a cursed wede,
               
               
                  To kepe one that will the ayatwire,
               
               
                  He is at ease, that of suche one is quyte.
               
            
            
               Multorum disce exemplo quae factasequaris
               Quae fugias vita est nobis, aliena magistra.
            
            
               
                  Of other men thy mirrour thou shalt make
               
               
                  Conforme the to that y• most men appreue,
               
               
                  What y• shalt do, & what thou shalt forsake,
               
               
                  A better lesson maist thou not contreue,
               
               
                  Than to other monnes dedes releue.
               
               
                  In all apperteyneth vnto thy teching,
               
               
                  Make other men a rule for thy lyning;
               
            
            
               Quod potes, id tentes: operis ne pondere pressus
               Succumbat laboriet frustra tentat a relinquas
            
            
               
                  A tempte nothing, y• sur
                        ••
                     ūtith thy might
               
               
                  Ne that to finysshe, thou mayst nor acheue
               
               
                  For thā, yu stādiste foule in thyn owne light
               
               
                  Ouer his power, what men list to meue,
               
               
                  With shame; his warke; must nedes take (his leue
               
               
                  It is foly amā such thing to begin:
               
               
                  Which to ꝑfourme, his wittes be to thinne
               
            
            
               
               Quod nosti haud rectefactum, nolito tacere.
               Nevideare malos imitari velle, tacēdo.
            
            
               
                  Lawe presumeth, that what mā kepith stille
               
               
                  The cryme of one that dothe greate offence,
               
               
                  And discouereth it not, he is as ille,
               
               
                  As is the crymous for his silence.
               
               
                  Therfore my sonne bring it in audience,
               
               
                  That thou apperceiuest not well done is:
               
               
                  Lest for thy silence men deme of the amys.
               
            
            
               Iudicis auxiliū sub ini qua lege rogato
               Ipsae etiā leges cupiūt, vt iure regātur.
            
            
               
                  Whan that the lawe is strayte & rigorous,
               
               
                  Entreate the iudge to shewe the fauoure,
               
               
                  Enclynyng him for to be gracious.
               
               
                  Anegall iudge, may the parcas socoure,
               
               
                  And yet the lawe, shall be his gouernoure.
               
               
                  whiche he ought, sometime to modifie:
               
               
                  As in the case, he may a poynt espie.
               
            
            
               Quod merito pateris, patienter ferre memento.
               Cunque reus tibi sis, ipsum te iudice damna.
            
            
               
                  What paine thou souffrest for thy deserte,
               
               
                  Receiue it well in gree with pacience:
               
               
                  And though thy trespace be priuie couerte,
               
               
                  yet whan thou feless in thyne aduertence,
               
               
                  That thou art blemysshed in thy cōscience,
               
               
                  within thy selfe than make arbitremente:
               
               
                  Demyng thy selfe in thyne owne iudgemēt.
               
            
            
               
               Multa legas facito, preelectis prelege multa.
               Nam miranda canunt, sed non credenda poetae.
            
            
               
                  Myspende no tyme, for stouth or for lachesse,
               
               
                  But sometyme rede in bokes olde and wyse,
               
               
                  Rede and reporte, with greate attentifnesse:
               
               
                  By redyng, to connyng men may aryse.
               
               
                  Than rede my sonne, & connyng accoplise.
               
               
                  These poetes write thiges of gret maruaile,
               
               
                  And of smale credence oft this is no faile.
               
            
            
               Inter conuiuas facsis sermone modestus.
               Ne dicare loquax, dum vis vrbanus haberi.
            
            
               
                  Among frendes sitting at feste,
               
               
                  Be curtes and demure of thy langage.
               
               
                  who speaketh moste, may not offende lesse,
               
               
                  Of fleshe & boone nature bath made a cage,
               
               
                  The tonge to kepe, that she be not outrage.
               
               
                  Than if thou wilt be loued of nature,
               
               
                  Refrayne thy tonge, with all thy besy cure.
               
            
            
               Coniugis iratae noli tu verba timere,
               Nam lachrymis struit incidias dum foemina plorat.
            
            
               
                  Some women wepe of pure feminite,
               
               
                  whan otherwise they can not her entent
               
               
                  Acheue: but yet beware of nyce pitie,
               
               
                  That of thy manly reason thou be not ble
                        ••
                     ,
               
               
                  
                     For such weping, thy heart ought not relēt
               
               
                  Some women of kynde ben euer wepynge:
               
               
                  And vnder that, they can bothe prik & sting.
               
            
            
               Vtere quaesitis, sed ne vidiaris abuti
               Qui sua cōlumūt, cū deest aliena seq̄tur
            
            
               
                  That yu hast gotē to thyne owne worship vse
               
               
                  what auayleth ryches without honoure:
               
               
                  To spare good, and worship to refuse,
               
               
                  The nygarde ay with payne and laboure
               
               
                  Is besy, but I rede the not deuoure
               
               
                  without reason, thy good excessifly:
               
               
                  For than must thou of other begge hastely.
               
            
            
               Fac tibi proponas mortem non essetimendam.
               Quae bona si non est, finis cum illa malorum est.
            
            
               
                  Enprent my chyld, ay sadly in thy mynde,
               
               
                  That thou be not of deth to sorē adrade
               
               
                  That shal the from wrechidnesse vnbynde
               
               
                  wherin thy lyfe, so longe thou hast lad,
               
               
                  Til on thy corps, thy soule hath bene ful sad
               
               
                  For ryght as deth is fyne of ferfulnes:
               
               
                  So is she the end of thy wrechidnes.
               
            
            
               Vxoris linguam, si frugi est, ferre memento.
               Namque malum, nec velle pati nec vaelle tacere.
            
            
               
                  Thy wyfis word suffre and take in gree,
               
               
                  whan it auayleth, for betyde it may
               
               
                  Full ofte, that of full great prudence is she,
               
               
                  
                     And must be alowed, this is noo nay.
               
               
                  Suffre her than and her consete assay,
               
               
                  For it is hard whan she can not be stille:
               
               
                  Yf yu wyl not suffre, yu can not haue thy will
               
            
            
               Dilige non aegra cha
                     •
                  os pietate parentes.
               Nec matraem offendas, dū vis bonus esse parenti.
            
            
               
                  Goodes that be geuen the of nature,
               
               
                  And comen also of thy progenitours,
               
               
                  Therfore my chylde with all thy besy cure,
               
               
                  Loue them well, and cheryshe at all houres.
               
               
                  Thei fostred y•, & kipte yc in youthes shoures
               
               
                  Thy moder my chyld in especialle,
               
               
                  Yf thou do wel neuer offend at alle.
               
            
            
               Lenuoye
               
                  Resoort resoort, and hiderward releue,
               
               
                  My maister, now here is a holsume eyre
               
               
                  For your auayl, vnto this place retreue,
               
               
                  Where as of moralite floures fayre,
               
               
                  And so full plesauntly doth repare.
               
               
                  Gethrith therof, and make you agay,
               
               
                  And restith you here in this harbate.
               
               
                  Beholde and se what thing is to your pay,
               
               
                  whan you haue gethred floures to your lift,
               
               
                  Take them, for they be ful preseruatif.
               
               
                  Holde them fast, and bere them in your fist,
               
               
                  For the pestilent heires infectis.
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  I counsail you, and I ieoparde my life,
               
               
                  That ye shall lede your life in sekernesse,
               
               
                  Through vertue of this conseruatife:
               
               
                  And eke attayne to muche worthynesse.
               
               
                  Thus moue I you, vnder protection
               
               
                  Of your good grace, that what time ye rede,
               
               
                  Or in this mater haue inspection
               
               
                  As it biddeth you ye will do indede.
               
               
                  Than dare I affirme without drede,
               
               
                  Ye shall acheue and be ryght vertuous:
               
               
                  Here shall ye finde y• may you guyde & lede,
               
               
                  Streight to good fame, & brig you to her hous
               
            
            Tertia pars finita.
         
         
            
               
                  SEcuram quicunque cupis traducere vitam,
               Nec vitiis haerere animum quae moribus obsunt.
            
            
               
                  What wight that lust to lede in sekernesse
               
               
                  His life, & kepe his soule from accōbraunce,
               
               
                  Of vices, which again good the wys expresse
               
               
                  Bi
                        •
                     h ay at strife, come geue me good attēdāce
               
               
                  These preceptes kepe well in remēbraunce.
               
               
                  Enrolle thē, and printe thē in your mynde:
               
               
                  How to lyue well, the meanes shal ye fynde.
               
            
            
               Despice diuitias, si vis animo esse beatus
               Quas qui suspiciūt, mēdicāt: semp auar
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The soule talent of riches my child eschewe,
               
               
                  Resemble not the gredy Tantalus,
               
               
                  Whose e
                        ••
                     ck in hunger, is alway newe:
               
               
                  
                     Among the fayre appels delicious.
               
               
                  no wat swete quēchith his thurst, right thus
               
               
                  To the vilaynes swalowe of couetise,
               
               
                  Lo all this worlde, not can ne may suffice.
               
            
            
               Commoda naturae nullo tibi tempore deerunt.
               Si contentus co fueris, quod postulat vsus.
            
            
               
                  Nature can with litle thing be content,
               
               
                  As ind
                        •
                     ete, a man should neuer charge
               
               
                  Him selfe with mete, for many mē ben shent:
               
               
                  For their receites be so greate and large.
               
               
                  Men se alday the litle bote and barge,
               
               
                  wyl drenche anone whā they be ouerfreght:
               
               
                  Cherisshe nature, but hurt her not wt weght
               
            
            
               Cum sis incautus, nec rem ratione gubernes.
               Noli fortunam quae non est, dicere caecam.
            
            
               
                  If thy thing thou happe to misgouerne.
               
               
                  without reason or any prouidence,
               
               
                  Than my childe of me this lesson lerne:
               
               
                  Sithe it was thy fortune suche expence
               
               
                  To make, but wyte it thyne own negligēce.
               
               
                  for fortune may neuer compelle the,
               
               
                  Thy good to spende but at thy liberte.
               
            
            
               Dilige denarium, sed parce dilige formam.
               Quam nemo sanctus, nec honestus captat habere.
            
            
               
               
                  Loue thy peny, as for thy cheuissaunce,
               
               
                  Not for the 
                        •
                     oigne, to h
                        ••
                     r̄deit on an hepe
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  For of the prynte, was made an ordynaūce,
               
               
                  Not for it shuld in cotres ly and slepe,
               
               
                  But for it shuld among the people lepe
               
               
                  In chaire eschaunge, and who it kepith inne
               
               
                  As for the forme, is subiect vnto sinne.
               
            
            
               Cum fueris locuples, corpus curare memento,
               Eger habet diues nummos, sed nō habet ipsum.
            
            
               
                  Whan thou hast plente, and arte pecunyal
               
               
                  I meane whan thou hast great suffisaunce
               
               
                  Of mony, foyson, and of helth but smalle
               
               
                  Than spend thy mony, and thy self a
                        •
                     aunce
               
               
                  Kepe not thy coygne, and liue in greuaunce,
               
               
                  The sicke, hath syluer in full great ercesse,
               
               
                  But of him-selfe, he hath no sikernesse.
               
            
            
               Verbera cum tuleris, discens aliquando magistri▪
               
               Fer patris imperium, cum verbis exit iniram.
            
            
               
                  Though somtime y• suffre great sharpnes
               
               
                  Of beering, yet thy maistre is chastissement
               
               
                  Take well in gre with lowly humblenes,
               
               
                  Sith it is do but all in good entente,
               
               
                  To cause the to learne, & wisdome for to hēre
               
               
                  And though his wordes sowne full of ire:
               
               
                  Yet suffre thou thy talant of thy desire.
               
            
            
               
               Res age quepro sunt. Rursus vitare memento.
               In quibus error
                     •
                  nest: nec spes est cert
                     •
                   laboris.
            
            
               
                  Also my chyld, thou shalt the occupie
               
               
                  To worke thynges that ben profitable
               
               
                  But loke thy wittes thou neuer applye,
               
               
                  To thing that may not be vaillable
               
               
                  To cast a thynge that is not pregnable
               
               
                  By wyt or strength, it is but greate errour.
               
               
                  Dispaired hope, is ende of suche laboure,
               
            
            
               Quod donare potes, gratis cocede roganti.
               Nam rectefecisse bonis, in parte lucrorum est.
            
            
               
                  whā thou shalt geue thā geue in frēdlywise,
               
               
                  frendly content a prayre or Requeste
               
               
                  for geuen in tyme, is geuen twyse,
               
               
                  Sith gladsom chere, makith giftes Richesse
               
               
                  who so geueth gladly & sone geueth beeste,
               
               
                  Loo no thing may frendes better conquere,
               
               
                  Than man to leue that he may forbere.
               
            
            
               Quod tibi suspectum est contestim discute quid sit.
               Nam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   solent primo quae sunt neglecta nocere.
            
            
               
                  whan a thynge thou haste in a coniecture
               
               
                  As in the conceyte, holdyng it suspecte
               
               
                  To discusse that thing anon to thy cūre
               
               
                  for at the furst whan such thynges is reiecte
               
               
                  
                     The rest is aftir easy to correct.
               
               
                  And thyng that at the furst is not set by,
               
               
                  Is often sayne to greue fynally.
               
            
            
               Cum te detiniat Veneris damnosa voluptas.
               Indulgere gulae noli, que ventris amica est.
            
            
               
                  And whan thou arte disposed inwardly.
               
               
                  To venus actes, than represse thy courage,
               
               
                  Fostre not thy flesshe to lustily.
               
               
                  For great dyet, makith the flesshe outrage,
               
               
                  Where as measure might cause it to 
                        ••
                     age
               
               
                  And glotony, is clepud chiefe pometrice,
               
               
                  Ledinge the flesshe, to wan
                        ••
                     nnesse & vice.
               
            
            
               Cum tibi proponas animalia cuncta tjmere,
               Vnum hominem tibi praecipio plus esse timendum.
            
            
               
                  The rampand Lyon & the Tygre felle,
               
               
                  The yrous Bore, the hounde ful of enuye,
               
               
                  And other beestes moo than nedeth to re
                        •
                     le,
               
               
                  Men dreden sore, and feren their tirannye,
               
               
                  And will they doo but yit one beest I spye,
               
               
                  That is to fere moste in speciale:
               
               
                  Man is the beest, y• thou moste drede shall.
               
            
            
               Cum tibi preualide fuerint in corpore vires,
               Facsapias, sic tu poteris vir fortis haberi.
            
            
               
                  The vertu
                        •
                      that is clepud fortitude
               
               
                  
                     Standith not all in strenghthes bodily,
               
               
                  As to be virous, mighty, strong and rude,
               
               
                  But in the soule, it must be sikurly.
               
               
                  Than if thou wylt thy self fortefie
               
               
                  Thy soule with in acqueynt wt sapiene:
               
               
                  And thā shalt thou be strong in existence.
               
            
            
               Auxilium a notis petito, si forte laboras.
               Nec quisquam melior medicus, quanfidus amicus.
            
            
               
                  what thing in erth thou shalt take on hande
               
               
                  And thy supporte, shal be in frendlynesse,
               
               
                  No straunger on lyue so nigh to y• wil stāde
               
               
                  As thy knowen frēd, my child this is expres
               
               
                  Of the straunger thou hast no sikernesse,
               
               
                  For whan all other ben full far to seche:
               
               
                  Thy faithfull frēd, can best thā be thy leche
               
            
            
               Cum sis ipsenocens, moritur curvictima pro 
                     •
                  e.
               Stultitia est morte alterius sperare salutem.
            
            
               
                  The deth of bestes that be vnresonable,
               
               
                  As be custum and right of sacryfice
               
               
                  To purge the is no seth greable.
               
               
                  Trust not so to gete thy reprice,
               
               
                  For they that trusten so be full vnwise.
               
               
                  By deth of bestes god will not quemed bee.
               
               
                  And man abyde in his iniquitee▪
                  
               
            
            
               
               Cum tibi vel socium, vel fidum qu aeri
                     •
                   an
                     ••
                  cuin.
               Non tibi fortuna est hominis, sed vita petenda.
            
            
               
                  Whan y• wolte chose a frende for trustines,
               
               
                  Than of his fortune make no Inquirance.
               
               
                  For fortune is mother of change ablenes,
               
               
                  Aske of his lyfe and of his gouernaunce:
               
               
                  For that is proue of greater suffisaunce.
               
               
                  Than vre of fortune that is casuelle,
               
               
                  For lyfe of man his fortune doth excelle.
               
            
            
               Vtere quesitis opibus: fuge nomen auari:
               Quid tibi diuitiae pro sunt, si pauper abūdas?
            
            
               
                  Vse wel the richesse that thou hast by quest
               
               
                  Of auarice the wicked name escheue,
               
               
                  Let not thy good be stopped in a cheste?
               
               
                  Kepe not thy stuffe ay closed stil in mewe?
               
               
                  Such old treasour wil make thy shāe newe.
               
               
                  What proufiteth plenty, or great treasoure.
               
               
                  And in pouerte a wretche alway to endure
               
            
            
               Si famam seruare cupis, dum viuis, honestam
               Fac fugias animo, quae sūt mala gaudia vitae.
            
            
               
                  And yf thou desyre to reioyse thy fame,
               
               
                  In honeste whyles thou lyuest here
               
               
                  Eschue tho thinges that may cause shame
               
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     icorous lustes must be layde on bere,
               
               
                  
                     And thinges fele, that soyonsly apere.
               
               
                  This worldis ioye is ay full defectyf
                        •
                     ,
               
               
                  Beware of ioy that hurtith thy good lyfe.
               
            
            
               Cum sapias animo, noli irridere iene
                     •
                  
                  tam.
               Nam qui cun que sene, puerilis sensus in illo est.
            
            
               
                  And ay my chyld conceyue and aduertise,
               
               
                  That neuer thou scorne feble stowping age
               
               
                  Thyn elders my child for nothing y• dispilee
               
               
                  Though in their wittes they he not so sage
               
               
                  As in their youth: such age is outrage,
               
               
                  Whan age cometh this is sothe certaine,
               
               
                  A man by ginneth to be a chyld agayne
               
            
            
               Disce aliquid nam cum iubito fortuna recedit,
               Ars remanet, vitam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   hominis nō deserit vnquam.
            
            
               
                  Enforce thy wittes sumwhat for to lere,
               
               
                  Acquaint the with conning, for that is sure
               
               
                  If fortune fayle, and pouerte appere
               
               
                  Who that hath conning, is likly to recure
               
               
                  Connyng and crafte, remayneth to endure
               
               
                  By th
                        •
                      a man may him selfe releue
               
               
                  Whan fortune hath cast him into mischefe.
               
            
            
               Precipito cuncta tacius, quid quis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   lo quatur,
               Sermo hominem mores. et celat. et in dicat idem.
            
            
               
                  Be styil in silence with abysenesse.
               
               
                  
                     Tary my chield tyl other men haue sayd,
               
               
                  So shalt thou sumwhat say in sothfastnesse
               
               
                  Let not thy tong be sodenly vntyde,
               
               
                  For that might the of hastines be obreide.
               
               
                  By mans word, his maner wil be shewed.
               
               
                  By word is knowē the wise from y• lewde.
               
            
            
               Exerce studium, quamuis perceperis artem,
               Vt cura ingenium, sit et manus adiuuat vsuin
            
            
               
                  Though in conyng y• hast full great cōceyte
               
               
                  Enforce the ay yet to lerne more.
               
               
                  The soule it is, that muste▪ be thy receyte,
               
               
                  Kepte in the hir, wt that treasure and store
               
               
                  Vse maketh maystry, vse conning therfore.
               
               
                  Vse helpith arte, as conning helpeth witte:
               
               
                  Than vse and vre, to cōning must be knette
               
            
            
               Multum ne cures venturi tempora fact
                     •
                  .
               Non timuit mortem qui sit comemnere vita
            
            
               
                  Body from soule shal haue desseueraunce,
               
               
                  Deth is ende comune to euery wight.
               
               
                  Charge not to much therfor of deth is chaūcē
                  
               
               
                  The tribute of deth must thou paie of right:
               
               
                  But yet by deth shalt thou set more light.
               
               
                  Yf by his lyfe thou set no thing expresse
               
               
                  That is full of woo and wrechianesse.
               
            
            
               
               Disce, sed a doctis, indoctos ipse doceto.
               Propagāda etenim est rerum doctrina bonarum.
            
            
               
                  Lerne of the wise, that teche the any thyng
               
               
                  Good, for it is vertue and full-commendable
               
               
                  To encrese doctrine through such cōning.
               
               
                  It is alwaye a dede charitable,
               
               
                  To lerne and tecehe it is full agreable
               
               
                  To good doctrine, vertu on lyue kepith,
               
               
                  Which newer doctrine, sone frō me should
               
            
            
               Hoc bibe quod possis, si tuvis 
                     •
                  ine viueresanus.
               Morbi causa mali est homini, quandoquae voluptas.
            
            
               
                  Drynke not to muche, no more thā y• maist
                        •
                      bere
               
               
                  Kute thy selfe wt thē brydel of mesure
               
               
                  To muche drinke, wil the annoye and dere,
               
               
                  Sur
                        ••
                     t: is euer of helth vnsure.
               
               
                  And measure makith m
                        •
                      in helth to endure
               
               
                  What man is 
                        〈…〉
                      lustes vile,
               
               
                  In go
                        ••
                      est atent may a bide no while.
               
            
            
               Lau
                     ••
                  tis quod cun que palam quodcunque probaris.
               Hoc y
                     ••
                  e 
                     •
                  e rursus leuitatis crimine▪ 
                  
                     •
                  anes.
            
            
               
                  And if it hap the in audience,
               
               
                  A thing to preise, beware y• thou not blame
               
               
                  It oft agayne right in the same presence
               
               
                  Yf then dispreyse cōmende not eke the same
               
               
                  
                     Of such trauerse, must nedis folowe shame
               
               
                  To pryese now, and eft to blame doubties,
               
               
                  Is a thing of great vnstablenes.
               
            
            
               Tranquillis rebus quae sunt aduersa caueto.
               Rusus in aduersis, melius sperare memento.
            
            
               
                  Whan y• lyuest here right in thin owne ese.
               
               
                  In all thy ioye reeste and prosperitie,
               
               
                  Thinke thou parcas aduersite wil cese:
               
               
                  For welth standith not in sekernesse,
               
               
                  And also sone whan any aduersitese,
               
               
                  Assautith the, yet fall not into dispaire:
               
               
                  Think in thy helpe, good fortūe may repair
               
            
            
               Discere necesses, cura sapientia crescit.
               Raro datur longo prudētia temporis vsu.
            
            
               
                  It is full fayre my child, to be prudente,
               
               
                  And wisely loke thou lerne therfore.
               
               
                  To lerne ay my sonne do thyn cntents,
               
               
                  By diligent besynes, wisdome is mo
                        ••
                     :
               
               
                  Wisdome is she, that may not be forbore
               
               
                  The rather prudence, yt folke nyce refuse.
               
               
                  Can not be had but by processe and vse,
               
            
            
               Parce laudato. Nam quem tu saepe ꝓbaris.
               Vna dies▪ qualis fuerit monstrabit amicus.
            
            
               
                  Beware alway that thou neuer enhaunce,
               
               
                  
                     In thy laude or praysing a wight to hie:
               
               
                  For thou maist haue cause eft to disauaūce
               
               
                  The same: but ay thy praising modefie.
               
               
                  For at one day, thou shalt ful wel espye
               
               
                  Whether he be frendly that frendly semyth:
               
               
                  For all be not frendes, that men demyth.
               
            
            
               Ne pudeat, quae nescieris te velle doceri.
               Scire aliquid laus est, pudor est nil discere velle
            
            
               
                  Be not ashamed also my chylde to lere,
               
               
                  That thou can not for it is a teche
               
               
                  Of folye: not to desyre doctryne to here.
               
               
                  Full wel is he that to conning may streche,
               
               
                  Sith conyngles a man is but a wreche.
               
               
                  To knowemuche, is right commendable,
               
               
                  And nought to knowe, is ay reproueable.
               
            
            
               Demissos animo, et tacitos, vitare me mento.
               Qua flumen placidum est, forsan later altius vnda
            
            
               
                  The solleyne styll oft meneth fraud & gyle,
               
               
                  Of suche a man escheue the company
               
               
                  For the stil man compassith otherwhile
               
               
                  within his hert, deceyte and trecherye.
               
               
                  In flodes stil is water depe and hye,
               
               
                  In stremes softe seming to thy plesaunce,
               
               
                  Often betidith, full vnhappy chaunce,
               
            
            
               
               Cum tibi displiceat rerum fortuna tua rum
               Alterius specta, quo sis discrimine 
                     ••
                  peior.
            
            
               
                  With thy fortune whā thou arte dischtente
               
               
                  And canst not take agre thyne aduenture,
               
               
                  Behold and fele in thyn auisemnete,
               
               
                  How thay sumtyme were as thou as sure,
               
               
                  And more likely in welth for to endure.
               
               
                  Bothe of beaute and eke of noblenesse:
               
               
                  Haue yet fallen downe into wrechednesse.
               
            
            
               Quod 
                     •
                  otes id tenta, nam littus carpere ren
                     •
                  s.
               Tutius est multo, quam, velum tendera in altum
            
            
               
                  Atempte no thyng, that y• maist not suffice,
               
               
                  Passe not thi might, bere not to hie thy sailt
               
               
                  For ther is parrell, yf that the streme arise,
               
               
                  Certayne my child, this without faile,
               
               
                  The vessel small, is at ful great auaile,
               
               
                  Whan with his Ore he may to land reche
               
               
                  where the sailes hie ful oftē gone to wreche
               
            
            
               Contra hominem iustum, praue contendere noli.
               Semper enim deus iniustas vlciscitur iras
            
            
               
                  Against y• true Iust mā, brawle not nestriue
               
               
                  For to god aboue, that is great displesaūce,
               
               
                  Trust this truly, ther is no man onlyue,
               
               
                  That to the iuste mā doth dere or greuaūce,
               
               
                  
                     But at the last god wil take vengeaunce.
               
               
                  And herof it is good hede for to take,
               
               
                  The rightwisman, of god is not forsake.
               
            
            
               Ereptis opibus, noli gaudere merendo.
               Sed gaude potius, tibi sī contingat habere.
            
            
               
                  Yf extorcion or misauenture,
               
               
                  Haue plucked at the and made ye thredbare
               
               
                  Of riches yet do thy force and cure,
               
               
                  Being mery and eschue thought and care.
               
               
                  For freting thought, is a ful cursed 
                        •
                     nare:
               
               
                  Come not therin, fortune is vnstable,
               
               
                  After pouerce, riches is pregnable.
               
            
            
               Cum Venere et Baccho, lis est, cōiuncta voluptas.
               Quod lautum est, animo complectere sed fugelites.
            
            
               
                  Venus is redy, with al hir actes vile.
               
               
                  whā he bacchus, hath sent hir in largesse,
               
               
                  The tresoure of his hote and feruent Ile.
               
               
                  Therfore my chield thyne appetyt represse,
               
               
                  In wynes hote, do not to great excesse.
               
               
                  Drinke that for thy soule is expedient,
               
               
                  Eschue strif, with mesure be contēte.
               
            
            
               Est iactura grauis, que sunt amitterre damnis.
               Sunt quaedam quae ferre decet patienter amicum
            
            
               
               
                  It is an harme, thy goodes to forge.
               
               
                  That bene in hand, by force or violence,
               
               
                  But yet my childe thou muste cōsidre who,
               
               
                  And what he is, that dothe the such offence.
               
               
                  Bitwixt frend and fo, haue ay a diffrence.
               
               
                  For in sum caas, thou must a frend forbere,
               
               
                  And suffre him, though he annoye & dere.
               
            
            
               Tempora longa tibi noli promittere vitae.
               Quocunque ingrederis, sequitur mors corpus, et vmbra.
            
            
               
                  Be not to sure that thou shalt lyue long,
               
               
                  A wight shal die be he loth or leef.
               
               
                  And as the olde so die the yong among,
               
               
                  Deth stelith on, as doth a priue theef.
               
               
                  Lo agaynst deth, men fynd noo releefe
               
               
                  She is aboute to make a deuorce,
               
               
                  And folowith ay the shadowe of the corce.
               
            
            
               Thure deum placa, vitulum sine crescat aratro.
               Ne credas placare daeum, dum caedat litatur.
            
            
               
                  Serue ay thy god wt lowly obseruaunce,
               
               
                  wt hert entier, with sote smelling encence,
               
               
                  Such facrifice, is moste to his plesaunce.
               
               
                  Of calues smale that neuer did offence,
               
               
                  Though thou them sle, thay not dispence
               
               
                  with y•, let thē groue & swinke in thy plough
               
               
                  Thy hert to god is sacrifice ynough.
               
            
            
               
               Cede locum laesus, fortunae cede potenti.
               Cedere qui potuit, prodesse aliquādo valebit.
            
            
               
                  Geue place to him that excedeth thy myght,
               
               
                  Though yu be hurt it may profit perchaūce.
               
               
                  and seld auayleth a man for to fight
               
               
                  against suche one as passeth his puissaunce,
               
               
                  Though he greue now, yet oft he may auāce
               
               
                  Full oft is sayne after greate duresse,
               
               
                  The mighty man will kithe his gentilnesse.
               
            
            
               Cum quid peccaris, castiges te ipse subinde.
               Vulnera dum sanas, dolor est medicina doloris.
            
            
               
                  After thy surfet and greate offence,
               
               
                  Chastise thy selfe correct that was amys,
               
               
                  Correcte thy gylte, amende thy necligence.
               
               
                  Sorowe for sinne, a veray medicine is
               
               
                  Repente the sore, than arte thou saufe iwis.
               
               
                  For phisicke saith, my chyld I the ensure:
               
               
                  a bitter drinke, y• sharpe sickenes may cnre.
               
            
            
               Damnaris nunquam post longum tempus amicum.
               Mutauit mores, sed pignora prima me mento.
            
            
               
                  If yu haue founde long frendship in a wight.
               
               
                  Ful yore ago, though he begyn to chaunge
               
               
                  Dispraise him not: mē bide not in one plight
               
               
                  sometime was abbay, there as now is grāge
               
               
                  
                     This worlds cours, is wōdre queinte & straū
                     ge.
               
               
                  but though y• mā, now be waxe vnkind:
               
               
                  His olde frendshyp remembre in thy mynd.
               
            
            
               Gracior officiis quo sis, magis charior esto.
               Ne nomen sub eas, quod dicitur offici perda.
            
            
               
                  If it vre the in office to be sette,
               
               
                  Than be thou gracious to other men
               
               
                  They may reporte a godly man is mette
               
               
                  with suche an office, & so good name shal rēne
               
               
                  About of the, but I ensure the whenne.
               
               
                  The officers are vnkinde, than say y• presse
               
               
                  Now wold god, this man were officelesse.
               
            
            
               Suspectus, caueas ne sis miser omnibus horis.
               Nam timidis et suspectis aptissima mors est.
            
            
               
                  Be not suspecte, that is a wicked teche,
               
               
                  The suspecte wight, with coward Iolasy,
               
               
                  In his liuing is but a very wretche,
               
               
                  Muche is amys, and all wold he es
                        •
                     y,
               
               
                  He demeth false and faileth hertinesse.
               
               
                  His false conceite sette in malyncolye
               
               
                  Sleeth him anone: deth endeth his folye.
               
            
            
               Cum fueris seruos proprios mercatus in vsus.
               Et famulos dicas, homines tamen esse memento.
            
            
               
                  If thou haue men without libertie,
               
               
                  
                     Suche as men clepe the men of bondage,
               
               
                  Though they be vnder thy cap
                        ••
                     u
                        •••
                     e,
               
               
                  yet to suche men be neuer so outrage,
               
               
                  If they be holden vnder thy seruage.
               
               
                  Though they be boūde yet veray mē thei be:
               
               
                  And so to dele with theim, & remembre the.
               
            
            
               Quam primum rapienda tibi est occasio prima.
               Ne rursus quaeras, quae iam negl exeris ante.
            
            
               
                  Thy first fortune receiue with redinesse,
               
               
                  Refuse it not though it be scant and smal.
               
               
                  It is well better in gree to take the lesse,
               
               
                  Than refuse it, and after fayle of all.
               
               
                  Giftes of fortune take theim as they fall.
               
               
                  Forsake them now, & oft thou shalt thē nede:
               
               
                  Tyme is to take when men proffer & bede.
               
            
            
               Morte repentina noli gaudere malorū
               
               Foelices obeūt, quotū sine crie vita est
            
            
               
                  Reioyce not my chyld in all thy lyfe,
               
               
                  The sodeine death of a cursed mā or wretche
               
               
                  whan he is dead, the soule may not reuyue,
               
               
                  Frō paine to ioye, y• sprite may not shretche,
               
               
                  The fyndes holde so sore y• they may retche.
               
               
                  who lyueth well full well eke dieth he:
               
               
                  That soule is sure of greate falicite.
               
            
            
               Cum coniux tibi sit, nec res, & fama la borat.
               Vitandum ducas inimicum nomen amici.
            
            
               
               
                  If thou haue a wyte in assuraunce,
               
               
                  Than trust her wel, and loue her inwardly,
               
               
                  with hert & thought & all thy affiaunc
                        •
                     ,
               
               
                  Be not 
                        ••
                     fecte with suspect Ielosy
               
               
                  It no daefa
                        •
                     te in her thou canst spie.
               
               
                  And if thy frende tel the suche is the fame:
               
               
                  He is a frende and she nothing to blame,
               
            
            
               Cum tibi contingat studio cognoscere multa:
               Fac discas multa, vites nescire doceri.
            
            
               
                  Whan through studie and long exercise,
               
               
                  Thou knoweit muche & hast great cōning,
               
               
                  yet do thy diligence, in besy wyse,
               
               
                  More to cunne it is a holsome thyng.
               
               
                  To greate honour, conning may the bring.
               
               
                  And neuer eschewe for to wille be taught,
               
               
                  without teaching, sciēce will not be raught.
               
            
            
               Miraris verbis nudis me scribere versus.
               Hos breuitas sensus fecit coniungere binos.
            
            
               
                  And if y• ought maruayle, or lust for to muse,
               
               
                  In naked wordes why my verses I wryte,
               
               
                  In no wyse I may me better excuse,
               
               
                  Than say my witte so dulle & inparfite,
               
               
                  Ar
                        •
                     ith me thus rudely to endite.
               
               
                  By two and two, my metre for to knytte,
               
               
                  Nought causeth me, but simplenes of witte.
               
            
            Pars quarta et vltima.
         
         
            
            
               Cum ani
                     •
                  ad
                     •••
                  terem, quum plurimo
                     •
                   homines grauiter errare.
            
            
               
                  WHan I aduertise in my remēbraunce,
               
               
                  And se how many folke erre greuously
               
               
                  In the way of vertuous go 
                        •
                     ernaūc
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
               
                  I haue supposed in my selfe that I,
               
               
                  Ought to supporte and counsaill prudently
               
               
                  Theim to be full glorious in syuyng,
               
               
                  and how the
                        •
                      shold thē selfe in honour bring▪
                  
               
            
            
               Legere et n
                     •
                   intelligere negligere eit.
            
            
               
                  Therfore my chys
                        •
                     e I shall tethe the,
               
               
                  Herken me well, the manet and the guyse,
               
               
                  How thy souse suward shall acqueinted be
               
               
                  with the goode and vertuous in al wyse,
               
               
                  Ke
                        •
                     e an conceyue, for he to dilpice,
               
               
                  that redith ay & wote not what is mente:
               
               
                  Suche redyng is nought but 
                        •
                     yn
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     pen
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
            
            
               Ita
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   de
                     ••
                  is
                     •
                  plica. Parentes ama▪
               
            
            
               
                  Prayse thy god & pray him with al thy hert,
               
               
                  Father & mother haue thou in reuerence,
               
               
                  Loue them wel, & be thou neuer to sm
                        •
                     rt
               
               
                  To here mens counsail but kepe the thence
               
               
                  Til thou be called, 
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     lene without offence▪
                  
               
               
                  Salue gladly
                        〈…〉
                      at be more dig
                        •
                     e
               
               
                  than y• thy selfe, thou shall thy place, re
                        •
                     igne.
               
            
            
               Magistrum me
                     •
                  ue. Rem tuam custodi.
            
            
               
                  Drede thy maister, thy thing loke thou kepe
               
               
                  Take hede to thy housh
                        •
                     ld, ay loue my wife,
               
               
                  Pleasaūt wordes cut of thy mouth ler crepe,
               
               
                  Be not Irous, kepe thy behest as lyfe,
               
               
                  
                     Be tempred with wyne, but not to excessise,
               
               
                  Thy wyues worde make none auctorite.
               
               
                  In foly, slepe no more than nedeth the.
               
            
            
               Libros lege, quod legeris memento.
            
            
               
                  In goodly bokes sometyme shalt thou rede,
               
               
                  And that thou redist in thy mynde it shit
                        •
                     e,
               
               
                  Stirre no wight to wrath, lye not I y• reede
               
               
                  Do wel to good, and that wll oft be quitte,
               
               
                  Be not wicked ne to the wicked knitte,
               
               
                  Stande in the place of pleting exercise,
               
               
                  Deme the ryght, be connseyled of the wyse.
               
            
            
               Troco lude: alias fuge.
            
            
               
                  Play with a top the dice loke thou eschewe,
               
               
                  Dispise not women, kepe theim thy behest,
               
               
                  Scorne neuer wight, for tha y• shalt it rewe,
               
               
                  Couet no mans good, speake fewe at feste▪
                  
               
               
                  Loke thy vengeaūce be euer wt the leste,
               
               
                  who hath done y• good haue in remebraūce,
               
               
                  Loue euery wight, & this shall the auaūnce.
               
            
            Trie before you trippe.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Fletestreate, at the signe of the Rose Garland, by William Coplande.
            Finished the first day of January. Anno. M. D. LVIII.
            
         
      
   