
      
         
            
            
            Troubleſome Raigne
of Iohn King of England, with the diſcouerie
of King Richard Cordelions
Baſe ſonne (vulgarly named, The Baſtard
Fawconbridge): alſo the
death of King Iohn at Swinſtead
Abbey.
            
            As it was (ſundry times) publikely acted by the
Queenes Maiesties Players, in the honourable
Citie of
London.
            
            
               Imprinted at London for Sampſon Clarke,
and are to be ſolde at his ſhop▪ on the backeſide of the Royall Exchange.
1591.
         
         
            
            
            To the Gentlemen Readers.
            YOu that with friendly grace of ſmoothed brow
            Haue entertained the Scythian Ta
                     •
                  burlaine,
            
            And giuen applauſe vnto an Infidel:
            
               Ʋouchſafe to welcome (with like curteſie)
            A warlike Christian and your Co
                  •
               ntreyman.
            For Christs true faith indur'd he many a ſtorme.
            And ſet himſelfe against the Man of Rome.
            
            
               Ʋntill aſe treaſon (by a damned wight)
            Di
                  ••
                all his former triumphs put to 
                  •
               ight,
            Accept of it (ſweete Gentles) in good ſort,
            And thinke it was preparde for your di
                  •
               port.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The troubleſome Raigne of
King Iohn.
            Enter K. Iohn, Queene Elinor his mother, William Marſhal
Earle of Pembrooke, the Earles of Eſſex, and of Salisbury
            
            
               Queene Elianor.
               
                  BArons of England, and my noble Lords;
               Though 
                     〈◊〉
                   Fortune haue bereft from vs
               Victorious 
                     〈…〉
                   ſcourge of Infidels,
               And clad this 
                     〈◊〉
                   in ſtole of diſmall hieu:
               Yet giue me leaue to ioy, and ioy you all,
               That from this wombe hath ſprung a ſecond hope,
               A King that may in rule and vertue both
               Succéede his brother in his Emperie.
            
            
               K. John
               My gracious mother Queene, and Barons all;
               Though farre vnworthie of ſo high a place,
               As is the Throne of mightie Englands King:
               Yet Iohn your Lord, contented vncontent,
               Will (as he may) ſuſtaine the heauie yoke
               Of preſſing cares, that hang vpon a Crowne.
               My Lord of Pembrooke and Lord Salsbury,
               
               Admit the Lord Shattilion to our preſence;
               That we may know what Philip King of Fraunce
               
               (By his Ambaſſadors) requires of vs.
            
            
               Q. Elinor.
               Da
                     •
                  e lay my hand that Elinor can geſſe
               Whereto this w
                     •
                  ightie Embaſſade doth tend:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of my Nephew Arthur and his claime,
               Then ſay my Sonne I haue not miſt my aime.
            
            
            Enter Chattilion and the two Earles.
            
               Iohn
               My Lord Chattilion, welcome into England:
               
               How fares our Brother Philip King of Fraunce?
               
            
            
               Chatt.
               His Highnes at my comming was in health,
               And wild me to ſalute your Maieſtie,
               And ſay the meſſage he hath giuen in charge.
            
            
               Iohn
               And ſpare not man, we are preparde to heare.
            
            
               Chattilion
               
                  Philip by the grace of God moſt Chriſtian K.
of France, hauing taken into his guardain and protection Arthur
Duke of Brittaine, ſon & heire to Ieffrey thine elder brother,
requireth in the behalfe of the ſaid Arthur, the Kingdom
of England, with the Lordſhip of Ireland, Poiters, Aniow,
Torain, Main: and I attend thine aunſwere.
            
            
               Iohn
               A ſmall requeſt: belike he makes account
               
                  That England, Ireland, Poiters, Aniow, Torain, Main,
               Are nothing for a King to giue at once:
               I wonder what he meanes to leaue for me.
               Tell Philip, he may keepe his Lords at home,
               With greater honour than to ſend them thus
               On Embaſſades that not concerne himſelfe,
               Or if they did, would yeeld but ſmall returne.
            
            
               Chatilion
               Is this thine anſwere?
            
            
               Iohn
               It is, and too good an anſwer for ſo proud a meſſage.
            
            
               Chattilion
               Then King of England, in my Maſters name,
               And in Prince Arthur Duke of Britaines name,
               I doo defie chee as an Enemie,
               And wiſh thee to prepare for bloodie warres.
            
            
               Q. Elinor
               My Lord (that ſtands vpon defiance thus)
               Commend me to my Nephew, tell the boy,
               That I Queene Elianor (his Grandmother)
               Vpon my bleſſing charge him leaue his Armes,
               Whereto his head-ſtrong Mother pricks him ſo:
               Her pride we know, and know her for a Dame
               That will not ſticke to bring him to his ende,
               So ſhe may bring her ſelfe to rule a Realme.
               Next wiſh him to forſake the King of Fraunce,
               
               
                  
And come to me and to his Vnckle here,
               And he ſhall want for nothing at our hands.
            
            
               Chattilion.
               This ſhall I doo, and thus I take my leaue.
            
            
               Iohn
               
                  Pembrooke, conuay him ſafely to the ſea,
               But not in haſt: for as we are aduiſde,
               We meane to be in Fraunce as ſoone as he,
               To forteſie ſuch townes as we poſſeſſe
               In Aniou, Torain and in Normandy.
               
            
            Ex
                  ••
               
            
            Enter the Shriue, & whiſpers the Earle of Salſ in the 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            
               Salisbury.
               Pleaſe it your Maieſtie, heere is the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  Northhamptonſhire, with certaine perſons that of late 
                     ••
                  
                  mitted
a riot, and haue appealed to your Maieſtie beſee
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
your Highnes for ſpeciall cauſe to heare them.
            
            
               Iohn
               Wil them come neere, and while we heare the cauſe,
               Goe Salsbury and make prouiſion,
               We meane with ſpeede to paſſe the ſea to Fraunce.
               
               Say Shrieue, what are theſe men, what haue they done?
               Or wheretoo tends the courſe of this appeale?
            
            
               Shrieue
               Pleaſe it your Maieſtie theſe two brethren vnnaturally
falling at odds about their Fathers liuing haue broken
your Highnes peace, in ſeeking to right their own wrōgs
without cauſe of Law, or order of Iuſtice, and vnlawfully aſſembled
themſelues in mutinous manner, hauing committed
a riot, appealing from triall in their Countrey to your Highnes:
and here I Thomas Nidigate Shrieue of Northhamptonſhire,
doo deliuer them ouer to their triall.
            
            
               Iohn
               My Lord of Eſſex, will the offenders to ſtand foorth,
and tell the cauſe of their quarrell.
            
            
               Eſſex
               Gentlemen, it is the Kings pleaſure that you diſcouer
your griefes, & dou
                     ••
                   not but you ſhall haue iuſtice.
            
            
               Philip
               Pleaſe it your Maieſtie, the wrong is mine; yet wil
I abide all wrongs, before I once open my mouth to vnrippe
the ſhamefull ſlaunder of my parents, the diſhonour of myſelf,
& the wicked dealing of my brother in this princely aſſembly.
            
            
               Robert
               Then by my Prince his leaue ſhall Robert ſpeake,
               And tell your Maieſtie? what right I haue
               
                  
To offer wrong, as he accounteth wrong.
               My Father (not vnknowen vnto your Grace)
               Receiud his ſpurres of Knighthood in the Field,
               At Kingly Richards hands in Palestine,
               
               When as the walls of Acon gaue him way:
               His name Sir Robert Fauconbridge of Mountbery.
               
               What by ſucceſſion from his Aunceſtours,
               And warlike ſeruice vnder Englands Armes,
               His liuing did amount too at his death
               Two thouſand Markes reuenew euery yeare:
               And this (my Lord) I challenge for my right,
               As lawfull heire to Robert Fauconbridge.
               
            
            
               Philip
               If firſt-borne ſonne be heire indubitate
               By certaine right of Englands auncient Lawe,
               How ſhould myſelfe make any other doubt,
               But I am heire to Robert Fauconbridge?
               
            
            
               Iohn
               Fond Youth, to trouble theſe our Princely eares
               Or make a queſtion in ſo plaine a caſe:
               Speake, is this man thine elder Brother borne?
            
            
               Robert
               Pleaſe it your Grace with patience for to heare;
               I not denie but he mine Elder is,
               Mine elder Brother too: yet in ſuch ſort,
               As he can make no title to the Land.
            
            
               Iohn
               A doubtfull tale as euer I did heare,
               Thy Brother and thine elder, and no heire:
               Explaine this darke Aenigma.
               
            
            
               Robert
               I graunt (my Lord) he is my mothers ſonne,
               Baſe borne, and baſe begot, no Fauconbridge.
               
               Indeede the world reputes him lawfull heire,
               My Father in his life did count him ſo,
               And here my Mother ſtands to prooue him ſo:
               But I (my Lord) can prooue, and doo 
                     •
                  uer
                     •
                  e
               Both to my Mothers ſhame and his reproach,
               He is no heire, nor yet legitimate.
               Then (gracious Lord) let Fauconbridge enioy
               The liuing that belongs to Fauconbridge.
               
               
                  
And let not him poſſeſſe anothers right.
            
            
               Iohn
               Proue this, the land is thine by Englands law.
            
            
               Q. Elianor
               Vngracious youth, to 
                     •
                  ip thy mothers ſhame,
               The wombe from whence thou didſt thy being take,
               All honeſt eares abhorre thy wickednes,
               But gold I ſee doth beate downe natures law.
            
            
               Mother.
               My gracious Lord, & you thrice reuerend Dame,
               That ſee the teares diſtilling from mine eyes,
               And ſcalding ſighes blowne from a rented heart:
               For honour and regard of womanhood,
               Let me entreate to be commaunded hence.
               Let not theſe eares receiue the hiſſing ſound
               Of ſuch a viper, who with poyſoned words
               Doth maſſerate the bowels of my ſoule.
            
            
               Iohn
               Ladie, ſtand vp, be patient for a while:
               And fellow, ſay, whoſe baſtard is thy brother.
            
            
               Philip
               Not for my ſelfe, nor for my mother now:
               But for the honour of ſo braue a Man,
               Whom he accuſeth with adulterie:
               Here I beſeech your Grace vpon my knees,
               To count him mad, and ſo diſmiſſe vs hence.
            
            
               Robert
               Nor mad, nor mazde, but well aduiſed, I
               Charge thee before this royall preſence here
               To be a Baſtard to King Richards ſelf,
               Sonne to your Grace, and Brother to your Maieſtie.
               Thus bluntly, and
            
            
               Elianor
               Yong man thou néedſt not be aſhamed of thy kin,
               Nor of thy Sire. But forward with thy proofe.
            
            
               Robert
               The proofe ſo plaine, the argument ſo ſtrong,
               As that your Highnes and theſe noble Lords,
               And all (ſaue thoſe that haue no eyes to ſee)
               Shall ſweare him to be Baſtard to the King.
               Firſt when my Father was Embaſſadour
               In Germanie vnto the Emperour,
               The King lay often at my Fathers houſe;
               And all the Realme ſuſpected what befell:
               
                  
And at my Fathers back returne agen
               My Mother was deliuered as tis ſed,
               Sixe weekes before the account my Father made.
               But more than this: looke but on Philips face,
               His features, actions, and his lineaments,
               And all this Princely preſence ſhall confeſſe,
               He is no other but King Richards Sonne.
               Then gracious Lord, reſt he King Richards Sonne,
               And let me reſt ſafe in my Fathers right,
               That am his rightfull ſonne and onely heire.
            
            
               Iohn
               Is this thy proofe, and all thou haſt to ſay?
            
            
               Robert
               I have no more, nor néede I greater proofe.
            
            
               John
               Firſt, where thou ſaidſt in abſence of thy Sire
               My Brother often lodged in his houſe:
               And what of that? baſe groome to ſlaunder him,
               That honoured his Embaſſador ſo much,
               In abſence of the man to cheere the wife?
               This will not hold, proceede vnto the next.
            
            
               Q. Elinor
               Thou ſaiſt ſhe téemde ſix wéeks before her time.
               Why good Sir Squire are you ſo cunning growen
               To make account of womens reckonings:
               Spit in your hand and to your other proofes:
               Many miſchaunces hap in ſuch affaires
               To make a woman come before her time.
            
            
               Iohn
               And where thou ſaiſt he looketh like the King
               In action, feature and proportion:
               Therein I holde with thée, for in my life
               I neuer ſaw ſo liuely counterfet
               Of Richard Cordelion, as in him.
            
            
               Robert
               Then good my Lord, be you indifferent Iudge,
               And let me haue my liuing and my right.
            
            
               Q Elinor
               Nay heare you Sir, you runne away too faſt:
               
                  Know you not, Omne ſimile non est idem?
               Or haue read in. Harke ye good ſir,
               T
                     •
                  was thus I warrant, and no otherwiſe,
               She lay with Sir Robert your Father, and thought vppon

King Richard my Sonne, and ſo your Brother was formed
in this faſhion.
            
            
               Robert
               Madame, you wrong me thus to ieſt it out,
               I craue my right: King Iohn as thou art King.
               So be thou iuſt, and let me haue my right.
            
            
               Iohn
               Why (fooliſh boy) thy proofes are friuolous,
               Nor canſt thou chalenge any thing thereby.
               But thou ſhalt ſee how I will helpe thy claime,
               This is my doome, and this my doome ſhall ſtand
               Irreuocable, as I am King of England.
               
               For thou knowſt not, weele aſke of them that know,
               His mother and himſelfe ſhall ende this ſtrife:
               And as they ſay, ſo ſhall thy liuing paſſe.
            
            
               Robert
               My Lord, herein I chalenge you of wrong,
               To giue away my right, and put the doome
               Vnto themſelues. Can there be likelihood
               That ſhe will looſe?
               Or he will giue the liuing from himſelfe?
               It may not be my Lord. Why ſhould it be?
            
            
               Iohn
               Lords keepe him back, and let him heare the doome.
               
                  Eſſex, firſt aſke the Mother thrice who was his Sire?
            
            
               Eſſex
               Ladie Margaret Widow of Fauconbridge,
               
               Who was Father to thy Sonne Philip?
               
            
            
               Mother
               Pleaſe it your Maieſtie, Sir Robert Fauconbridge.
               
            
            
               Robert
               This is right, aſke my felow there if I be a thiefe.
            
            
               Iohn
               Aſke Philip whoſe Sonne he is.
            
            
               Eſſex
               
                  Philip, who was thy Father?
            
            
               Philip
               Ma
                     •
                   my Lord, and thats a queſtion: and you had
not taken ſome paines with her before, I ſhould haue deſired
you to aſke my Mother.
            
            
               Iohn
               Say who was thy Father?
            
            
               Philip
               Faith (my Lord) to anſwere you ſure he is my father
that was néereſt my mother when I was gotten, & him
I thinke to be Sir Robert Fauconbridge.
               
            
            
               Iohn
               
                  Eſſex, for faſhions ſake demaund agen,
               And ſo an ende to this contention.
            
            
               
               Robert
               Was euer man thus wrongd as Robert is?
            
            
               Eſſex
               
                  Philip ſpeake I ſay, who was thy Father?
            
            
               Iohn
               Yong man how now, what art thou in a traunce?
            
            
               Elianor
               
                  Philip awake, the man is in a dreame.
            
            
               Philip
               Philippus atauis a
                     •
                  dite Regibus.
               What ſaiſt thou Philip, ſprung of auncient Kings?
               Quo me rapit tempestas?
               What winde of honour blowes this furie forth?
               Or whence proeede theſe fumes of Maieſtie?
               Me thinkes I heare a hollow Eccho ſound,
               That Philip is the Sonne vnto a King:
               The whiſtling leaues vpon the trembling trees,
               Whiſtle in conſort I am Richards Sonne:
               The bubling murmur of the waters fall,
               
                  Records Philippus Regius filius:
               Birds in their flight make muſicke with their wings,
               Filling the ayre with glorie of my birth:
               Birds, bubbles, leaues, and mountaines, Eccho, all
               Ring in mine eares, that I am Richards Sonne.
               Fond man, ah whether art thou carried?
               How are thy thoughts ywrapt in Honors heauen?
               Forgetfull what thou art, and whence thou camſt.
               Thy Fathers land cannot maintaine theſe thoughts,
               Theſe thoughts are farre vnfitting Fauconbridge:
               
               And well they may; for why this monnting minde
               Doth ſoare too high to ſtoupe to Fauconbridge.
               
               Why how now? knoweſt thou where thou art?
               And knoweſt thou who expects thine anſwere here?
               Wilt thou vpon a frantick madding vaine
               Goe looſe thy land, and ſay thy ſelfe baſe borne?
               No, keepe thy land, though Richard were thy Sire,
               What ere thou thinkſt, ſay thou art Fauconbridge.
               
            
            
               John
               Speake man, be ſodaine, who thy Father was.
            
            
               Philip
               Pleaſe it your Maieſtie, Sir Robert
               
               
                  Philip, that Fauconbridge cleaues to thy iawes:
               It will not out, I cannot for my life
               
                  
Say I am Sonne vnto a Fauconbridge.
               
               Le
                     •
                   land and liuing goe, tis honors fire
               That makes me ſweare King Richard was my Sire.
               Baſe to a King addes title of more State,
               Than Knights begotten, though legittimate.
               Pleaſe it your Grace, I am King Richards Sonne.
            
            
               Robert
               
                  Robert reuiue thy heart, let ſorrow die,
               His faltring tongue not ſuffers him to lie.
            
            
               Mother
               What head-ſtrong furie doth enchaunt my ſonne?
            
            
               Philip
               
                  Philip cannot repent for he hath done.
            
            
               Iohn
               Then Philip blame not me, thy ſelfe haſt loſt
               By wilfulneſſe, thy liuing and thy land.
               
                  Robert, thou art the heire of Fauconbridge,
               
               God giue thee ioy, greater than thy deſert.
            
            
               Q Elianor
               Why how now Philip, giue away thine owne?
            
            
               Philip
               Madame, I am bold to make my ſelfe your nephew,
               The pooreſt kinſman that your Highnes hath:
               And with this Prouerb gin the world anew,
               Help hands, I haue no lands, honour is my deſire;
               Let Philip liue to ſhew himſelfe worthie ſo great a Sire.
            
            
               Elinor
               
                  Philip, I think thou knewſt thy Grandams minde:
               But chéere thée boy, I will not ſee thée want
               As long as Elinor hath foote of land;
               Henceforth thou ſhalt be taken for my ſonne,
               And waite on me and on thine Vnckle heere,
               Who ſhall giue honour to thy noble minde.
            
            
               Iohn
               
                  Philip kneele down, that thou maiſt throughly know
               How much thy reſolution pleaſeth vs,
               Riſe vp Sir Richard Plantaginet K. Richards Sonne.
            
            
               Phil.
               Graunt heauens that Philip once may ſhew himſelf
               Worthie the honour of Plantaginet,
               
               Or baſeſt glorie of a Baſtards name.
            
            
               Iohn
               Now Gentlemen, we will away to France,
               
               To checke the pride of Arthur and his mates:
               
                  Eſſex, thou ſhalt be Ruler of my Realme,
               And toward the maine charges of my warres,
               
                  
Ile ceaze the lazie Abbey lubbers lands
               Into my hands to pay my men of warre.
               The Pope and Pop
                     •
                  li
                     •
                  g
                     •
                   ſhall not greaſe themſelues
               With golde and groates, that are the ſouldiers due.
               Thus forward Lords, let our commaund be done,
               And march we forward mightely to Fraunce.
               
               Exeunt.
               Manet Philip and his Mother.
            
            
               Philip
               Madame I 
                     •
                  eſeech you deigne me ſo much leaſure
as the hearing of a matter that I long to impart to you.
            
            
               Mother
               Whats the matter Philip. I thinke your ſute in
ſecret, tends to ſome money matter, which you ſuppoſe burns
in the bottome of my cheſt.
            
            
               Phil.
               No Madam, it is no ſuch ſute as to beg or borrow,
               But ſuch a ſute, as might ſome other grant.
               I would not now haue troubled you withall.
            
            
               Mother
               A Gods name let vs heare it.
            
            
               Philip
               Then Madame thus, your Ladiſhip ſees well,
               How that my ſcandall growes by meanes of you,
               In that report hath rumord vp and downe,
               I am a baſtard, and no Fauconbridge.
               
               This groſe attaint ſo tilteth in my thoughts,
               Maintaining combat to abridge my eaſe,
               That field and towne, and company alone,
               Whatſo I doo, or whereſoere I am,
               I cannot chaſe the ſlaunder from thy thoughts.
               If it be true, reſolue me of my Sire,
               For pardon Madame, if I thinke amiſſe.
               Be Philip Philip and no Fauconbridge,
               
               His Father doubtles was as braue a man.
               To you on knees as ſometime Phaeton,
               
               Miſtruſting ſilly Merop for his Sire,
               Strayning a little baſhfull modeſtie,
               I beg ſome inſtance whence I am extraught.
            
            
               Mother
               Yet more adoo to haſte me to my graue,
               And wilt thou too become a Mothers croſſe?
               Muſt I accuſe myſelf to cloſe with you?
               
                  
Slaunder myſelf to quiet your affects:
               Thou moouſt me Philip with this idle talke,
               Which I remit, in hope this mood will die.
            
            
               Philip
               Nay Ladie mother, heare me further yet,
               For ſtrong conceipt driues dutie hence awhile:
               Your huſband Fauconbridge was Father to that ſonne,
               That carries marks of Nature like the Sire,
               The ſonne that blotteth you with wedlocks breach,
               And holds my right, as lineall in diſcent
               From him whoſe forme was figured in his face.
               Can Nature ſo diſſemble in her frame,
               To make the one ſo like as like may be,
               And in the other print no character
               To chalenge any marke of true diſcent?
               My brothers minde is baſe, and too too dull,
               To mount where Philip lodgeth his affects,
               And his externall graces that you view
               (Though I report it) counterpoiſe not mine:
               His conſtitution plaine debilitie,
               Requires the chayre, and mine the ſeate of ſte
                     •
                  le.
               Nay, what is he, or what am I to him?
               When any one that knoweth how to carpe,
               Will ſcarcely iudge vs both one Countrey borne.
               This Madame, this, hath droue me from myſelfe:
               And here by heauens eternall lampes I ſweare,
               As curſed Nero with his mother did,
               So I with you, if you reſolue me not.
            
            
               Mother
               Let mothers teares quench out thy angers fire,
               And vrge no further what thou dooſt require.
            
            
               Philip
               Let ſonnes entreatie ſway the 
                     〈◊〉
                   now,
               Or els ſhe dies: Ile not infringe my vow.
            
            
               Mother
               Vnhappy taſke: muſt I recount my ſhame,
               Blab my miſdeedes, or 
                     •
                  y concealing die?
               Some power ſtrike me ſpeechleſſe for a time▪
               
               Or take from him awhile his hearings vſe,
               Why wiſh I ſo, vnhappy as I am?
               
                  
The fault is mine, and he the faultie frute,
               I bluſh, I faint, oh would I might be mute.
            
            
               Philip
               Mother be briefe, I long to know my name.
            
            
               Mother
               And longing dye to ſhrowd thy Mothers ſhame.
            
            
               Philip
               Come Madame come, you neede not be ſo loth,
               The ſhame is ſhared equall twixt vs both.
               Iſt not a ſlacknes in me worthie blame,
               To be ſo olde, and cannot write my name.
               Good Mother reſolue me.
            
            
               Mother
               Then Philip heare thy fortune and my griefe,
               My honours loſſe by purchaſe of thy ſelfe,
               My ſhame, thy name, and huſbands ſecret wrong,
               All maind and ſtaind by youths vnruly ſway.
               And when thou knoweſt from whence thou art extraught,
               Or if thou knewſt what ſutes, what threates, what feares,
               To mooue by loue, or maſſacre by death.
               To yeeld wi
                     •
                  h loue, or end by loues contempt.
               The mightines of him that courted me,
               Who tempred terror with his wanton talke,
               That ſomething may extenuate the guilt.
               But let it not aduantage me ſo much:
               Vpbraid me rather with the Romane Dame
               That ſhed her blood to waſh away her ſhame.
               Why ſtand I to expoſtulate the crime
               With pro & contra, now the déede is don,
               When to conclude two words may tell the tale,
               That Philips Father was a Princes Son,
               Rich Englands rule, words onely terror hee,
               For honours loſſe left me with childe of thee:
               Whoſe Sonne thou art, then pardon me the rather,
               For faire King Richard was thy noble Father.
            
            
               Philip
               Then Robin Fauconbridge I wiſh thee ioy,
               My Sire a King, and I a landles Boy.
               Gods Ladie Mother, the world is in my debt,
               There's ſomething owing to Plantaginet.
               
               I marrie Sir, let me alone for game,
               
                  
Ile act ſome wonders now I know my name.
               By bleſſed Marie Ile not ſell that pride
               For Englands weal
                     •
                  h, and all the world beſide.
               Sit faſt the proudeſt of my Fathers foes,
               Away good Mother, there the comfort goes.
            
            Execunt.
            Enter Philip the French King, and Lewes, Limoges, Conſtance,
and her ſonne Arthur.
            
            
               King
               Now gin we broach the title of thy claime
               Yong Arthur in the Albion Territories,
               Scaring proud Angiers with a puiſſant ſiedge:
               Braue Austria, cauſe of Cordelions death,
               Is alſo come to aide thee in thy warres;
               And all our Forces ioyne for Arthurs right.
               And, but for cauſes of great conſequence,
               Pleading delay till newes from England come,
               Twice ſhould not Titan hide him in the Weſt,
               To coole the fet-locks of his wearie teame,
               Till I had with an vnreſiſted ſhock
               Controld the mannage of proud Angiers walls,
               Or made a forfet of my fame to Chaunce.
            
            
               Conſtance
               May be that Iohn in conſcience or in feare
               To offer wrong where you impugne the ill,
               Will ſend ſuch calme conditions backe to Fraunce,
               
               As ſhall rebate the edge of fearefull warres:
               If ſo, forbearance is a deede well done.
            
            
               Arthur
               Ah Mother, poſſeſſion of a Crowne is muc
                     •
                  ,
               And Iohn as I haue heard reported of,
               For preſent vantage would aduenture farre.
               The world can witnes in his Brothers time,
               He tooke vpon him rule any almoſt raigne:
               Then muſt it follow as a doubtfull poynt,
               That hee 
                     •
                  ereſigne the rule vnto his Nephew.
               I rather thinke the menace of the world
               Sounds in his eares as threats of no eſtéeme,
               
                  
And ſooner would he ſcorne Europaes power,
               Than looſe the ſmalleſt title he enioyes;
               For queſtionles he is an Engliſhman.
            
            
               Lewes
               Why are the Engliſh péereles in compare?
               Braue Caualiers as ere that Iland bred,
               Haue liude and dyde, and darde and done inough,
               Yet neuer gracde their Countrey for the cauſe:
               
                  England is England, yéelding good and bad,
               And John of England is as other Iohns.
               
               Truſt me yong Arthur, if thou like my réede,
               Praiſe thou the French that helpe thee in this neede.
            
            
               Lymoges
               The Engliſhman hath little cauſe I trow,
               To ſpend good ſpeaches on ſo proud a foe.
               Why Arthur heres his ſpoyle that now is gon,
               Who when he liude outroude his Brother Iohn:
               
               But haſtie curres that lie ſo long to catch,
               Come halting home, and meete their ouermatch.
               But newes comes now, heres the Embaſſadour.
            
            Enter Chattilion.
            
            
               K Philip
               And in good time, welcome my Lord Chattilion:
               
               What newes? will Iohn accord to our commaund.
            
            
               Chattilion
               Be I not briefe to tell your Highnes all,
               He will approach to interrupt my tale:
               For one ſelfe bottome brought vs both to Fraunce.
               
               He on his part will try the chaunce of warre,
               And if his words inferre aſſured truth,
               Will looſe himſelfe and all his followers,
               Ere yéeld vnto the leaſt of your demaunds.
               The Mother Quéene ſhe taketh on amaine
               Gainſt Ladie Constance, counting her the cauſe
               That doth effect this claime to Albion,
               
               Coniuring Arthur with a Grandames care,
               To leaue his Mother; willing him ſubmit
               His ſtate to Iohn and her protection,
               Who (as ſhe ſaith) are ſtudious for his good:
               More circumſtance the ſeaſon intercepts:
               
                  
This is the ſumme, which briefly I haue ſhowne.
            
            
               K. Phil.
               This bitter winde muſt nip ſome bodies ſpring,
               Sodaine and briefe, why ſo, tis harueſt weather.
               But ſay Chattilion, what perſons of accompt are with him?
            
            
               Chattilion
               Of England Earle Pembrooke and Salsbury,
               
               The onely noted men of any name.
               Next them a Baſtard of the Kings deceaſt,
               A hardy wilde head, tough and venturous,
               With many other men of high reſolue.
               Then is there with them Elinor Mother Queene,
               And Blanch her Néece daughter to the King of Spaine:
               
               Theſe are the prime Birds of this hot aduenture.
            
            Enter Iohn & his followers, Queene, Baſtard, Earles, &c.
            
               K. Philip
               Me ſeemeth Iohn an ouer-daring ſpirit
               Effecte ſome frenzie in thy raſh approach,
               Treading my Confines with thy armed Troupes.
               I rather lookt for ſome ſubmiſſe reply
               Touching the claime thy Nephew Arthur makes
               To that which thou vniuſtly doſt vſurpe.
            
            
               K Iohn
               For that Chattilion can diſcharge you all,
               I liſt not plead my Title with my tongue.
               Nor came I hether with intent of wrong
               To Fraunce or thee, or any right of thine;
               But in defence and purchaſe of my right,
               The Towne of Angiers: which thou dooſt begirt
               In the behalfe of Ladie Conſtance Sonne,
               Wheretoo nor he nor ſhe can lay iuſt claime.
            
            
               Conſtance
               Yes (falſe intruder) if that iuſt be iuſt,
               And headſtrong vſurpation put apart,
               
                  Arthur my Sonne, heire to thy elder Brother,
               Without ambiguous ſhadow of diſcent,
               Is Soueraigne to the ſubſtance thou withholdſt.
            
            
               Q Elinor
               Miſgouernd Goſſip, ſtaine to this reſort,
               Occaſion of theſe vndecided iarres,
               I ſay (that know) to check thy vaine ſuppoſe,
               Thy Sonne hath naught to doo with that he claymes.
               
                  
For proofe whereof, I can inferre a Will,
               That barr
                     •
                  s the way he vrgeth by diſcent.
            
            
               Constance
               A Will indéede, a crabbed Womans will,
               Wherein the Diuell is an ouerſéer,
               And proud dame Elnor ſole Executreſſe:
               More wills than ſo, on perill of my ſoule,
               Were neuer made to hinder Arthurs right.
            
            
               Arthur
               But ſay there was, as ſure there can be none,
               The law intends ſuch teſtaments as voyd,
               Where right diſcent can no way be impeacht.
            
            
               Q Elinor
               Peace Arthur peace, thy mother makes thee wings
               To ſoare with perill after Icarus,
               
               And truſt me yongling for the Fathers ſake,
               I pitie much the hazard of thy youth.
            
            
               Constance
               Beſhrew you els how pitifull you are,
               Readie to weepe to heare him aſke his owne;
               Sorrow betide ſuch Grandames and ſuch griefe,
               That miniſter a poyſon for pure loue.
               But who ſo blinde, as cannot ſee this beame,
               That you forſooth would kéepe your couſin downe,
               For feare his Mother ſhould be vſde too well?
               I theres the grieſe, confuſion catch the braine,
               That hammers ſhifts to ſtop a Princes raigne.
            
            
               Q. Elianor
               Impatient, frantike, common ſlanderer,
               Immodeſt Dame, vnnurtred quarreller,
               I tell thée I, not enuie to thy Son,
               But iuſtice makes me ſpeake as I haue don.
            
            
               K. Philip
               But heres no proof that ſhowes your ſon a King.
            
            
               K. Iohn.
               What wants, my ſword ſhal more at large ſet down.
            
            
               Lewes
               But that may breake before the truth be knowne.
            
            
               Bastard
               Then this may hold till all his right be ſhowne.
            
            
               Lymoges
               Good wor
                     •
                  s ſir ſauce, your betters are in place.
            
            
               Baſtard
               Not you ſir doughtie with your Lions caſe.
            
            
               Blanch
               Ah ioy betide his ſoule, to whom that ſpoile belōgd
               Ah Richard how thy glorie hate is wrongd.
            
            
               Lymoges
               Me 
                     〈…〉
                   pride, & Richards fall,
               
                  
Should be a preſident t'affright you all.
            
            
               Baſtard
               What words are theſe? how doo my ſinews ſhake?
               My Fathers foe clad in my Fathers ſpoyle,
               A thouſand furies kindle with reuendge,
               This hart that choller keepes a conſiſtorie,
               Searing my inwards with a brand of hate:
               How doth Alecte whiſper in mine eares?
               Delay not Philip, kill the villaine ſtraight,
               Diſrobe him of the matchles moniment
               Thy Fathers triumph ore the Sauages,
               Baſe heardgroome, coward, peaſant, worſe than a threſhing
ſlaue,
               What makſt thou with the Trophei of a King?
               Shamſ
                     •
                   thou not coyſtrell, loathſome dunghill ſwad,
               To grace thy carkaſſe with an ornament
               Too precious for a Monarchs couerture?
               Scarce can I temper due obedience
               Vnto the p
                     •
                  eſence of my Soueraigne,
               From acting outrage on this trunke of hate:
               But arme thee traytor, wronger of renowme,
               For by his ſoule I ſweare, my Fathers ſoule,
               Twice will I not review the Mornings riſe,
               Till I haue torne that Trophei from thy back,
               And ſplit thy heart, for wearing it ſo long.
               
                  Philip hath ſworne, and if it be not done,
               Let not the world repute me Richards Sonne.
            
            
               Lymoges
               Nay ſoft ſir Baſtard, harts are not ſplit ſo ſoone,
               Let them reioyce that at the ende doo win:
               And take this leſſon at thy foemans hand,
               Pawne not thy life, to get thy Fathers ſkin.
            
            
               Blanch
               Well may the world ſpeake of his knightly valor,
               That winnes this hide to weare a Ladies fauour.
            
            
               Baſtard
               Ill 
                     •
                  ay I thriue, and nothing brooke with mee,
               If ſhortly I preſent it not to thee.
            
            
               K. Philip
               Lordings forbeare, fortune is comming faſt,
               That deedes may trie what words cannot determine.
               
                  
And to the purpoſe for the cauſe you come.
               Me ſeemes you ſet right in chaunce of warre,
               Yeelding no other reaſons for your claime,
               But ſo and ſo, becauſe it ſhall be ſo.
               So wrong ſhalbe ſubornd by truſt of ſtrength:
               A Tyrants practize to inueſt himſelfe.
               Where weake reſiſtance giueth wrong the way.
               To check the which, in holy lawfull Armes,
               I in the right of Arthur Geffreys Sonne,
               Am come before this Citie of Angiers,
               
               To barre all other falſe ſuppoſed clayme,
               From whence or howſoere the error ſprings.
               And in his quarrell on my Princely word,
               Ile fight it out vnto the lateſt man.
            
            
               Iohn
               Know King of Fraunce, I will not be commaunded
               By any power or Prince in Chriſtendome,
               To yeeld an inſtance how I hold mine owne,
               More than to anſwere, that mine owne is mine.
               But wilt thou ſee me parley with the Towne,
               And heare them offer me alleageance,
               Fealtie and homage, as true liege men ought.
            
            
               K. Philip
               Summon them, I will not beleeue it till I ſee
it, and when I ſee it Ile ſoone change it.
               They ſummon the Towne, the Citizens appeare vpon the
walls.
            
            
               K. Iohn
               You men of Angiers, and as I take it my loyall
Subiects, I haue ſummoned you to the walls: to diſpute on
my right, were to thinke you doubtfull therein, which I am
perſwaded you are not. In few words, our Brothers Sonne,
backt with the King of Fraunce, haue beleagred your Towne
vpon a falſe pretended title to the ſame: in defence whereof
I your liege Lord haue brought our power to fence you from
the Vſurper, to free your intended ſeruitude, and vtterly to
ſupplant the foemen, to my right & your reſt. Say then, who
who keepe you the Towne for?
            
            
               Citizen
               For our lawfull King.
            
            
               
               John
               I was no leſſe perſwaded: then in Gods name open
your gates, and let me enter.
            
            
               Citizen
               And it pleaſe your Highnes we comptroll not your
title, neither will we raſhly admit your entrance: if you bee
lawfull King, with all obedience we keepe it to your vſe, if not
King, our raſhnes to be impeached for yeelding, without more
conſiderate triall: we anſwere not as men lawles, but to the
behoofe of him that prooues lawfull.
            
            
               Iohn
               I ſhall not come in then?
            
            
               Citizen
               No my Lord, till we know more.
            
            
               K. Philip
               Then heare me ſpeake in the behalfe of Arthur
Sonne of Geffrey elder Brother to Iohn, his title manifeſt
without contradiction to the Crowne and Kingdome of England,
with Angiers and diuers Townes on this ſide the ſea:
will you acknowledge him your liege Lord, who ſpeaketh in
my word to intertaine you with all fauours as beſcemeth a
King to his ſubiects, or a friend to his wel-willers: or ſtand
to the perill of your contempt, when his title is prooued by
the ſword.
            
            
               Citizen
               We anſwere as before till you haue prooued one
right, we acknowledge none right, he that tries himſelfe our
Soueraigne, to him will we remaine firme ſubiects, and for
him, and in his right we hold our Towne as deſirous to know
the truth as loath to ſubſcribe before we knowe? More than
this we cannot ſay and more than this we dare not doo.
            
            
               K. Philip
               Then Iohn I def
                     •
                  e thee in the name and behalfe
of Arthur Plantaginet thy King and couſin, whoſe right and
patrimonie thou detaineſt, as I doubt not ere the day ende in
a ſet battell make thee confeſſe; whereunto with a zeale to
right I challenge thee.
            
            
               K. Iohn
               I accept the challenge, and turne the defiance to
thy throate.
            
            Excurſions. The Baſtard chaſeth Lymoges the Auſtrich
Duke, and maketh him leaue the Lyons skinne.
            
               
               Baſtard
               And art thou gone, miſfortune haunt thy ſteps,
               And chill colde feare aſſaile thy times of reſt.
               
                  Morpheus leaue here thy ſilent Eban caue,
               Beſiedge his thoughts with diſmall fantaſies.
               And ghaſtly obiects of pale threatning Mors.
               
               Affright him euery minute with ſtear
                     •
                  e lookes,
               Let ſhadowe temper terror in his thoughts,
               And let the terror make the coward mad,
               And in his madnes let him feare purſute,
               And ſo in frenzie let the peaſant die.
               Here is the ranſome that allayes his rage,
               The firſt freehold that Richard left his ſonne:
               With which I ſhall ſurprize his liuing foes,
               As Hectors ſtatue did the fainting Greekes. Exit.
            
            Enter the Kings Herolds with Trumpets to the wals of
Angiers: they ſummon the Towne.
            
               Eng. Herold
               
                  Iohn by the grace of God King of England,
Lord of Ireland, Aniou, Toraine, &c. demaundeth once againe
of you his ſubiects of Angiers, if you will quietly ſurrender
vp the Towne into his hands?
            
            
               Fr. Herold
               
                  Philip by the grace of God King of Fraunce, demaundeth
in the behalfe of Arthur Duke of Britaine, if you
will ſurrender vp the Towne into his hands, to the vſe of the
ſaid Arthur.
               
            
            
               Citizens
               Herrolds goe tell the two victorious Princes,
that we the poore Inhabitants of Angiers, require a parle of
their Mateſties.
            
            
               Herolds
               We goe.
            
            
               Enter the Kings, Queene Elianor, Blaunch, Baſtard, Lymoges,
Lowes, Caſtilean, Pembrooke, Salisbury, Conſtance,
and Arthur Duke of Britaine.
            
               John
               Herold, what anſwere doo the Townſmen ſend?
            
            
               
               Philip
               Will Angiers yéeld to Philip King of Fraunce,
               
            
            
               En. Her.
               The Townſmen on the wals accept your Grace.
            
            
               Fr. Her.
               And craue a parley of your Maieſtie.
            
            
               Iohn
               You Citizens of Angiers, haue your eyes
               Beheld the ſlaughter that our Engliſh bowes
               Haue made vpon the coward frawdfull French?
               And haue you wiſely pondred therewithall
               Your gaine in ye
                     •
                  lding to the Engliſh King?
            
            
               Philip
               Their loſſe in yéelding to the Engliſh King.
               But Iohn, they ſaw from out their higheſt Towers
               The Cheualiers of Fraunce and croſſebow ſhot
               Make lanes of ſlaughtred bodies through thine hoaſt,
               And are reſolude to yéelde to Arthurs right.
            
            
               Iohn
               Why Philip, though thou braueſt it fore the walls,
               Thy conſcience knowes that Iohn hath wonne the field.
            
            
               Philip
               What ere my conſcience knows, thy Armie feeles
               That Philip had the better of the day.
            
            
               Bastard
               
                  Philip indéede hath got the Lyons caſe,
               Which here he holds to Lymoges diſgrace.
               Baſe Duke to flye and leaue ſuch ſpoyles behinde:
               But this thou knewſt of force to make mée ſtay.
               It farde with thée as with the marriner,
               Spying the hugie Whale, whoſe monſtrous bulke
               Doth beare the waues like mountaines fore the winde,
               That throwes out emptie veſſels, ſo to ſtay
               His furie, while the ſhip doth ſaile away.
               
                  Philip tis thine: and fore this Princely preſence,
               Madame I humbly lay it at your feete,
               Being the firſt aduenture I atchieud,
               And firſt exployt your Grace did enioyne:
               Yet many more I long to be enioynd.
            
            
               Blaunch
               
                  Philip I take it, and I thee commaund
               To weare the ſame as earſt thy Father did:
               Therewith receiue this fauour at my hands,
               T'incourage thee to follow Richards fame.
            
            
               Arthur
               Ye Citizens of Angiers, are ye mute?
               
                  
                  Arthur or Iohn, ſay which ſhall be your King?
            
            
               Citizen
               We care not which, if once we knew the right,
               But till we know we will not yeeld our right.
            
            
               Bastard
               Might Philip counſell two ſo mightie Kings,
               As are the Kings of England and of Fraunce,
               
               He would aduiſe your Graces to vnite
               And knit your forces gainſt theſe Citizens,
               Pulling their battered walls about their eares.
               The Towne once wonne then ſtriue about the claime,
               For they are minded to delude you both.
            
            
               Citizen
               Kings, Princes, Lords & Knights aſſembled here,
               The Citizens of Angiers all by me
               Entreate your Maieſtie to heare them ſpeake:
               And as you like the motion they ſhall make,
               So to account and follow their aduice.
            
            
               Iohn. Philip.
               Speake on, we giue thee leaue.
            
            
               Citizen
               Then thus: whereas that yong & luſtie knight
               Incites you on to knit your kingly ſtrengths:
               The motion cannot chooſe but pleaſe the good,
               And ſuch as loue the quiet of the State.
               But how my Lords, how ſhould your ſtrengths be kni
                     •
                  ?
               Not to oppreſſe your ſubiects and your friends,
               And fill the world with brawles and mutinies:
               But vnto peace your forces ſhould be knit
               To liue in Princely league and amitie:
               Doo this, the gates of Angiers ſhall giue way
               And ſtand wide open to your harts content.
               To make this peace a laſting bond of loue,
               Remains one onely honorable meanes,
               Which by your pardon I ſhall here diſplay.
               
                  Lewes the Dolphin and the heire of Fraunce,
               
               A man of noted valor through the world,
               Is yet vnmaried: let him take to wife
               The beauteous daughter of the King of Spaine,
               
               Neere to K. Iohn, the louely Ladie Blanche,
               
               Begotten on his Siſter Elianor.
               
               
                  
With her in marriage will her vnckle giue
               Caſtles and Towers as fitteth ſuch a match.
               The Kings thus ioynd in league of perfect loue,
               They may ſo deale with Arthur Duke of Britaine,
               
               Who is but yong, and yet vnmeete to raigne,
               As he ſhall ſtand contented euerie way.
               Thus haue I boldly (for the common good)
               Deliuered what the Citie gaue in charge.
               And as vpon conditions you agree,
               So ſhall we ſtand content to yeeld the Towne.
            
            
               Arthur
               A proper peace, if ſuch a motion hold;
               Theſe Kings beare armes for me, and for my right,
               And they ſhall ſhare my lands to make them friends.
            
            
               Q. Elianor
               Sonne Iohn, follow this motion, as thou loueſt
thy mother,
               Make league with Philip, yeeld to any thing:
               
                  Lewes ſhall haue my Neece, and then be ſure
               
                  Arthur ſhall haue ſmall ſuccour out of Fraunce.
               
            
            
               John
               Brother of Fraunce, you heare the Citizens:
               Then tell me, how you meane to deale herein.
            
            
               Conſtance
               Why John, what canſt thou giue vnto thy Neece,
               That haſt no foote of land, but Arthurs right?
            
            
               Lewes
               Byr Ladie Citizens, I like your choyce,
               A louely Damſell is the Ladie Blanche,
               
               Worthie the heire of Europe for her pheere.
            
            
               Conſtance
               What Kings, why ſtand you gazing in a trance?
               Why how now Lords? accurſed Citizens
               To fill and tickle their ambicious eares,
               With hope of gaine, that ſprings from Arthurs loſſe.
               Some diſmall Plannet at thy birthday raignd,
               For now I ſee the fall of all thy hopes.
            
            
               K. Philip
               Ladie, and Duke of Britaine, know you both,
               The King of Fraunce reſpects his honor more,
               Than to betray his friends and fauourers.
               Princeſſe of Spaine, could you affect my Sonne,
               If we vpon conditions could agree?
            
            
               
               Baſtard
               Swounds Madam, take an Engliſh Gentleman:
               Slaue as I was, I thought to haue mooude the match.
               Grandame you made me halfe a promiſe once,
               That Lady Blanch ſhould bring me wealth inough,
               And make me heire of ſtore of Engliſh land.
            
            
               Q. Elianor
               Peace Philip, I will looke thee out a wife,
               We muſt with pollicie compound this ſtrife.
            
            
               Bastard
               If Lewes get her, well, I ſay no more:
               But let the frolicke Frenchman take no ſcorne,
               If Philip front him with an Engliſh horne.
            
            
               Iohn
               Ladie, what anſwere make you to the King of France?
               
               Can you affect the Dolphin for your Lord?
            
            
               Blanch
               I thanke the King that likes of me ſo well,
               To make me Bride vnto ſo great a Prince:
               But giue me leaue my Lord to pauſe on this.
               Leaſt being too too forward in the cauſe,
               It may be blemiſh to my modeſtie.
            
            
               Q Elinor
               Sonne John, and worthie Philip K. of Fraunce,
               
               Doo you confer awhile about the Dower,
               And I will ſchoole my modeſt Neece ſo well,
               That ſhe ſhall yéeld aſſoone as you haue done.
            
            
               Constance
               I, theres the wretch that broacheth all this ill,
               Why flye I not vpon the Beldames face,
               And with my nayles pull foorth her hatefull eyes.
            
            
               Arthur
               Swéete Mother ceaſe theſe haſtie madding fits:
               For my ſake, let my Grandame haue her will.
               O would ſhe with her hands pull forth my heart,
               I could affoord it to appeaſe theſe broyles.
               But mother let vs wiſely winke at all:
               Leaſt farther harmes enſue our haſtie ſpeach.
            
            
               Philip
               Brother of England, what dowrie wilt thou giue
               Vnto my Sonne in marriage with thy Neece?
            
            
               Iohn
               Firſt Philip knowes her dowrie out of Spaine
               
               To be ſo great as may content a King:
               But more to mend and amplifie the ſame,
               I giue in money thirtie thouſand markes.
               
                  
For land I leaue it to thine owne demaund.
            
            
               Philip
               Then I demaund 
                     Ʋolqueſſon, Torain, Main,
               
               
                  Poiters and Aniou, theſe fiue Prouinces,
               Which thou as King of England holdſt in Fraunce:
               
               Then ſhall our peace be ſoone concluded on.
            
            
               Bastard
               No leſſe than fiue ſuch Prouinces at once?
               
                  Iohn Mother what ſhall I doo? my brother got theſe lands
               With much effuſion of our Engliſh bloud:
               And ſhall I giue it all away at once?
            
            
               Q. Elinor
               
                  Iohn giue it him, ſo ſhalt thou liue in peace,
               And keepe the reſidue ſanz ieopardie.
            
            
               Ion
               
                  Philip bring forth thy Sonne, here is my Neece,
               And here in mariage I doo giue with her
               From me and my Succeſſors Engliſh Kings,
               
                  Ʋolqueſſon, Poiters, Aniou, Torain, Main,
               And thirtie thouſand markes of ſtipend coyne.
               Now Citizens, how like you of this match?
            
            
               Citizen
               We ioy to ſee ſo ſweete a peace begun.
            
            
               Lewes
               
                  Lewes with Blanch ſhall euer liue content.
               But now King Iohn, what ſay you to the Duke?
               Father, ſpeake as you may in his behalfe.
            
            
               Philip
               K. Iohn, be good vnto thy Nephewhere,
               And giue him ſome what that ſhall pleaſe thee beſt.
            
            
               John
               
                  Arthur, although thou troubleſt Englands peace:
               Yet here I giue thee Brittaine for thine owne,
               Together with the Earledome of Richmont,
               
               And this rich Citie of Angiers withall.
            
            
               Q. Elianor
               And if thou ſeeke to pleaſe thine Vnckle John,
               
               Shalt ſee my Sonne how I will make of thee.
            
            
               Iohn
               Now euery thing is ſor
                     •
                  ed to this end,
               Lets in and there prepare the mariage rytes,
               Which in S. Maries Chappell preſently
               Shalbe performed ere this Preſence part.
            
            Exeunt.
            
               Ma
                     •
                  ent Conſtance & Arthur.
            
               Arthur
               Madam good chcere, theſe drouping languiſhmētes
               
                  
Adde no redreſſe to ſalue our awkward haps.
               If heauens haue concluded theſe euents,
               To ſmall auaile is bitter penſiuenes:
               Seaſons will change, and ſo our preſent griefe
               May change with them, and all to our reliefe.
            
            
               Conſtance
               Ah boy, thy yeares I ſée are farre too greene
               To looke into the bottome of-theſe cares.
               But I, who ſee the poyſe that weigheth downe
               Thy weale, my wiſh, and all the willing meanes
               Wherewith thy fortune and thy fame ſhould mount.
               What ioy, what eaſe, what reſt can lodge in me,
               With whom all hope and hap doth diſagree?
            
            
               Arthur
               Yet Ladies teares, and cares, and ſolemne ſhows,
               Rather than helpes, heape vp more worke for woes.
            
            
               Conſtance
               If any Power will heare a widdowes plaint,
               That from a wounded ſoule implores reuenge;
               Send fell contagion to infect this Clyme,
               This curſed Countrey, where the traytors breath.
               Whoſe periurie as prowd Briareus,
               
               Beleaguers all the Skie with miſbeliefe.
               He promiſt Arthur, and he ſware it too,
               To fence thy right, and check thy foemans pride:
               But now black-ſpotted Periure as he is,
               He takes a truce with Elnors damned brat,
               And marries Lewes to her louely Neece,
               Sharing thy fortune, and thy birth-dayes gift
               Betweene theſe louers: ill betide the match.
               And as they ſhoulder thee from out thy owne,
               And triumph in a widowes tearefull cares:
               So heauens croſſe them with a thriftles courſe.
               Is all the bloud yſpilt on either part,
               Cloſing the cranies of the thirſtie earth,
               Growne to a louegame and a Bridall feaſt?
               And muſt thy birthright hid the wedding banes?
               Poore helples boy, hopeles and helples too,
               To whom miſfortune ſeemes no yoke at all.
               
                  
Thy ſtay, thy ſtate, thy imminent miſhaps
               Woundeth thy mothers thoughts with feeling care,
               Why lookſt thou pale? the colour flyes thy face,
               I trouble now the fountaine of thy yo
                     •
                  th,
               And make it moodie with my doles diſcourſe,
               Goe in with me, reply not louely boy,
               We muſt obſcure this mone with melodie,
               Leaſt worſer wrack enſue our malecontent.
            
            Exeunt.
            
               Enter the King of England the King of Fraunce, Arthur,
Baſtard, Lewes, Lymoges, Co
                  •
               ſtance, Blanche, Chattilion,
Pembrooke, Salisburie, and Elianor.
            
               Iohn
               This is the day, the long deſired day,
               Wherein the Realmes of England and of Fraunce
               
               Stand highly bleſſed in a laſting peace.
               Thrice happie is the Bridegroome and the Bride,
               From whoſe ſweete Bridale ſuch a concord ſprings,
               To make of mortall foes immortall friends.
            
            
               Conſtance
               Vngodly peace made by an others warre.
            
            
               Philip
               Vnhappie peace, that ties thee from reuenge.
               Rouſe thée Plantaginet, liue not to ſee
               The butcher of the great Plantiginet.
               
               Kings, Princes, and ye Peeres of either Realmes,
               Pardon my raſhnes, and forgiue the zeale
               That caries me in furie to a deede
               Of high deſert, of honour, and of armes.
               A boone O Kings, a boone doth Philip beg
               Proſtrate vpon his knee: which knee ſhall cleaue
               Vnto the ſuperficies of the earth,
               Till Fraunce and England graunt this glorious boone.
            
            
               Iohn
               Speake Philip, England graunts thee thy requeſt.
            
            
               Philip
               And Fraunce confirmes what ere is in his power.
            
            
               Baſtard
               Then Duke ſit faſt, I leuell at thy head,
               Too baſe a ranſome for my fathers life.
               Princes, I craue the Combat with the Duke
               
                  
That braues it in diſhonor of my Sire.
               Your words are paſt nor can you now reuerſe
               The Princely promiſe that reuiues my ſoule,
               Whereat me thinks I ſee his ſinnews ſhake:
               This is the boon (dread Lords) which granted once
               Or life or death are pleaſant to my ſoule;
               Since I ſhall liue and die in Richards right.
            
            
               Lymoges
               Baſe Baſtard, miſbegotten of a King.
               To interrupt theſe holy nuptiall rytes
               With brawles and tumults to a Dukes diſgrace:
               Let it ſuffice, I ſcorne to ioyne in fight,
               With one ſo farre vnequall to my ſelfe.
            
            
               Bastard
               A fine excuſe, Kings if you wilbe Kings,
               Then keepe your words, and let vs combat it.
            
            
               Iohn
               
                  Philip, We cannot force the Duke to fight,
               Being a ſubiect vnto neither Realme:
               But tell me Auſtria, if an Engliſh Duke
               Should dare thee thus, wouldſt thou accept the challendge?
            
            
               Lymoges
               Els let the world account the Auſtrich Duke
               The greateſt coward liuing on the Earth.
            
            
               Iohn
               Then cheere thee Philip, Iohn will keepe his word,
               Kneele downe, in ſight of Philip King of Fraunce
               
               And all theſe Princely Lords aſſembled here,
               I gird thee with the ſword of Normandie,
               
               And of that land I doo inueſt thee Duke:
               So ſhalt thou be in liuing and in land
               Nothing inferiour vnto Auſtria.
               
            
            
               Lymoges
               K. Iohn, I tell thee flatly to thy face
               Thou wrongſt mine honour: and that thou maiſt ſee
               How much I ſcorne thy new made Duke and thee,
               I flatly ſay, I will not be compeld:
               And ſo farewell Sir Duke of low degree,
               Ile finde a time to match you for this geere.
            
            Exit.
            
               Iohn
               Stay Philip, let him goe the honors thine.
            
            
               Baſtard
               I cannot liue vnles his life be mine.
            
            
               Q. Elianor
               Thy forwardnes this day hath ioyd my ſoule.
               
                  
And made me thinke my Richard liues in th
                     ••
                  .
            
            
               K. Philip
               Lordings lets in, and ſpend the wedding day
               In maſkes and triumphs, letting quarrells ceaſe.
            
            Enter a Cardynall from Rome.
            
            
               Card.
               Stay King of France, I charge thee ioyn not hands
With him that ſtands accurſt of God and men.
               Know Iohn, that I Pandulph Cardinall of Millaine, and
Legate from the Sea of Rome, demaund of thee in the name
of our holy Father the Pope Innocent, why thou doſt (contrarie
to the lawes of our holy mother the Church, and our holye
father the Pope) diſturbe the quiet of the Church, and diſanull
the election of Stephen Langhton, whom his Holines hath elected
Archbiſhop of Canterburie: this in his Holines name I
demaund of thee?
            
            
               Iohn
               And what haſt thou or the Pope thy maiſter to doo to
demaund of me, how I employ mine owne? Know ſir Prieſt
as I honour the Church and holy Churchmen, ſo I ſcorne to
be ſubiect to the greateſt Prelate in the world. Tell thy Maiſter
ſo from me, and ſay, Iohn of England ſaid it, that neuer an
Italian Prieſt of them all, ſhall either haue tythe, tole, or poling
penie out of England, but as I am King, ſo wil I raigne
next vnder God, ſupreame head both ouer ſpirituall and temrall:
and hee that contradicts me in this, Ile make him hoppe
headleſſe.
            
            
               K. Philip
               What King Iohn, know you what you ſay, thus
to blaſpheme againſt our holy father the Pope.
            
            
               Iohn
               
                  Philip, though thou and all the Princes of Chriſtendome
ſuffer themſelues to be abuſde by a Prelates ſlauerie,
my minde is not of ſuch baſe temper. If the Pope will bee
King in England, let him winne it with the ſword, I know no
other title he can alleage to mine inheritance.
            
            
               Card.
               
                  Iohn, this is thine anſwere?
            
            
               Iohn
               What then?
            
            
               Card.
               Then I Pandulph of Padoa, Legate from the Apoſtolik

Sea, doo in the name of S. Peter and his ſucceſſor our
holy Father Pope Innocent, pronounce thee accurſed diſcharging
euery of thy ſubiectes of all dutie and fealtie that they
doo owe to thee, and pardon and forgiuenes of ſinne to thoſe or
them whatſoeuer, which ſhall carrie armes againſt thee, or
murder thee: this I pronounce, and charge all good men to
abhorre thee as an excommunicate perſon.
            
            
               Iohn
               So ſir, the more the Fox is curſt the better a fares: if
God bleſſe me and my Land, let the Pope and his ſhauelings
curſe and ſpare not.
            
            
               Card.
               Furthermore I charge thée Philip King of France,
and al the Kings and Princes of Chriſtendome, to make war
vppon this miſcreant: and whereas thou haſt made a league
with him, and confirmed it by oath, I doo in the name of our
foreſaid father the Pope, acquit thée of that oath as vnlawful,
being made with an heretike, how ſaiſt thou Philip, dooſt thou
obey?
            
            
               Iohn
               Brother of Fraunce, what ſay you to the Cardinall?
            
            
               Philip
               I ſay, I am ſorrie for your Maieſtie, requeſting
you to ſubmit your ſelfe to the Church of Rome.
               
            
            
               John
               And what ſay you to our league, if I doo not ſubmit?
            
            
               Philip
               What ſhould I ſay? I muſt obey the Pope.
            
            
               Iohn
               Obey the Pope, and breake your oath to God?
            
            
               Philip
               The Legate hath abſolude me of mine oath:
               Then yeeld to Rome, or I defie thée héere.
            
            
               Iohn
               Why Philip, I defie the Pope and thée,
               Falſe as thou art, and periurde K. of Fraunce,
               
               Vnworthie man to be accompted King.
               Giu'ſt thou thy ſword into a Prelates hands?
               
                  Pandulph, where I of Abbots, Monkes and Friers
               Haue taken ſomewhat to maintaine my warres,
               Now will I take no more but all they haue.
               Ile rowze the lazie lubbers from their Cells,
               And in deſpight Ile ſend them to the Pope.
               Mother, come you with me, and for the reſt
               That will not follow Iohn in this attempt,
               
                  
Confuſion light vpon their damned ſoules.
               Come Lords, 
                     •
                  ight for your King that fighteth for your good?
            
            
               Philip
               And are they gone? Pandulph thy ſelfe ſhalt ſee
               How Fraunce will fight for Rome and Romiſh rytes.
               Nobles, to armes, let him not paſſe the ſeas.
               Lets take him captiue, and in triumph lead
               The K. of England to the gates of Rome.
               
               
                  Arthur, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   thee man, and thou ſhalt ſee
               What Philip K. of Fraunce will doo for thee.
            
            
               Blanche
               And will your Grace vpon your wedding day
               Forſake your Bride and follow dreadfull drums:
               Nay, good my Lord, ſtay you at home with mee.
            
            
               Lewes
               Sweete heart content thée, and we ſhall agree.
            
            
               Philip
               Follow me Lords, Lord Cardynall lead the way,
               Drums ſhalbe muſique to this wedding day.
            
            Exeunt.
            Excurſions. The Baſtard purſues Austria, and kills
him.
            
               Baſtard
               Thus hath K. Richards Sonne performe his
vowes.
               And offred Austrias bloud for ſacrifice
               Vnto his fathers 
                     •
                  uerliuing ſoule.
               Braue Cordelion, now my heart doth ſay,
               I haue deſerude, though not to be thy heire
               Yet as I am, thy baſe begotten ſonne,
               A name as pleaſing to thy Philips heart,
               As to be cald the Duke of Normandie.
               
               Lie there a pray to euery rauening fowle:
               And as my Father triumpht in thy ſpoyles,
               And trode thine Enſignes vnderneath his féete,
               So doo I tread vpon thy curſed ſelfe,
               And leaue thy bodie to the fowles for food.
            
            Exit.
            Excurſions, Arthur, Constance, Lewes, hauing taken
Q. Elianor priſoner.
            
               
               Conſtance
               Thus hath the God of Kings with conquering
arme
               Diſpearſt the foes to true ſucceſſion.
               Proud, and diſturber of thy Coun
                     •
                  reyes peace,
               
                  Conſtance doth liue to came thine inſolence,
               And on thy head will now auenged be
               For all the miſchiefes hatched in thy braine.
            
            
               Q Elinor
               Contemptuous dame vnreuent Dutches thou,
               To braue ſo great a Quéene as Elianor.
               
               Baſe ſcolde haſt thou forgot, that I was wife,
               And mother to three mightie Engliſh Kings?
               I charge thée then, and you forſooth ſir Boy,
               To ſet your Grandmother at libertie,
               And yéeld to John your Vnckle and your King.
            
            
               Conſtance
               Tis not thy words proud Queene ſhal carry it.
            
            
               Elianor
               Nor yet thy threates proud Dame ſhal daunt my
minde.
            
            
               Arthur
               Sweete Granda
                     •
                  e, and good Mother leaue theſe
brawles.
            
            
               Elinor
               Ile finde a time to triumph in thy fall.
            
            
               Conſtance
               My time is now to triumph in thy fall,
               And thou ſhalt know that Conſtance will triumph.
            
            
               Arthur
               Good Mother weigh it is Queene Elianor,
               
               Though ſhe be captiue, vſe her like herſelfe.
               Sweete Granda
                     •
                  e beare with what my Mother ſayes,
               Your Highnes ſhalbe vſed honourably.
            
            Enter a Meſſenger.
            
               Meſſ. Lewes
               my Lord, Duke Arthur, and the reſt,
               To armes in haſt, K. John relyes his men,
               And ginnes the fight afreſh: and ſweares withall
               To loſe his life, or ſet his Mother free.
            
            
               Lewes
               
                  Arthur away, tis time to looke about.
            
            
               Elianor
               Why how 
                     ••
                  
                  
                     •
                  daine, what is your courage coold?
            
            
               Conſtance
               No Elianor, my courage gathers ſtrength,
               
                  
And hopes to lead both John and thee as ſlaues:
               And in that hope, I hale thee to the field.
            
            Exeunt.
            Excurſions. Elianor is reſcued by Iohn, and Arthur
is taken priſoner. Exeunt. Sound victorie.
            
               Enter Iohn, Elianor, and Arthur Priſoner, Bastard, Pembrooke,
Salisbury, and Hubert de Burgh.
            
               Iohn
               Thus right triumphs, and John triumphs in right.
               thou ſeeſt, Fraunce cannot bolſter thee:
               Thy Mothers pride hath brought thee to this fall.
               But if at laſt, Nephew thou yeeld thy ſelfe
               Into the gardance of thine Vnckle John,
               
               Thou ſhalt be vſed as becomes a Prince.
            
            
               Arthur
               Vnckle, my Grandame taught her Nephew this,
               To beare captiuitie with patience.
               Might hath preuayld not right, for I am King
               Of England, though thou weare the Diadem.
            
            
               Q. Elianor
               Sonne Iohn, ſoone ſhall we teach him to forget
               Theſe proud preſumptions, and to know himſelfe.
            
            
               Iohn
               Mother, he neuer will forget his claime,
               I would he liude not to remember it.
               But leauing this, we will to England now,
               And take ſome order with our Popelings there,
               That ſwell with pride, and fat of lay mens lands.
            
            
               Philip▪
               
               I make thee chiefe in this affaire,
               Ranſack the Abbeys, Cloyſters, Priories,
               Conuert their coyne vnto my ſouldiers vſe:
               And whatſoere he be within my Land,
               That goes to Rome for iuſtice and for law,
               While he may haue his right within the Realme,
               Let him be iudgde a traitor to the State,
               And ſuffer as an enemie to England.
               
               Mother, we leaue you here beyond the ſeas,
               As Regent of our Prouinces in Fraunce,
               
               
                  
While we to England take a ſpeedie courſe,
               And thanke our God that gaue vs victorie.
               
                  Hubert de Burgh take Arthur here to thee,
               Be he thy priſoner: Hubert kéepe him ſafe,
               For on his life doth hang thy Soueraignes crowne,
               But in his death conſiſts thy Soueraignes bliſſe:
               Then Hubert, as thou ſhortly hearſt from me,
               So vſe the priſoner I haue giuen in charge.
            
            
               Hubert
               Frolick yong Prince, though I your keeper bee,
               Yet ſhall your kéeper liue at your commaund.
            
            
               Arthur
               As pleaſe my God, ſo ſhall become of me.
            
            
               Q. Elianor
               My Sonne to England, I will ſee thee ſhip
                     •
                  ,
               And pray to God to ſend thee ſafe aſhore.
            
            
               Bastard
               Now warres are done, I long to be at home
               To diue into the Monkes and Abbots bags.
               To make ſome ſport among the ſmooth ſkin Nunnes,
               And keepe ſome reuell with the fanzen Friers.
            
            
               Iohn
               To England Lords, each looke vnto your charge,
               And arme yourſelues againſt the Romane pride.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter the K. of Fraunce, Lewes his ſonne, Cardinall Pundolph
Legate, and Conſtance.
            
            
               Philip
               What euery man attacht with this miſhap?
               Why frowne you ſo, why droop ye Lords of Fraunce?
               
               Me thinkes it differs from a warlike minde
               To lowre it for a checke or two of chaunce.
               Had Lymoges eſcapt the baſtards ſpight,
               A little ſorrow might haue ſerude our loſſe.
               Braue Austria, heauen ioyes to haue thee there.
            
            
               Card.
               His ſowle is ſafe and free from Purgatorie,
               Our holy Father hath diſpenſt his ſinnes,
               The bleſſed Saints haue heard our oriſons,
               And all are Mediators for his ſoule,
               And in the right of theſe moſt holy warres,
               His holines free pardon doth pronounce
               
                  
To all that follow you gainſt Engliſh heretiques,
               Who ſtand accurſed in our mother Church.
            
            Enter Conſtance alone.
            
               Philip
               To aggrauate the meaſure of our griefe,
               All malcontent comes Conſtance for her Sonne.
               Be briefe good Madame, for your face imports
               A tragick 
                     •
                  ale behinde thats yet vntolde.
               Her paſſions ſtop the organ of her voyce,
               Deepe ſorrow throbbeth miſbefalne euents,
               Out with it Ladie, that our Act may end
               A full Cataſtrophe of ſad laments.
            
            
               Conſt.
               My tongue is tunde to ſtorie forth miſhap:
               When did I breath to tell a pleaſing tale?
               Muſt Conſtance ſpeake? let teares preuent her talke:
               Muſt I diſcourſe? let Did
                        •
                     
                   ſigh and ſay,
               She weepes againe to heare the wrack of Troy:
               
               Two words will ſerue, and then my tale is done:
               
                  El
                        •
                     ors proud brat hath robd me of my Sonne.
            
            
               Lewe
                     •
                  
               
               Haue patience Madame, this is chaunce of warre:
               He may be ranſomde, we reuenge his wrong.
            
            
               Conſtance
               Beit 
                     •
                  er ſo ſoone, I ſhall not liue ſo long.
            
            
               Philip
               Deſpaire not yet, come Conſtance, goe with me,
               Theſe clowdes will fleet, the day will cleare againe.
            
            Exeunt.
            
               Card.
               Now Lewes, thy fortune buds with happie ſpring,
               Our holy Fathers prayers effecteth this.
               
                  Arthur is ſafe, let Iohn alone with him,
               Thy title next is fairſt to Englands Crowne:
               Now ſtirre thy Father to begin with John,
               
               The Pope ſayes I, and ſo is Albiox thine.
            
            
               Lewes
               Thankes my Lord Legate for your good conceipt,
               Tis beſt we follow now the game is faire.
               My Father wants to worke him your good words.
            
            
               Card.
               A few will ſerue to forward him in this,
               Thoſe ſhal not want: but lets about it then.
            
            Exeunt.
            
            Enter Philip leading a Frier, charging him to ſhow where
the Abbots golde lay.
            
               Philip
               Come on you fat Franciſcans, dallie no longer, but
ſhew me where the Abbots treaſure lyes, or die.
            
            
               Frier
               
                  Benedicamus Domini, was euer ſuch an iniurie.
               Sweete S. Withold of thy lenitie, defend vs from extremitie,
               And heare vs for S. Charitie, oppreſſed with auſteritie.
               
                  In nomini Domini, make I my homilie,
               Gentle Gentilitie griene not the Cleargie.
            
            
               Philip
               Grey gownd good face, coniure ye,
               n
                     •
                  r truſt me for a groate,
               If this waſte girdle hang thee not
               that girdeth in thy coate.
               Now balde and barefoote Bungie birds
               when vp the gallowes climing,
               Say Philip he had words inough
               to put you downe with ryming.
            
            
               Frier
               A pardon, Oparce, Saint Fraunces for mercie,
               Shall ſhield thee from nightſpells and dreaming of diuells,
               If thou wilt forgiue me, and neuer more grieue me,
               With faſting and praying, and Haile Marie ſaying.
               From black Purgatorie a penance right ſorie.
               Frier Thomas will warme you,
               It ſhall neuer harme you.
            
            
               Philip
               Come leaue off your rabble,
               Sirs hang vp this lozell.
            
            
               2. Frier
               For charitie I beg his life,
               Saint Frauncis chiefeſt Frier,
               The beſt in all our Couent Sir,
               to keepe a Wintersſter.
               O ſtrangle not the good olde man,
               my hoſteſſe oldeſt gueſt,
               And I will bring you by and by
               vnto the Priors cheſt.
            
            
               
               Philip
               I, ſaiſt thou ſo, & if thou wilt the frier is at libertie,
               If not, as I am honeſt man, Ile hang you both for companie.
            
            
               Frier.
               Come hether, this is the cheſt though ſimple to behold
               That wanteth not a thouſand pound in ſiluer and in gold.
               Myſelfe will warrant full ſo much, I know the Abbots ſtore,
               Ile pawne my life there is no leſſe to haue what ere is more.
            
            
               Philip
               I take thy word, the ouerplus vnto thy ſhare ſhall
come,
               But if there want of full ſo much, thy neck ſhall pay the ſum.
               Breake vp the Cofer, Frier.
            
            
               Frier
               Oh I am vndun, faire Alice the Nun
               Hath tooke vp her reſt in the Abbots cheſt,
               
                  Sancte benedicite, pardon my ſimplicitie.
               Fie Alice, confeſſion will not ſalue this tranſgreſſion.
            
            
               Philip
               What haue wee here, a holy Nun? So kéepe mee
God in health,
               A ſmooth facte Nunne (for ought I knowe) is all the Abbots
wealth.
               Is this the No
                     •
                  ries chaſtitie? Beſhrewe me but I thinke
               They goe as oft to Venery, as niggards to their drinke.
               Why paltrey Frier and Pandar too, yee ſhameleſſe ſhauen
crowne,
               Is this the cheſt that held a hoord, at leaſt a thouſand pound?
               And is the hoord a holy whore? Wel be the hangman nimble,
               Hee'le take the paine to paye you home, and teach you to diſſemble.
            
            
               Nunne
               O ſpare the Frier Anthony, a better neuer was
               To ſing a Dirige ſolemnly, or read a morning Maſſe.
               If money be the meanes of this, I know an ancient Nunne,
               That hath a hoord this ſeauen yeares, did neuer ſée the ſunne;
               And that is yours, and what is ours, ſo fauour now be ſhown,
               You ſhall commaund as commonly, as if it were your owne,
            
            
               Frier
               Your honour excepted.
            
            
               Nunne
               I Thomas, I meane ſo.
            
            
               Philip
               From all ſaue from Friers.
            
            
               Nunne
               Good Sir, doo not thinke ſo?
               
                  
and you Frier Laurence remember your raunſome a hundred
pound, and a pardon for your ſelfe, and the reſt come on. Sir
Prophet, you ſhall with me, to receiue a Prophets rewarde.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter Hubert de Burgh with three men.
            
               Hubert
               My maſters. I haue ſhewed you what warrant I
haue for this attempt; I perceiue by your heauie countenances,
you had rather be otherwiſe imployed, and for my owne
part, I would the King had made choyce of ſome other executioner:
onely this is my comfort, that a King commaunds,
whoſe precepts neglected or omitted, threatneth torture for the
default. Therefore in briefe, leaue me, and be readie to attend
the aduenture: ſtay within that entry, and when you heare me
crie, God ſaue the King, iſſue ſodainly foorth, lay handes on
Arthur, ſet him in this chayre, wherin (once faſt bound) leaue
him with me to finiſh the reſt.
            
            
               Attendants
               We goe, though loath.
            
            Exeunt.
            
               Hubert
               My Lord, will it pleaſe your Honour to take the
benefite of the faire euening?
            
            
               Enter Arthur to Hubert de Burgh.
            
               Arthur
               Gramttcie Hubert for thy care of me,
               In or to whom reſtraint is newly knowen,
               The ioy of walking is ſmall beue
                     ••
                  
                  
                     •
                  ,
               Yet will I take thy offer with ſmall thankes,
               I would not looſe the pleaſure of the eye.
               But tell me curteous keeper if you can,
               How long the King will haue me tarrie heere.
            
            
               Hubert
               I know not Prince, but as I geſſe not long.
               God ſend you freedome, and God ſaue the King,
               
               They iſſue forth.
            
            
               Arthur
               Why how now ſirs, what, may this outrage
meane?
               
                  
O helpe me Hubert, gentle keeper helpe:
               God ſend this ſodaine mutinous approach
               Tend not to reaue a wretched guiltles life.
            
            
               Hubert
               So ſirs, depart, and leaue the reſt for me.
            
            
               Arthur
               Then Arthur yeeld, death frowneth in thy face,
               What meaneth this? Good Hubert plead the caſe.
            
            
               Hubert
               Patience yong Lord, and liſten words of woe,
               Harmfull and harſh, hells horror to be heard:
               A diſmall tale fit for a furies tongue.
               I faint to tell, déepe ſorrow is the ſound.
            
            
               Arthur
               What, muſt I die?
            
            
               Hubert
               No newes of death, but tidings of more hate,
               A wrathfull doome, and moſt vnluckie fate:
               Deaths diſh were daintie at ſo fell a feaſt,
               Be deafe, heare not, its hell to tell the reſt.
            
            
               Arthur
               Alas thou wrongſt my youth with words of feare,
               Tis hell, tis horror, not for one to heare:
               What is it man if it muſt needes bedon,
               Act it, and end it, that the paine were gon.
            
            
               Hubert
               I will not chaunt ſuch dolour with my tongue,
               Yet muſt I act the outrage with my hand.
               My heart my head, and all my powers beſide,
               To aide the office haue at once deuide.
               Peruſe this letter, lines of treble woe,
               Read ore my charge, and pardon when you know.
            
            Hubert theſe are to commaund thee, as thou tendrest our
quiet in minde and the eſtate of our perſon, that preſently
vpon the receipt of our commaund, thou put out
the eyes of Arthur Plantaginet.
            
            
               Arthur
               Ah monſtrous damned man, his very breath infects
the elements,
               Contagious venyme dwelleth in his heart,
               Effecting meanes to poyſon all the world.
               Vnreuerent may I be to blame the heauens
               
                  
Of great iniuſtice, that the miſcreant
               Liues to oppreſſe the innocents with wrong.
               Ah Hubert, makes he thee his inſtrument
               To ſound the tromp that cauſeth hell triumph?
               Heauen weepes, the Saints doo ſhed celeſtiall teares,
               They feare thy fall, and cyte thee with remorſe,
               They knock thy conſcience, moouing pitie there,
               Willing to fence thee from the rage of hell:
               Hell Hubert, truſt me all the plagues of hell
               Hangs on performance of this damned deede.
               This ſeale, the warrant of the bodies bliſſe,
               Enſureth Satan chieftaine of thy ſoule:
               Subſcribe not Hubert, giue not Gods part away.
               I ſpeake not onely for eyes priuiledge,
               The chiefe exterior that I would enioy:
               But for thy perill, farre beyond my paine,
               Thy ſweete ſoules loſſe, more than my eyes vaine lack;
               A cauſe internall, and eternall too.
               Aduiſe thee Hubert, for the caſe is hard,
               To looſe ſaluation for a Kings reward.
            
            
               Hubert
               My Lord, a ſubiect dwelling in the land
               Is tyed to execute the Kings commaund.
            
            
               Arthur.
               Yet God commands, whoſe power reacheth further,
               That no commaund ſhould ſtand in force to murther.
            
            
               Hubert
               But 
                     〈◊〉
                   me Eſſence hath ordaind a law,
               A death for guilt, to keepe the world in awe.
            
            
               Arthur
               I plead not guiltie, treaſonles and free.
            
            
               Hubert
               But that appeale my Lord concernes not me.
            
            
               Arthur
               Why, thou art he that maiſt omit the perill.
            
            
               Hubert
               I, if my Soueraigne would remit his quarrell.
            
            
               Arthur
               His quarrell is vnhallowed falſe and wrong.
            
            
               Hubert
               Then be the blame to whom it doth belong.
            
            
               Arthur
               Why thats to thee if thou as they proceede,
               Conclude their iudgement with ſo vile a déede.
            
            
               Hubert
               Why then no execution can be lawfull,
               If Iudges doomes muſt be reputed doubtfull.
            
            
               
               Arthur
               Yes where in forme of Lawe in place and time,
               The offender is conuicted of the crime.
            
            
               Hubert
               My Lord, my Lord, this long expoſtulation,
               Heapes vp more griefe, than promiſe of redreſſe;
               For this I know, and ſo reſolude I end,
               That ſubiects liues on Kings commaunds depend.
               I muſt not reaſon why he is your foe,
               But doo his charge ſince he commaunds it ſo.
            
            
               Arthur
               Then doo thy charge, and charged be thy ſoule
               With wrongfull perſecution done this day.
               You rowling eyes, whoſe ſuperficies yet
               I doo behold with eyes that Nature lent:
               Send foorth the terror of your Moouers frowne,
               To wreake my wrong vpon the murtherers
               That rob me of your faire reflecting view:
               Let hell to them (as earth th
                     •
                  y wiſh to mée)
               Be darke and direfull guerdon for their guylt,
               And let the black tormenters of deepe Tartary
               
               Vpbraide them with this damned enterpriſe,
               Inflicting change of tortures on their ſoules.
               Delay not Hubert, my oriſons are ended,
               Begin I pray thée, reaue me of my ſight:
               But to performe a tragedie indéede,
               Conclude the period with a mortall ſtab.
               
                  Conſtance farewell, tormentor come away,
               Make my diſpatch the Tirants feaſting day.
            
            
               Hubert
               I faint, I feare, my conſcience bids deſiſt:
               Faint did I ſay, feare was it that I named?
               My King commaunds, that warrant ſets me frée:
               But God forbids, and he commaundeth Kings,
               That great Commaunder counterchecks my charge,
               He ſtayes my hand, he maketh ſoft my heart,
               Goe curſed tooles, your office is exempt,
               Cheere thée yong Lord, thou ſhalt not loo
                     •
                  e an eye,
               Though I ſhould purchaſe it with loſſe of life.
               Ile to the King, and ſay his willis done,
               
                  
And of the langor tell him thou art dead,
               Goe in with me, for Hubert was not borne
               To blinde thoſe lampes that Nature polliſht ſo,
            
            
               Arthur
               
                  Hubert, if euer Arthur be in ſtate,
               Looke for amends of this receiued gift
               I tooke my eyſight by thy curteſie,
               Thou leneſt them me, I will not be ingrate.
               But now procraſtination may offend
               The iſſue that thy kindnes vndertakes:
               Depart we Hubert to preuent the worſt.
            
            Exeunt.
            Enter King Iohn, Eſſex, Salisbury, Penbrooke.
            
               Iohn
               Now warlike followers reſteth ought vndon
               That may impeach vs of foud ouerſight?
               The French haue felt the temper of our ſwords,
               Cold terror keepes poſſeſſion in their ſowles,
               Checking their ouerdaring arrogance
               For buckling with ſo great an ouermatch.
               The Arche proud titled Prieſt of Italy,
               
               That calles himſelfe grand Viccar vnder God
               Is buſied now with trentall obſequies,
               Maſſe and mouths minde, dirge and I know not what
               To eaſe their ſowles in painefull purgatory,
               That haue miſcaried in theſe bloudy warres.
               Heard you not Lords when firſt his holines
               Had tidings of our ſmall account of him,
               How with a taunt vaunting vpon his toes
               He vrdge a reaſon why the Engliſh Aſſe
               Diſdaingd the bleſſed ordinance of Rome?
               
               The title (reuerently might I inferre)
               Became the Kings that earſt haue borne the load,
               The ſlauiſh weight of that controlling Prieſt:
               Who at his pleaſure temperd them like waxe
               To carrie armes on danger of his curſe,
               Banding their ſowles with warrants of his hand.
               I grieue to thinke how Kings in ages paſt
               
                  
(Simply deuoted to the Sea of Rome)
               Haue run into a thouſand acts of ſhame.
               But now for confirmation of our State,
               Sith we haue proynd the more than needfull braunch
               That did oppreſſe the true wel-growing ſtock,
               It reſteth we throughout our Territories
               Be reproclaimed and inueſted King.
            
            
               Pembrook
               My Liege, that were to buſie men with doubts,
               Once were you crownd, proclaimd, and with applauſe
               Your 
                     ••
                  tie ſtréetes haue ecchoed to the eare,
               God ſaue the King, God ſaue our Soueraigne Iohn.
               
               Pardon my feare, my cenſure doth infer
               Your Highnes not depoſde from Regall State,
               Would breed a mutinie in peoples mindes,
               What it ſhould meane to haue you crownd againe.
            
            
               Iohn
               
                  Pembrooke performe what I haue bid thée doo,
               Thou knowſt not what induceth me to this.
               
                  Eſſex goe in, and Lordings all be gon
               About this taſke, I will be crownd anon.
            
            Enter the Baſtard.
            
               Philip,
               what newes, how doo the Abbots cheſts?
               Are Friers fatter than the Nunnes are faire?
               What chéere with Churchmen, had they golde or no?
               Tell me how hath thy office tooke effect?
            
            
               Philip
               My Lord, I haue performd your Highnes charge:
               The eaſe bred Abbots and the bare foote Friers,
               The Monkes the Priors and holy cloyſtred Nunnes,
               Are all in health, and were my Lord in wealth,
               Till I had tythde and tolde their holy boords.
               I doubt not when your Highnes ſees my prize,
               You may proportion all their former pride.
            
            
               Iohn
               Why ſo, now ſorts it Philip as it ſhould:
               This ſmall intruſion into Abbey trunkes,
               Will make the Popelings excommunicate,
               
                  
Curſe, ban, and breath out damned oriſons,
               As thick as haileſtones fore the ſprings approach:
               But yet as harmles and without effect,
               As is the eccho of a Cannons crack
               Diſchargd againſt the battlements of heauen.
               But what newes els befell there Philip?
               
            
            
               Baſtard
               Strange newes my Lord: within your territories,
               Nere Pomfret is a Prophet new ſprong vp,
               Whoſe diuination volleys wonders foorth;
               To him the Commons throng with Countrey gifts,
               He ſets a date vnto the Beldames death,
               Preſcribes how long the Virgins ſtate ſhall laſt,
               Diſtinguiſheth the moouing of the heauens,
               Giues limits vnto holy nuptiall rytes,
               Foretelleth famine, aboundeth plentie forth,
               Of fate, of fortune, life and death he chats,
               With ſuch aſſurance, ſcruples put apart,
               As if he knew the certaine doomes of heauen,
               Or kept a Regiſter of all the Deſtinies.
            
            
               Iohn
               Thou telſt me meruailes, would thou hadſt brought the man,
               We might haue queſtiond him of things to come.
            
            
               Bastard
               My Lord, I tooke a care of had I wiſt,
               And brought the Prophet with me to the Court,
               He ſtayes my Lord but at the Preſence doore:
               Pleaſeth your Highnes, I will call him in.
            
            
               Iohn
               Nay ſtay awhile, wée'l haue him here anon,
               A thing of weight is firſt to be performd.
            
            Enter the Nobles and crowne King Iohn, and then crie
God ſaue the King.
            
               Iohn
               Lordings and friends ſupporters of our ſtate,
               Admire not at this vnaccuſtomd courſe,
               Nor in your thoughts blame not this déede of yours.
               Once ere this time was I inueſted King,
               Your fealtie ſworne as Li
                     •
                  gmen to our ſtate▪
               
               
                  
Once ſince that time ambicious wéedes haue ſprung
               To ſtaine the beautie of our garden plot:
               But heauens in our conduct rooting thence
               The falſe intruders, breakers of worlds peace,
               Haue to our ioy, made Sunſhine chaſe the ſtorme.
               After the which, to try your conſtancie,
               That now I ſee is worthie of your names,
               We craude once more your helps for to inueſt vs
               Into the right that enuie ſought to wrack.
               Once was I not depoſde, your former choyce;
               Now twice béen crowned and applauded King:
               Your cheered action to inſtall me ſo,
               Infers aſſured witnes of your loues,
               And binds me ouer in a Kingly care
               To render loue with loue, rewards of worth
               To ballance downe requitall to the full.
               But thankes the while, thankes Lordings to you all:
               Aſke me and vſe me, try me and finde me yours.
            
            
               Eſſex
               A boon my Lord, at vauntage of your words
               We aſke to guerdon all our loyalties.
            
            
               Pembrooke
               We take the time your Highnes bids vs aſke:
               Pleaſe it you graunt, you make your promiſe good,
               With leſſer loſſe than one ſuperfluous haire
               That not remembred falleth from your head.
            
            
               Iohn
               My wordis paſt, receiue your boone my Lords.
               What may it be? Aſke it, and it is yours.
            
            
               Eſſex
               We craue my Lord, to pleaſe the Commons with
               The libertie of Ladie Conſtance Sonne:
               Whoſe durance darkeneth your Highnes right,
               As if you kept him priſoner, to the end
               Your ſelfe were doubtfull of the thing you haue.
               Diſmiſſe him thence, your Highnes néedes not feare,
               Twice by conſent you are proclaimd our King.
            
            
               Pembrooke
               This if you graunt, were all vnto your good:
               For ſimple people muſe you keepe him cloſe.
            
            
               Iohn
               Your words haue ſearcht the center of my thoughts,
               
                  
Confirming warrant of your loyalties,
               Diſmiſſe your couuſell, ſway my ſtate,
               Let John doo nothing but by your conſents.
               Why how now Philip, what extaſie is this?
               Why caſts thou vp thy eyes to heauen ſo?
            
            There the fiue Moones appeare.
            
               Bastard
               See, ſee my Lord ſtrange apparitions.
               Glauncing mine eye to ſee the Diadem
               Placte by the Biſhops on your Highnes head,
               From foorth a gloomie cloude, which curtaine like
               Diſplaide it ſelfe, I ſodainly eſpied
               Fiue Moones reflecting, as you ſée them now:
               Euen in the moment that the Crowne was placte
               Gan they appeare, holding the courſe you ſee.
            
            
               Iohn
               What might portend theſe apparitions,
               Vnvſuall ſignes, forerunners of euent,
               Preſagers of ſtrange terror to the world:
               Beleeue me Lords the obiect feares me much.
               
                  Philip thou toldſt me of me of Wizzard late,
               Fetch in the man to deſcant of this ſhow.
            
            
               Pembrooke
               The heauens frowne vpon the ſinfull earth,
               When with prodigious vnaccuſtomd ſignes
               They ſpot their ſuperficies with ſuch wonder.
            
            
               Eſſex
               Before the ruines of Ieruſalem,
               
               Such Meteors were the Enſignes of his wrath
               That haſtned to deſtroy the faultfull Towne.
            
            Enter the Baſtard with the Prophet.
            
               Iohn
               Is this the man?
            
            
               Baſtard
               It is my Lord.
            
            
               Iohn
               Prophet of Pomfret, for ſo I heare thou art,
               That calculatſt of many things to come:
               Who by a power repleate with heauenly gift
               
                  
Canſt blab the counſell of thy Makers will.
               If fam
                     •
                   be true, or truth be wrongd by thee,
               Decide in cyphering what theſe fiue Moones
               Portend this Clyme, if they preſage at all.
               Breath out thy gift, and if I liue to ſee
               Thy diuination take a true effect,
               Ile honour thee aboue all earthly men.
            
            
               Peter
               The Skie wherein theſe Moones haue reſidence,
               Preſenteth Rome the great Metropolis,
               
               Where ſits the Pope in all his holy pompe.
               Fowre of the Moones preſent fowre Prouinces,
               
                  To wit, Spaine, Denmarke, Germanie, and Fraunce,
               That beare the yoke of proud commaunding Rome,
               
               And ſtand in feare to tempt the Prelates curſe.
               The ſmalleſt Moone that whirles about the reſt,
               Impatient of the place he holds with them,
               Doth figure foorth this Iland Albion,
               
               Who gins to ſcorne the Sea and State of Rome,
               
               And ſeekes to ſhun the Edicts of the Pope:
               This ſhowes the heauen, and this I doo auerre
               Is figured in theſe apparitions.
            
            
               Iohn
               Why then it ſeemes the heauens ſmile on vs,
               Giuing applauſe for leauing of the Pope.
               But for they chaunce in our Meridian,
               Doo they effect no priuate growing ill
               To be inflicted on vs in this Clyme?
            
            
               Peter
               The Moones effect no more than what I ſaid:
               But on ſome other knowledge that I haue
               By my preſcience, ere Aſcenſion day
               Haue brought the Sunne vnto his vſuall height,
               Of Crowne, Eſtate, and Royall dignitie,
               Thou ſhalt be cleane diſpoyld and diſpoſſeſt.
            
            
               Iohn
               Falſe Dreamer, periſh with thy witched newes,
               Villaine thou woundſt me with thy fallacies:
               If it be true, dye for thy tidings price;
               If falſe, for fearing me with vaine ſuppoſe:
               
                  
Hence with the Witch, hells damned ſecretarie.
               Lock him vp ſure: for by my faith I ſweare,
               True or not true, the Wizzard ſhall not liue.
               Before Aſcenſion day: who ſhould be cauſe hereof?
               Cut off the cauſe and then the effect will dye.
               Tut, tut, my mercie ſerues to maime my ſelfe,
               The roote doth liue, from whence theſe thornes ſpring vp,
               I and my promiſe paſt for his deliury:
               Frowne friends, faile faith, the diuell goe withall,
               The brat ſhall dye, that terrifies me thus.
               
                  Pembrooke and Eſſex I recall my graunt,
               I will not buy your fauours with my feare:
               Nay murmur not, my will is law enough,
               I loue you well, but if I loude you better,
               I would not buy it with my diſcontent.
               Enter Hubert.
               
               How now, what newes with thee.
            
            
               Hubert
               According to your Highnes ſtrickt commaund
               Yong Arthurs eyes are blinded and extinct.
            
            
               John
               Why ſo, then he may feele the crowne, but neuer ſée it.
            
            
               Hubert
               Nor ſee nor féele, for of the extreame paine,
               Within one hower gaue he vp the Ghoſt.
            
            
               John
               What is he dead?
            
            
               Hubert
               He is my Lord.
            
            
               Iohn
               Then with him dye my cares.
            
            
               Eſſex
               Now ioy betide thy ſoule.
            
            
               Pembrooke
               And heauens reuenge thy death.
            
            
               Eſſex
               What haue you done my Lord? Was euer heard
               A deede of more inhumane conſequence?
               Your foes will curſe, your friends will crie reuenge.
               Vnkindly rage more rough than Northern winde,
               To chip the beautie of ſo ſweete a flower.
               What hope in vs for mercie on a fault,
               When kinſman dyes without impeach of cauſe,
               As you haue done, ſo come to chéere you with,
               The guilt ſhall neuer be caſt me in my teeth.
            
            Exeunt.
            
               
               Iohn
               And are you gone? The diuell be your guide:
               Proud Rebels as you are to braue me ſo:
               Saucie, vnciuill, checkers of my will.
               Your tongues giue edge vnto the fatall knife:
               That ſhall haue paſſage through your traitrous throats.
               But huſht, breath not buggs words to ſoone abroad,
               Leaſt time preuent the iſſue of thy reach.
               
                  Arthur is dead, I there the corzie growes:
               But while he liude, the danger was the more;
               His death hath freed me from a thouſand feares,
               But it hath purchaſt me ten times ten thouſand foes.
               Why all is one, ſuch luck ſhall haunt his game,
               To whome the diuell owes an open ſhame:
               His life a foe that leueld at my crowne,
               His death a frame to pull my building downe.
               My thoughts harpt ſtill on quiet by his end,
               Who liuing aymed ſhrowdly at my roome:
               But to preuent that plea twice was I crownd,
               Twice did my ſubiects ſweare me fealtie,
               And in my conſcience loude me as their liege,
               In whoſe defence they would haue pawnd their liues.
               But now they ſhun me as a Serpents ſting,
               A tragick Tyrant ſterne and pitiles,
               And not a title followes after Iohn.
               
               But Butcher, bloudſucker and murtherer,
               What Planet gouernde my natiuitie,
               To bode me ſoueraigne types of high eſtate,
               So interlacte with helliſh diſcontent,
               Wherein fell furie hath no intereſt.
               Curſt be the Crowne chiefe author of my care,
               Nay curſt my will that made the Crowne my care:
               Curſt be my birthday, curſt ten times the wombe
               That yeelded me aliue into the world.
               Art thou there villaine, Furies haunt thee ſtill,
               For killing him whom all the world laments.
            
            
               
               Hubert
               Why heres my Lord your Highnes hand & ſcale,
               Charging on liues regard to doo the deede.
            
            
               John
               Ah dull conceipted peazant knowſt thou not,
               It was a damned execrable deede:
               Showſt me a ſeale? Oh villaine, both our ſoules
               Haue ſolde their freedome to the thrall of hell,
               Vnder the warrant of that curſed ſeale.
               Hence villaine, hang thy ſelfe, and ſay in hell
               That I am comming for a kingdome there.
            
            
               Hubert
               My Lord attend the happie tale I tell,
               For heauens health ſend Sathan packing hence
               That inſtigates your Highnes to deſpaire.
               If Arthurs death be diſmall to be heard,
               Bandie the newes for rumors of vntruth:
               He liues my Lord the ſweeteſt youth aliue,
               In health, with eyſight, not a haire amiſſe.
               This hart tooke vigor from this forward hand,
               Making it weake to execute your charge.
            
            
               Iohn
               What liues he? Then ſweete hope come home agen,
               Chaſe hence deſp
                     •
                  ire, the purueyer for hell.
               Hye Hubert, tell theſe tidings to my Lords
               That throb in paſſions for yong Arthurs death:
               Hence Hubert, ſtay not till thou haſt reueald
               The wiſhed newes of Arthurs happy health.
               I goe my ſelfe, the ioyfulſt man aliue
               To ſtorie out this new ſuppoſed crime.
            
            Exeunt.
            The ende of the firſt part.
            
         
      
   