
      
         
            
            
            THE EAGLE AND THE BODY; DESCRIBED IN ONE SERMON PREACHED BEFORE QVEENE ELIZABETH of precious memorie, in Lent. Anno 1601.
            By WILLIAM BARLOVV Doctor of Diuinitie, now Biſhop of Lincolne, Newly called for, and ſet foorth.
            
               IOB. 39. 32.
               Aquila in arduis ponit nidum ſuum, vbicun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Cadauer fuerit ſtatim adeſt.
            
            LONDON Printed for MATTHEVV LAVV, and are to be ſold at his Shop in Pauls Church-yard, neere vnto Saint Auſtines Gate, at the Signe of the Foxe. 1609.
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE EAGLE AND THE BODY.
            
               LVKE 17. 37.
               
                  
                     He ſaid vnto them, VVhereſoeuer the Body is, thether will the Eagles be gathered together.
               
            
            
               WHich words may bee handled, either as a Parable IN Scripture, or as a Text OF Scripture; as it is a Prouerbe at randome applied, the vſe is manifold & generally Morall: as it is a text, ioyned to the Precedents, the doctrine is

comfortable and properly Spirituall. If I intended the firſt, I might enter that common place out of Seneca and Solomon, that varietie of obiects diſcouer the Diuerſitie of Natures, not onely in Beaſts led by fancie; as in the ſame field the Bee ſucking the Flower, the Swine turning vp the Root, the Bird knapping the Seed, the Goat cropping the Herbe, the Kine plucking the Graſſe: To keepe the word of this Text, at the ſame Carkaſſe, the Eagle ſeizing vppon the whole, the Rauen digging at the Eyes, the Glead dragging at the Entrailes; but alſo in Men ouer-awed by affectiō, the bootie of Profite, or Pleaſure, or Honour alluring Them, as they are ſeuerally diſpoſed. So might I, withall, ſurview all Places, where the deſire of theſe make the concourſe moſt frequent. And thus begin with the Court, a full Bodie, the fatneſſe and marrow wherof, hath fetcht many Eagles from all corners; in ſo much, that Prouerb hath begotten Prouerb, No fiſhing to the Sea, No ſeruice to the Court: becauſe no

bootie ſo gainefull, no gaine ſo eaſie, no office ſo affected, as thoſe of this Place. Which I ſpeake not out of enuie of their deſire, but with prayer for a bleſsing on the Royall Foundreſse, and onely to ſhewe how it doth moralize this Prouerbe, That where the BODY is, the EAGLES will RESORT After that, wee might behold the Church in this land; THAT Body ſomtime plethorical & goodly, though now (with the Prophet)Eſay 24. 16. it may truely cry, My leanneſſe, my leanneſſe; ſo long it hath beene a Prey to the Eagles of the Epicene gender, both Hees, & Shees, that it is become 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                not 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , rather an Anatomie of Bones, then a Bodie of Subſtance: a true ſpeech, but perhaps too bitter, and therefore I leaue it, and onely preſent it, as fulfilling this Adage, That where the BODY is, the EAGLES will FLOCK. And from thence wee might paſſe, to the Conſiſtories and Courts of both Lawes; and ſee, how many Eagles haue lofted their Ayries for themſelues and their yong ones, with the gobbets and morſels pluckt and

carried from thoſe Bodies; the Fowles not ſo greedily preying vpon Abrahams diuidedGen. 15. 11. fleſh; nor the Flies more buſily ſuckingEccleſ. 10. 1 the Apothecaries ointment, then the fatnes of thoſe Bodies (the Gaines by thoſe Pleas) hath allured Students and Agents to that profeſsion and practiſe. And thus might I goe on in this veine of diſcourſe, tartly in the particulars, and yet pleaſingly for the varietie; becauſe nothing now a dayes pleaſeth more, then that which the French-men call Eſcriture picquante, Satyricall Inuectiues, both in Pulpits, and Pamphlets. Nor need I conteine my ſelfe within the Land, but might paſſe the Seas to Rome, the onely Body for our malecontented Oſprayes to prey vpon, Immunities to warrant ſinne, Indulgences to remit ſinne, Iubilees for libertie, Libels of contumely, Exemptions from loialtie, Pretence of Conſcience, Promiſes of preferment, Faculties for Treaſons and Murthers of the Lords annointed, Facilities to climbe heauen, not by Iaakobs ladder (the grace of Chriſt) but

by merit of Saints, and ſupererogation of workes: that BODIE, theſe OFFALS haue allured many of this NATION, with Noahs Crow, to flie out of the Ark without any mind of Returne at leaſt without any good mind if they returne: which iuſtifies this Morall of our Sauiour, Ʋbi CORPVS, Ibi AQVILAE. But that ſenſe I leaue, and, (which is a Prouerbe in Philo) I come a Chaldoeo ad Philoſophum, from Vultures to Eagles, from worldlings to Saints, from the Fleſh to the Spirit: and handle it as a Context, depending on the former words: obſeruing firſt, in DIXIT, the wiſedome and cuſtome of our Sauiour; who, when he hath preached a doctrine of terror, doth preſently ſalue it with a Lenitiue of cōfort: For the Diſciples being affrighted with that thundring threat, of the ſignes in Heauen, and warres on earth: of Ieruſalems ruines, and the generall iudgement: and asking what ſhould become of them, in this deſtruction of all things at the worlds end, and in this diſtraction of mens hearts being at their wits end? Hee

tels them, that while ſome are at the Mill making prouiſion for the belly: others in bed at their eaſe and in ſecuritie: others feaſting, at their ſports and iollitie: others in the field, forraging for neceſsity: the affections of his choſen ſhall reſt only vpon him; meditating on his paſsion, imploring his helpe, apprehending his mercies, deſiring the ſight, and reioycing in the fruition of his preſence: For where the BODY is, thether will the EAGLES be gathered together. And this is the meaning of our Sauior in theſe words; which being Foure principall, in them we may view, Firſt, the Booty which is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , a ſubſtantiall Body, no imaginarie ſhadow; for Eagles ſtoope not to flies, much leſſe to flying ſhadowes; and as Saint Matthew
               Matt 24. 28. hath it 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                a DEAD Body, for Eagles ſeize not vpon Liue men. Secondly, Eagles not Rauens, the dignitie of the Foules, Birdes Royall. Thirdly, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , their qualitie and affection, ſharpe of ſent, and ſharpe ſet, eſpying the prey a farre off, and haſting thereto a maine. Fourthly, Whereſoeuer,
               
the place indefinite, which makes the affection infinite; for where there is no certaine place, the eager appetite will ſearch euery place. So that the Body is Chriſt, and he crucified; the Eagles the Elect, and they ſanctified: their flocking, their affection and that eagerly ſharpned; the Place, his Reſidence and that vnlimited: Of theſe in their order.
            Whereof that I may ſpeake to Gods glory and your inſtruction, Let vs humble our ſelues in Prayer &c.
            The Queſtion being propounded by a1. BODY. learned Deacon to a Reuerend Biſhop, why,Iſidor. Peluſi
                     •
                  t. in One and the ſame Chapter our Sauiour called the word of the Kingdom (the Goſpell preached) by the name of SEEDE; andMat. 13. 19. likewiſe doth in title the children of the kingdome (Gods elect) by the name alſo of SEEDE? It is anſwered by the ſame Father,Ver. 38. briefely and ſoundly, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , becauſe the Word effectually receiued, as it were by tranſ-elementation, doth change the hearts of men into the

nature of it ſelfe; and makes them as holy in affection, as it ſelfe is holy by inſpiration. The like queſtion being moued, why our Sauiour in this place ſhould perſonally call himſelfe the BODIE, whereas the Church elſewhere is called his Body? an anſwere ſemblable may be truely ſhaped; it is by reaſon of that mutual Coaleſcence between him and his Elect; they not onely being His generation in whom they liue and haue their
               Act. 17. 28. 
               being, but by ſpirituall regeneration, being made partakers of the very diuine nature; not2. Pet. 1. 4. tranſitiuely with any diminution in him,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               diſtributiuely, as the Fire in the forge heateth the yron without loſſe to it ſelfe (which is the reſemblance of S. Baſil)Baſil. or as a Scale-ring imprinteth the forme vpon diuers things, it ſelfe remaining as it was, (which is Philo his compariſon) orPhilo. as ten thouſand Torches may receiue flame from a fountaine of fire, and this no way diminiſhed (which is the Simile by Chryſoſtome) or as the ſpirit of Moſes diuided betweeneChryſoſt. Num. 11. 16. 17 the ſeauenty two Elders, himſelfe

hauing neuer a whit the leſſe, which Origen
               Origen. applies to this purpoſe; Chriſt being the very Body and ſubſtance of all thoſe graces and vertues, which in the Saints of God are but accidentall qualities: for in HIM dwelleth the FVLNES of the God-head BODILY, and from that FVLNES we all haue receiued
               Col. 2. 9. Ioh. 1. 14. 
               grace for grace. Therfore to this PREY the Elect do flie, & vpon this BODY they feed; both vt corpus carnis, as a Body INCARNATE; & vt Corpus mortis, as a Body CRVCIFIED; and vt Corpus Gloriae, as in heauen GLORIFIED. From the firſt they receiue a trebleLuc. 10. 22. vertue. jo. Their Wiſedome and Knowledge, for no man knoweth the Father but the Sonne, and HE to whom the Sonne will reueale him. The great Beau-Clerkes of Diuinitie (the Doctors of the Church) by the traditions of antiquitie, & the definitions of Councels, haue ſhewed themſelues cunning in finding out ſome rich and deepe veynes, and haue made both themſelues and others very wealthy, with the Ingots and wedges of this gold, as Plato and Salomon call the knowledge of arts in all kind: but

in THIS Bodie (that is, in Chriſt) were the whole hidden mines, and the heaped treaſures themſelues of all wiſdome and knowledge.
               Col. 2. 3. His enemies confeſt it, neuer man ſpake as this man doth: And Saint Paul accompts allIoh. 7. 46. his fore-learning & skill (though very accurate) in reſpect therof, to be but loſſe and doung; and the Oracle from heauen twiſe,Phil. 3. 8. Firſt, in the riuer Iordan, and againe onMat. 3. &. 17. mount Tab
                     •
                  r inioynes an Audite EVM, as leauing all other, to Heare HIM: For, if an Angell frō 
               Heauen preach any OTHER doctrine
               Gal. 1. 8. 
               then HE, Let him be accurſed. If ſome preferre Philoſophie, as THAT wiſdome toClem. Alex. ſaluation, we note it for their Hereſie. If others match the foure Councels with theGreg. mag. foure Euangeliſts, we tell them it is Blaſphemie. If Rome obiect Traditions vnwritten, wee accuſe them of Vncertainty. If any come with Ecce hic, to tell vs that here, or there isVer. 21. hic.
                
               Christ, we beleeue him not, but take him to be either larua Chriſti, a falſe Chriſt, orMat. 24. 24. 
               hoſtis Chriſti, a meere Antichriſt: Secondly, we mainteine, that the multiplied skill of the beſt humane knowledge, is but a ſhaddow

               compared to this BODIE; yea the chiefe diuine knowledge to bee no other then a ſhaddow deriued from this BODY: And therefore conclude againſt them all with the Diſciples, Domine ad quem ibimus? Lord
               Ioh. 6. 68 WHETHER ſhall wee goe? THOV haſt the words of eternall life. And thus the EAGLES finding in themſelues ſcientiam not ſufficientiam (ſaith S. Bernard) prey vpon HIM,1. Cor. 1. 30. as he is factus ſapientia, made wiſedome vnto vs, and ſay with Iehoſaphat, Cum ignorauerimus ad te leuamus oculos, when our owne skill faileth vs wee haue reſort to THEE. 2. From IT they haue their true Righteouſneſse; becauſe the iuſtice which they haue by nature, is but iuſtitia Gentiliū, not ſanctified by faith; what they have by the law, is iuſtitia Phariſaeorum, vnprofitable, becauſeMat. 5. 20. vnpoſsible to be performed▪ yea, that which they haue by grace, is but iustitia viatorum
               Phil. 3. 12. inchoate and imperfect, before it be made vp with HIS Obedience imputed; For of HIM it was ſaid, My righteous ſeruant
               Eſa. 53. 11. 
               ſhall iustifie many. And the precept for that, is, Credite in EVM, Beleeue on HIM whichRom. 4. 5.
                  
iustifieth the vngodly.
            
            Where, if the French hereticke in Saint Bernard, or the Romaniſts his Proctors inBern. in Epist. 
               that Plea, ſhall obiect, IVSTICIA ſit CVIVS eſt, quid ad te? the righteouſneſſe is Chriſts, whats that to thee? anſwere him with that Father, Sit etiam CVLPA CVIVS eſt, quid ad me; the FAVLT was Adams alſo, whats THAT to ME? Match them therfore together, traducta culpa, indulta iuſticia, as Sinne is mine by propagation, ſo righteouſnes is mine by imputation. Peccatum in ſemine, iuſtitia in ſanguine; Adam deriueth ſinne by nature to my condemnation, Christ bringes life by his obedience to my iuſtification. Yea rather, there is no match betweene them; for if by the OFFENCE of one, many be made ſinners, much more by the OBEDIENCE of one ſhall many be made righteous, ſaith the Apoſtle:
               Rom. 5. 19. 1. Iohn 2. 1. eſpecially if he be THAT One, Ieſus the iuſt; Sit efficacior cauſa, vbi potior natura; HIS nature was more diuine then Adams, HIS power therefore ſhould be more effectuall. For which cauſe, the Apoſtle calls it 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               Rom 5. 17.
               
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the SVPER-ABVNDANCE of his grace; and ſo to IT the Eagles flie, and hungring after Righteouſnes, ſeize vpon HIM as heMatth. 5. 6. Ier. 23. 6. is Iehouah Iustitia noſtra, the Lord OVR righteouſnes: and ſay, both with Saint Bernard,
               Bern. 
               de TE Domine ſuppleo, quod minus habeo in me, that which we want in our ſelues, Lord we ſupply from thee; and with Dauid alſo, Domine memorabor iuſtitiae TVAE SOLIVS,Pſal. 70. 16. 
               Lord we will make mention of THY righteouſnes ONELY. Laſtly, from it they take the Sanctitie of their liues deportment, for in I
                  •
               M there was no ſinne, nor guile in his
               Eſa. 53. 9. 1. Pet. 2. 22. 
               mouth, wheras in all other men there is corruption: in the beſt men there is defection: yea, euen in his Angels, vnfaithfulneſſe hath beene found: the beſt mens actions beingIob 15. 15. like Salomons gold-worke, a Lilly vpon a
               1. Reg. 7. 19. 
               Piller, and a Lilly vpon a Piller, rare and few: and therefore Saint Paul framing patterns to be followed, when he propounds1. Cor. 11. 1. 
               himſelf, be ye Imitatores MEI, his command for imitation hath his Sicut of limitation ſo FARRE as I am of CHRIST. But elſewhere,

when he wils them to be imitatores
               Epheſ. 5. 1. 2. DEI, he reſtraines not that, but walke in loue (ſaith he) as Chriſt loued you: who is not, as the holieſt men [Sanctus] holy in themſelues, but [Sanctificans] making others holy: ſo him ſelfe ſayth, for their ſakes SANCTIFIE I my ſelfe, that they alſo may be SANCTIFIED.Ioh. 17. 19. Therefore the precept for that is by the Apoſtle, Ʋidete EVM, Looke vpon HIM,Heb. 12. 2. who neither contracted ſin by pollution, nor cōmitted any ſin by actuall tranſgreſsion. So that the Eagles herein reſort to him,
               Ioh. 8. 46. as he is, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that HOLY thing; & as S.Luc. 1. 35. 
               Peter counſelleth, frame their holynes, ſecundum eum, qui vocauit, Sanctum, according1. Pet. 1. 15. to his Sanctity, which, being himſelfe holy, called them ſo to be. And all this they receiue from THIS Body, as he was Corpus Carnis, in his fleſh conuerſing in the world. But yet, ſaith S. Bernard, when I haue fed vpon him, calling vnto him forBern. the firſt, that is, knowledge and wiſedome, with the Prophet Dauid, lighten thou mine
               Pſal. 119. 18. 
               eyes that I may ſee the wonders of thy law, &
               
SAPIENS ſum, and I become WISE: for the Second, requeſted him with the ſame Prophet, not to remember the Sinnes of my
               Pſal. 25. 7. 
               youth, but recorde his mercies, & IVSTVS ſum, and ſo I am IVSTIFIED: for the laſt, prayed him to guid me in the way of Eternity,
               Pſal. 139. 24. 
               & ſic SANCTVS ſum, and ſo I become holy: notwithſtanding all this, ſaith he, my wiſedome, by his inſtruction; my righteouſnes by his imputation; my ſanctity by his example and direction; yet, niſi SANGVIS eius interpellet pro me, ſaluus non ſum, vnleſſe this Corpus proue Cadauer, and this Body of FLESH, had beene a Body of DEATH, ſaued I could not be: in illa inſtituit, in hac reſtituit, ſaith the ſame Father
               Bern. elſewhere. For vita in SANGVINE, ſurely, our ſubſtance and ſuſtenance is from his DEATH; as Sampſon was fed and refreſht by the DEAD Lion. For what can bee ſoIud. 14. 9. ſtrong to worke Death, which is not weakened by Chriſts DEATH? The wrathProu. 16. 14. of a Prince is the Meſſenger of death, ſaith Solomon; and wee were borne filii irae, the

ſonnes of his wrath, by whome Princes raigne. Seize we therefore vpon this Body; taſte wee and ſee how gratious the Lord is;
               Pſal. 34. 8. Rom. 5. 10. and there we ſhall finde God and man reconciled by his death.
            
            
               The wages of ſinne is death, and in ſinne the beſt of vs are conceiued. Search thereforeRom. 6. 23. the VVOVNDES of this Body, and beholdPſal. 51, 5. thy Cure in his gaſhes; for by his
               Eſa 53. 5. STRIPES are we healed. Say not with Cain, his indignation is more thē can be ſatisfied; my ſinnes greater then can be remitted: ſtirGen. 4. 13 not from this Body, but looke into the HOLE of his ſide pearced, and ſee his heart bleeding in compaſſion of thine infirmities;Heb. 2. 14. 18 and feele his bowels melting at thy repentance. The ſauour of this DEAD Bodie drawes all the Eagles vnto it, cum exaltatus
               Ioh. 12. 32. 
               fuero, &c. When I ſhall be LIFTED vp, I ſhall draw all men vnto me. This is the Trumpe of our profeſsion, we REACH Christ and
               1. Cor. 1. 23. 
               him CRVCIFIED; the triumph of our conſolation, God forbid, we ſhould reioyce in anie
               Gal. 6. 14. 
               thing but in the CROSSE of Chriſt; The ſubſtance
               
of our Sacraments, we are Baptized intoRom. 6. 3. his Death; and as the Iewes, in their Paſseouer did eate their Lambe, aſſum, SLAINE and roſted: ſo in the Euchariſt, we eat this Body, mortuum & paſſum DEAD and CRVCIFIED. And thus the Eagles ſeed on him, as he is factus Redemptio, made vnto1. Cor. 1. 30. vs Redemption; and ſay (with S. Bernard)Bern. 
               quod ex me mihi deeſt vſurpo mihi ex viſceribus Domini, the defects in our ſelues, the woundes of our Lord God ſhall make good. But as the Angels moued the queſtion, why
               Luk. 24. 5. 
               ſeeke we the liuing among the DEAD? hee is not heere but is RISEN: true, for at it was impoſsible that hee ſhould bee holden ofAct. 2. 
                     •
                  4. 
               Death, ſo ſhould it haue beene vncomfortable to vs; becauſe, if in this life onely the hope were in Christ, of all men the beſt men ſhould be
               1. Cor. 15. 19. 
               moſt miſerable. Their ſtate no better then the Iſraelites deliuerance by Moſes, freedom from the Egyptian ſlauery, but no poſſeſsion in the land of Canaan; a redemption from Hell, but no inheritance in the Heauens. And therefore as Corpus mortis, his crucified Bodie had an Oportet a neceſsity adioyned,

               thus it muſt be: ſo Corpus Gloriae, asLuc. 24. 26. Saint Paul cals it, his GLORIFIED body hadPhil. 3. 2
                     •
                  . the Expedit, a neceſſary conuenience ſo toIohn 16. 7. be. By his Bodie INCARNATE and DEAD, Parauit nos manſioni, he made vs fit for that
               Iohn 14. 2. manſion; but by the laſt, parauit manſionem nobis, hee prepared that manſion for vs.
               Auguſt. Cōcerning the firſt, he died ſaith S. Auguſt. vt patiamur, to make vs patient if we ſuffer for him: by the laſt, he excites our hope, vt potiamur, that wee ſhall alſo reigne with him. Therefore, though he be placed in the heauens, without returne till the finall iudgement; yet the Eagles (his Elect) ſeize euen there vpon him by their Praiers, asRom. 8. 34. their Interceſsor; accompting mediation by Saints (as by fauourites to the Prince)Amb. in Rom. with Saint Ambroſe, a courtly reuerence, no celeſtiall courteſie, no canonicall cuſtome; acknowledging him, with S. Iohn
               1. Iohn 2. 1. 2. to be the ONELY maſter of requeſts: the very preſenting of his man-hood glorified, vnto his Father, being the ſole interpellation for vs; and no other Prayers, either preuailing with God or auailing vs, but thoſe

that are concluded per Chriſtum Dominum
               Ioh. 16. 23. 
               noſtrum, by Chriſt Ieſus our Lord. Secondly, they reſort by hope; that as he tooke vpon him our Bodie, and after that was taken vp to the right hand of his Father: ſo,1. Cor. 15. 42. though our Bodies corrupted prooue Eſca vermium, and buried, bee ſemen terrae; yet wee hope that he will chaunge our vile
               Phil. 3. 21. 
               bodies, & make them like to his GLORIOVS body. And ſo cōclude with S. Paul, We know that when this domus è luto, this Tabernacle of earth is mouldred away, we haue ſtructurā in Coelo, a building eternall & euerlaſting in the Heauens: and thus much for this BODY. The ſumme whereof is breefely, that of2. Cor. 3. 5. the Apoſtle, that of our ſelues we haue no ſufficiency, but what we haue, it is of CHRIST. All knowledge without him, but Prudentia carnis,
               Rom. 8. 7. either ignorance or vanity; al righteouſnes not his, pollutio panni, ſtaines and filth,Eſa. 64. 6. Pro. 26. 23. all holines not from him, ſcoria obducta, ſinne gilded, ciuility not Chriſtianity: any challenge by merit, a preſumptuous arrogancy, atchieuement of heauen, an impoſsibility: All the Sacrifices before him Vmbra praecedens,
               Heb. 10. 1.
               
a ſhadow vſhering this Body: all after him Vmbraſequens, reſemblances therof: remembrances gratulatory, not oblations propitiatorie. Briefely, Inuocation of any beſides him, a ſacrilegious blaſphemy. The concluſion, S. Bernards exclamation, quis
               Bern. 
               non poſt illum, ad illum libenter, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   alacriter currat? What is he that will not cheerefully flie vnto him? qui & ab errore liberat, who rectifieth our errors in opinion, and cleereth our ignorance by his doctrine▪ errata diſsimulat, couereth the ſinnes of our life with his righteouſnes: merita viuendo tradit, makes vs vertuous by his example: praemia moriendo conquirit, ſedendo largitur, purchaſed rewardes for vs when he ſuffered, and giues them vnto vs now that he is glorified? But the ſwiftneſſe both of the time, and theſe Fowles carieth vs to the ſecond parte, namely, the Eagles. To trace Plinie or Aelian
               2. Eagles. for the varietie of Eagles were a courſe eaſie, but a diſcourſe tedious: to follow the Allegoriſts in moralizing their qualities, were, as S. Baſil ſaith, to make an Eagle noBaſil. 
               Foule, nor to giue the Scripture the true

               ſenſe: For ſo might I touch great-men, who, with Pyrrhus; deſire to bee called, and ſhow themſelues to be Eagles. Some, truſting to the ſtrength and length of their winges, popularly beating the ayre, pleaſing themſelues with their ſoaring ambition, Flying ſo high out of compaſſe, till finally they flie themſelues out of breath. Others, with the ſharpeneſse of their Tallents griping their Tenants with inexorable oppreſsion in their contracts; and plucking out the very heart of their Creditors by an execrable defalcation of their debts. Others, which is the compariſon of Theophraſtus chucking and crying ouer the prey which they haue found dead (not ſlaine by themſelues) ſo glorying in their nobility, not purchaſed by their vertue, but traduced by birth. But leauing theſe moralized EAGLES; the two principall & moſt proper qualities of theſe Fowles; are their LOFTIE FLIGHT and their SHARPE SIGHT;Iob. 39. 32. which the holy man Iob obſerueth (to which place; I doubt not but our Sauiour alludeth.) So that, without controuerſie
               
or violence, the Fowle heere reſembleth the Soule of man: for, as among all the Birds, to the EAGLE is aſcribed maximus honos, & maxima vis; ſo the Soule within vs, is the part more honourable, but the force therof moſt admirable. Firſt, for the lofty flight, that expreſſeth the mind of euery man, as he is a reaſonable creature, much more as hee is a regenerate Chriſtian. For the Soule of man, by the confeſsion euen of Ariſtotle, being 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , an infuſion celeſtiall, no naturall traduction; for that cauſe by Philo,
               Philo. called Caeli apoſpaſma, a very arrachment or a cantle pulled from the heauenly ſubſtance, cannot conteine it ſelfe within this Lumpe of fleſh; therfore, as the beams of the ſunne, though they touch the earth, and giue life to theſe lower creatures, yet are ſtill in the body of the Sunne, from whence they are darted: ſo the ſoule, though it dwell and be confined (as that Iew ſpeaketh) either within the filme of the braine, or in the heart of theſe our bodies, and conuerſeth with the ſenſes; yet haeret origini ſuae, ſaith Seneca, it ſtill aſpireth vpward,Seneca.
               
& there will haue her being, whence ſhee hath her beginning. Whereupon the Philoſopher Heraclite, and Clemens Alexandrinus the diuine, inferre an excellent poſition; that anima ſicca eſt ſapientiſsima, that the ſoule, which, being in the bodie, is not ſurbated with trauelling cares, nor ſurfeitted with exceſsiue riot, either ſolid or liquid, is more fit for diuine contemplation; as the drie exhalation is ſooner carried into the higher Region, then the moiſt vapour. And this meant Plato by his anima alata in his Phaedrus, where hee giueth winges to the ſoule, by which the vnderſtanding ſoareth vp ad diuinum verum, to the chiefeſt trueth, and the will not reſting but in diuino bono, in the chiefeſt good. Wherefore the Stoikes haue placed their Philoſophers, ex ſuperiori loco ad homines, ex aequo ad Deos; higher then men, equally with their Gods: ſignifying therby, that they are, either as Gods among men, or rather as men liuing, on earth, the life of Gods; not affrighted with terror; not houen with aduancements; not deiected with wants; not captiuated to paſsions. If then

the mind of their contemplating Philoſopher, a naturall man, doth thus ſurmount; much more the minde of true Chriſtians (poſſeſt with the Spirit of God) enlightning the vnderſtanding; working vpon the will; ſanctifying the affections; by the power whereof, conſedere nos fecit (ſaith the Apoſtle)Ephe. 2. 6. 
               hee hath made vs ſit in heauenly places: where being mounted ſuper altitudines terrae (as Eſay ſpeaketh) aboue all the loftie towers
               Eſai. 58. 14. 
               of the earth; from thence ſaith Chryſoſt.
               Chryſoſt. 
               Cuncta tanquam muſcas vident, like true Eagles they ouer-looke all the allurements of the world, as Gnats and Flies. There hee beholds the valley of Baca, and there hee ouerlookesPſal. 84. 6. Pſal. 68. 15. the hilles of Baſan; the lower and higher places of the earth, ſaith Gregorie; in the firſt he deſcrieth loſſes, contumelies,
               Greg. in moral. 
               pouertie, baſeneſſe; and thoſe, euen the moſt worldly minded, will flie ouer and tread vpon: on the other, the glory of Soueraigntie; ſublimitie of honors; blandiſhment of ſubjects; confluence of wealth; profit by gaine; high in the view, great in the deſire of men, not yet led by the ſpirit: All which, to this Eagle
               Rom. 8. 14.
               
thus lifted vp aboue theſe hils, and his heart faſtned where this BODIE is, in thePſal. 121. 1. 
               Ioyes of Heauen; Lord, ſaith Saint Gregorie,
               Greg. 
               quàm abiecta ſint cernitur quae alta vide bantur, how baſe & meane do they appeare to the iudgement reformed, which before appeared lofty in the imagination corrupted? Then heIob. 28. 1. 2. accompts the gold of Ophir but Ilia terrae the entrals and garbage of the earth, no food for Eagles to ſeize vpon: the pleaſures of the world, but lilia terrae, lillies of the field, more delectable in ſhow then durable for continuance; no stay for Eagles to perch vpon: Titles of Honour, but folia venti, the leaues of vanitie; a gnathonicall blaſt, the breath of the chaps, a fleſhly paire of bellowes (as the Philoſopher tearms them) too weake an ayre to carry vp an Eagle. Briefly, all the allectiues vnder the heauens, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               Nazian. ſaith Nazian: compared to this one BOOTIE, are vnto him (as the Apoſtle accompts them) Damnum & ſtercora, loſſePhil. 3. 7. and dounge; as the holy Preacher, fumus
               Eccle. 5. 15. 
               aut funus, a vanitie or vexation; as Caeſarius in Nazianz Nugae & delirium, a folly andNazian.
               
madnes; as Chryſoſtom, a ſhadow or a dreame
               Chriſoſtom. yea, leſſe then them both; with Plato
               Plate. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , nothing and worth nothing: All the poſſeſsions and indowments of the whole world with the Prince of this world (when he ſets them out to the beſt) this Eagle may accompt a glory, but the word is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is a glory in opinion, not ſo inLuc. 4. 6. 
               deed. Therfore HE vſeth the world, as though
               1. Cor. 7. 31. 
               he vſed it not; and what ſtate ſoeuer he hath, he is therewith content. Siue vir deſideriorum,
               Phil. 4. 11. as was Job; whether he be a man fauoured of the Prince; dignified with honours, magnified for deſerts; applauded by the people: yet is he not houen vp with ſurquedry, nor ſwelleth with ambition, if thwarted in ſuits; or kept low, either by the malalent of fortune, or malice of Informers or miſconceipt of ſuperiors; yet is he not moued to diſcontentment, much leſſe to rebellion. But what the Poets faine, of Eagles laying their egges in Iupiters lap, fabulouſly; that doth he by Dauids counſellEſay. 40. 
                     
                        •
                     lt.
                truely; and, with Eſay his Eagle, flying vp to Heauen, caſts his whole burthen vpon

the Lord: hee truſteth not in Princes,
               Pſal. 55. 22. their fauour is mutable, their bodies arePſal. 146. 3. 4. corruptible; not in friends, who, like the waters of Tema, in a moyſture they ſwell, in a drought they faile: Sacrificeth not to his net relies not vpon his meanes, and policie, which often prooues either the Spiders Web, or the Cockatrice egge, a folly or aEſay. 59. 5. Iere. 49 16. deſtruction: but with Ieremies EAGLE, that builds his neaſt on high, he rouzeth himſelfe with the Prophets comfortable queſtion, whom haue I in heauen but THEE, and what is there on earth that I deſire in compariſon of THEE? And this is ſpeciale ſpecimen electorum (ſaith Gregory) the ſpeciall argumentGregory. whereby yee may know a right Eagle, the choſen child of God. This beingPhilo. proper but to One kind of men, ſaith Philo; who, with Moſes, building their TentExod. 33. 7. without the hoſt, farre from the hoſt; with Elias, being ſtript of their cloake (theſe2. Reg. 2. 13. outward and worldly impediments) ſtill hauing in their eye Maries object, that ſame vnum neceſſarium, conuerſeth withLuc. 10. 42. 
               God 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                with a mind ſequeſtred

from all earthly thoughts: And theſe are they, ſaith he, which are ſo often in Scripture called viri Dei. For there are viri terrae, men of the earth; ſuch, as with the Giants of the old Teſtament will build with the Eagles [Let vs build (ſay they) a Tower] butGen. 11. 4. it is, that they may haue a name on earth; that by an vnlimited ioyning of houſe to houſe; office to office; honour to honour; they may profeſſe themſelues of that humour in earneſt, which Saint Peter fell into by amazement: Let vs build vs HEERE a Tabernacle: an infallible note, he will not ſay of a reprobate, but certainly of a worldman, not yet regenerate: And there are Viri Coeli, as the Chaldees and naturall Philoſophers;
               Philo 
                     •
                  bi ſupr. who, in the height of their vnderſtanding, could pierce the clouds; diſcouer the motions of the heauens; the influence of the ſtarres; the proprieties of times; the impreſsions in the aire; the periods of Empires; yea, metaphyſically inquire into the nature of God himſelfe: and yet come farre ſhort of the firſt, whom he calleth Virum Dei, the man of God; whoſe mind

lift vp by the Spirit of God within him, liueth in the earth, as in terra obliuionis, in aPſal. 88. 12. land where all things are forgotten, and is as a dead man to the world, becauſe his life is hid with Chriſt in God. Therefore, asCol. 3. 3. Saint Hierom ſpeaketh, in his mundanis nolit
               Hierom. 
               eſſe perpetuus, in theſe worldly things he affects no perpetuity, becauſe the place is ABOVE, where he purpoſeth his ETERNITIE. And this is the firſt propertie of the Eagle, following the Body, euen to the very heauens: and the concluſion for it, is that of the Prophet, Beatus qui aſcenſiones in corde diſpoſuit, Bleſſed
               Pſal. 84. 5. 
               is that man who hath ſet his heart to flie VPWARD. The ſecond is the SHARPE SIGHT of the Elect; becauſe the naturall man cannot perceiue the things that be of God: For though his vnderſtanding (which Nazianz callethNazian. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the eye and lampe of reaſon) be piercing ſharpe, able to enter euen the ſecrets of nature, yea, to the deepeneſſe of Satan; yet the fartheſt Horizon it can reach, is, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , ſaith Clement, that which may be made manifeſt by demonſtration; whereas the ſpirituall man diſcerneth all

the deepe things of God, euen that moſt1 Cor. 2. 10. profound myſterie of this BODIE, God manifeſted
               1. Tim. 3. 16. 
               in the fleſh; and making it the obiect vnto the eyes of Reaſon and Faith, ſhewes the different vſe which they make thereof. Firſt, as it is Corpus Carnis; that it ſhould be conceiued in the wombe of a Virgin, without the helpe of man; heere Reaſon like Sarah laugheth, the Philoſopher ſtumbleth:Gen. 18. 12. yea the bleſsed virgin her ſelfe (at firſt) demurred with a quomodo? how can this be? Then, as Corpus mortis, that our God ſhould die, and his death giue vs life; the Iew ſtormes at the ſollie; the Grecians count it a reproch; yea, Peter himſelfe gaueMat. 16. 22. it an abſit. Then, as Corpus Gloriae, that being dead it ſhould riſe againe, euen the diſciples themſelues (not hauing as yet theLuc. 24. 11. 
               ſpirit) tooke it 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as a feigned thing. But the Eagles eye, which Philo calleth fidem oculatam, faith illuminated by the holy Ghoſt,
               Philo. in that ſtrange birth acknowledgeth a diuine miracle; in that ſhamefull death, a glorious victorie; in his returne from death, an aſſured hope of glory. And the reaſon of that

difference is giuen by Saint Auguſtine; forAuguſt. that, as the eye if it be either blind or purblind,
               Matth. 6. 
                     •
                  3. cannot perfectly diſcerne the cleereſt obiect: ſo (ſaith he) animus pollutus, or turbatus, a mind defiled with ſinne or troubled with worldly cates, Deum etiam praeſentem videre non poteſt, cannot ſee God though he were preſent with them. But, as the ſame Father writeth of the Eagle, that being aloft in the clouds, ſhee can diſcerne Sub frutice Leporem, ſub fluctibus piſcem, Vnder the ſhrubs a Hare, vnder the waues a fiſh: ſo Faith, being Eagle eyed, can with Moſes inExod. 3. 2, a bramble buſh ſee the maieſtie of God; with Abednego in the fierie Ouen ſee the preſenceDan. 3 25. of Chriſt; with Elizeus in the ſtreighteſt2. Reg. 6. 17. ſiege, an army of Angels to defend him; with Saint Paul in the heape of afflictions,Rom. 8. 18. behold a weight of glory prouided for2. Cor. 4. 17. him. And ſo much for the ſecond propertie of the Eagle, belonging onely to the Elect; the ſumme whereof is that of Hilary,
               Hilar. 
               Hoc officium fides profitetur, &c. THIS is the proper office of FAITH, to attaine that which neither wit, nor reaſon can reach vnto.

The concluſion, that prayer of the diſtreſſed Father, Lord I beleeue, helpe thou mine
               Mar. 9. 24. 
               vnbeliefe. The third followeth, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , they will flocke or be gathered together; wherein many things are worth obſeruation, if time would ſuffer. Firſt in the pr
                  •
               ae poſition 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the ioint reſort and Communion of Saints, both in their inward m
                  •
               n; for howſoeuer they bee, either triumphant in heauen, or militant on earth; or diſperst in place; or vnequall in condition; or aliens in nation; or differing in ſome cirucmſtance of opinion; yet congregabuntur, there will be among them a vnanimous coalition, aſwell1. Ioh. 3. 18. 19. mutuall betweene thēſelues, in charitable affection, as alſo in a concurrent deſire of this one BODIE, which is their head, Chriſt; profeſsing the ſame Faith; reſting vpon the ſame hope; holding the vnitie of the ſame ſpirit in the bond of peace: So, forEphe. 4. 3. their outward man alſo, euen theſe bodies which whether conſumed by fire; or ſuncke in the ſeas; or deuoured of beaſts; or rotted in their graues; or quartered (yea minſed by tyrants; yet congregabuntur, they

ſhall all be gathered in one place, and bee ioyned with the ſame Chriſt, to ſit withApoc. 2. 21. him in his Throne. Secondly, the verbe it ſelfe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , no tranſlation doth fully expreſſe it, hauing more in it then reſorting or gathering, bringing with it a violence of drawing or driuing; and that double, either paſsiue from this BODIE, the ſight & ſent therof alluring the Eagles; the power, grace, and merits of Chriſt attracting the deſire of the elect: or actiue, they inforcing themſelues to flie vnto him, notwithſtanding all reſiſtances, either outward or inward; neither height nor depth, nor life nor death, neither Angels of heauen, nor Diuels in hell, nor terror of law, nor torture of conſcience,Rom. 8. 39. can ſeparate them from this prey. Thirdly, in the moode and tenſe, [WILL BEE,] their inclination working with the attractiue of this Body. For Aquilarum haec praeda
               Chryſoſt. 
               eſt, non Graculorum, ſaith Chryſoſtom, be the Body neuer ſo full, and the Sauour neuer ſo ſtrong, Popingaies and Parrots haue no mind vnto it, but the Eagle preſently flies: the will of the Saints co-operateth with the

               grace of Chriſt: of Saints I ſay, not of men. For in the beginning of our conuerſion, and intertainment of our firſt affections vnto good, the will is not agent, for it is meerely paſsiue; but after that the heart of ſtone is made an heart of fleſh, it worketh with grace, not by the naturall power, but as prepared and ſeconded by grace. Which doctrine is grounded vpon that diſtiction of S. Paul, Gratia IN me & gratia MECVM,1 Cor. 15. 10. 
               His grace WITHIN me was not in vaine, but I laboured more then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God WITH me: and vpon the Spouſe her affection, DRAWE me, there isCant. 1. 3. the power of grace; We WILL runne after thee, there is the will cooperating therewith; for he draweth him that is willing, ſaith Chryſostome. If any reſiſt the holy Ghoſt, him hee
                  Chryſoſtome. Act. 7. 5 1. Rom. 8. 14. 
               drawes not, for as many as are LED by the ſpirit are the ſonnes of God, LED not hailed; becauſe in leading, as there is a force drawing, ſo is there a voluntary following: and the ſpirit is willing, ſaith our Sauiour, though the fleſh be
               Mat. 26. 41. 
               weake. But of thi enough. The ſumme whereof is, that of the Philoſopher, animus

eſt vbi amat non vbi animat, the Soule is where it loueth, not where it liueth: euen that of our Sauiour, where the treaſure is, there will the
               Matth. 6. 21. 
               heart be alſo. The Soules of Gods children, whether conioyned with the body, affectionately conuerſing with God that gaue them; for Our conuerſation is in HEAVEN: or ſeparated
               Phil 3. 19. from the body, actually returning vnto God, who firſt imbreathed them; ſtill they are with him, either heere by affection,
               Eccle. 12. 7. or there by fruition. The laſt word followeth, the place [WHERESOEVER.] In my bed I ſought him, ſaith the Spouſe, but found him not
               Cant. 3. 1. 2. 3. 
               I ſearched the ſtreets for him whom I ſo loued, I ſought him but got him not; I met with the watchmen, and inquired of them for my beloued, I asked but they told me not: In the end, hauing found him, I tooke hold on him, and left him not. This is that which I ſayd in the beginning that where it knowes no certain place, the EGAR APPETITE will ſearch EVERY place. WHERESOEVER he is, his choſen will Flocke vnto him, in his word they beleeue him, in Baptiſme they indue him, in the Euchariſt they eate him, in the poore they releeue
               
him; in his life they followe him, in his death they truſt in him, in his Temple they glorifie him, on earth they affect him, inApoe. 14. 4. 
               heauen they inioy him. They will follow the Lambe WHERESOEVER hee goeth. To him with the Father, &c.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   