
      
         
            
            
            A Sermon preached ye fourth Sūdaye in Lente before the Kynges Maieſtie. and his honorable Counſell, by Thomas Leauer.
            ☞ Anno Domini. M. ccccc. l. ⸫*⁎*
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            In nomine Ieſu Chriſti.
            
               GOD be mercyfull vnto vs: For the tyme is euen nowe comynge, when as God muſte needes eyther of hys mercy here in Englande, worcke ſuche a wonderfull miracle vnto our conforte, as farre paſſeth mans expectacion: or els of his righteouſnes take ſuch vengeaunce of this land to thexample of all other landes, as ſhal be to our vtter deſtruccion.
            Ye know, that immediatlie after the preachynge of Noe, came the great ſtud that drouned ye worlde. After the warnynge of Loth, came fyre, & brimſtone vpon the Sodomites and Gomorrians. When Moiſes had declared gods threatnynges in Egipt, kinge Pharao and hys people were plaged vpon the lād, and drouned in the red ſea.
            Such plages came euer where

gods worde truly preached, is not beleued, receaued, and folowed. But at is the preaching of Ionas, the Niniuites repented wonderfully. When the boke of the lawe was reade vnto Ioſias the kynge, he, with all his people ſpedely repentynge, found exceadyng mercy bleſſynge and grace: as lykewyſe all other ſhalbe ſure to find, which heare the word of God and kepe it.
            For when Chriſt and his Apoſtles had preached the goſpell vnto the Iewes, thoſe that beleued were delyuered frome the curſe of the law, vnto▪ the bleſſing of grace out of worldly myſerye, to be inheritours of the heuenly kingdome: and thoſe that did not beleue, were caſt from God, oppreſſed of men, ouercome, ſpoyled, murthered, and deſtroyed of theyr enemies.
            Wherfore Englande, whyche at this preſente tyme, by reaſon of

the worde of god ſet fourth, reade, preached, and communed, dothe in euery place heare ye coūcel of Noe, the warning of Loth, the lawe of Moiſes, the threatnyngs of ye prophetes, and the grace of the goſpel, as it was declared and taught by Chriſt and his Apoſtles: This Englande muſte nedes, either by beleuynge of theſe thinges, obteine of god wonderful grace of amendmente▪ or els by neglectinge them, prouoke the vengeance of god, as a dewe plage and punyſhment.
            Take heede therfore England, for if thou by vnbelefe, let and ſtop God from workynge of miracles to thy comforte, then ſurely doeſt thou prouoke god to powre down vengeaunce vpon the, to thy vtter diſtruccyon: But if thou doo regarde, receiue, and beleue goddes worde, he wyll worke wonderfull miracles to thy conforte, wealthe,

and proſperitie. Yea, let euerye man, of what eſtate or degree ſoeuer he be, grope hys owne conſcience, for if he dooe not there fele that the worde of God dothe take place to moue him to repentaunce and amendment of lyfe, then ſhall he be ſure ſoone to haue experience, that the vengeaunce of god, by a ſhameful ſhorte ende of hys wretched lyfe, wyl brynge hym vnto an euerlaſtinge dampnable deathe. For all thoſe that wyll not creepe vnder the merciful wings of god, as the chikinnes of Chryſt, ſhal be caught and deuoured of puttocks, haukes, and kytes, as a praye for the deuyll. The wynges of god be ſtretched abrode here in Englande, by the kynges gracious maieſty, and his honourable counſell, of mighty power, wyth ready wyl, to ſhadowe, defende, and ſaue all thoſe that wyth reuerent loue, come

humbly creping vnder theyr ordynaūce, rule, & gouernāce, which is ye power, ye wings & the order of god.
            The filthye gredy puttockes, wylde haukes, and rauenyng kytes, be ſuperſticious papiſtes, carnall goſpellers, and ſedicious rebelles, whych as ye haue ſeene by late experience, haue moſt cruelly caught, ſpoyled, and deuoured the lambes, the chekynnes, the chyldren of God▪ redemed and boughte with Chriſtes bloude. Wherefore as Chriſt in his owne perſon dyd once lamente and bewayle Ieruſalem, ſo doeth he nowe many tymes in the perſons of hys propheticall Preachers, lament & bewayl Englande, ſaying: O Englande, howe ofte wold I haue gathered thy chyldren, as a hen gathereth her chikens vnder her wynges, and thou woldeſt not? Euen wyth the ſame affeccion that the ſhepeherde

cryeth, ſeynge the wolfe leeryng towardes the ſhepe, & with the ſame affeccion that the hen clocketh and calleth, ſpyeng the kyte houeryng ouer her chekyns: wyth the ſame affeccion it behoueth the miniſter and preacher of god, ſeeynge vntollerable vengeaunce hangynge ouer Englande, to crye, to cal, and to geue warnyng vnto the people ſaying as it is writē in ye firſt of Eſay: If ye willingly wil heare & obey, ye ſhal eate the good confortable frutes of ye earth: but if ye wil not, & prouoke me vnto anger, the ſword ſhal deuour you. Quid os Domini lo cutum eſt. For it is ye mouth of ye lord that hath ſpoken.
            Now your reuerende maieſty, moſt gracyous kyng, and you honourable, wyſe godly counſellers, you are the chiefe ſhepeherds, you are the moſt reuerende fathers in Chryſte, hauynge the wynges of

power and authorytye, to ſhadow, ſaue, and kepe theſe lambs of god, theſe chekens of Chriſte, and theſe chyldrē of the heauenly father, redemed wyth Chryſtes bloude, and cōmitted vnto your handes, to be ſaued, kepte, and prouyded for.
            God be prayſed, wyth thankeful obedience, and louynge reuerence dewe to your gracious maieſtye & honourable counſell, whiche haue ſurely, wyſely prouyded for, dylygently kepte, and charitably ſaued thys realme, by driuing awaye the wyly foxe of papiſticall ſuperſtycion, and by caſtinge oute the vncleane ſpirit of ignoraūce, to gods glorye, your honor, & our comfort.
            But alas moſt gracious King and godly gouernors, for the tender mercyes of god, in oure Sauiour Ieſu Chriſt, take good and diligent heed when ye be chaſyng the wyly foxe of papiſticall ſuperſticion,

that the gredye wolfe of couetous ambicion, doo not creepe in at your backes: For ſurely he wyl do more harme in a weke, then the foxe did in a yere.
            Take hede yt the vncleane ſpirit of ignorāce, returning with .vii. other worſe then hym ſelfe. find no place vnwarded, wher he may crepe in again. For if he returning wt his felowes, enter in agayne, then wyl he make the ende of thys generacion to be worſe then the beginninge.
            Then ſhall▪ you leeſe the rewarde of your former dylygence, and be damned for your later negligence. Then ſhal the welſpring of mercy which of long tyme hath watered this Realm with the grace of god, be cloſed vp, and the bludy flouds of vengeance guſhing out frō the wrath & indignacion of God, ouer flow al togither. Thē wil not god by workinge of miracles declare

mercy, but by takinge of vengaūce execute rightuouſnes.
            But God beyng as mercyfull yet, as euer he was, if you contynewe as faythful, wiſe, and dylygente as ye haue bene, to handle the wolfe, as you haue done the foxe, to keepe out the deuyll, as to caſt out the deuyll: then ſhall the people of this lāde feede in quyetnes, wtout feare of euyl: then ſhall you continuyng to thende, be ſure of an hunderdfold reward in thys lyfe, and afterwardes euerlaſting lyfe, ioye and glorye. Then ſhall God doo wonderfull myracles in England, to declare howe mercye ſhall triumphe ouer rightouſnes.
            And that we maye all dyſpoſe our ſelues the more conuenientlye for god to worke ſuche a miracle amonge vs, wee haue appoynted for the goſpel of this day, wrytten in the .vi. of Ihon, a wonderfull

miracle of .v. thouſande men, fed and ſatiſfied wyth .v. loaues and ii. fyſhes, wher as euery man maye & ought to learne hys owne dutye, whiche ſhall cleare appeare too a king in Chriſt, to head gouerners vnder the kynge, in the Apoſtles beyng moſt neare about Chriſt, & to all other men, in that multitude of the people, whyche folowynge Chriſt, were obedient to ſyt downe at the cōmaundemēt of his Diſciples, not knowing, nor enquiring why they were ſo commaunded.
            And as ſuerly as this wonderful, miracle was done to ye great cōfort of thē in Chriſts time: ſo truly is it left in writyng for to learne vs by paciēce & cōforte of ye Scriptures, to haue good hope at thys tyme. And as Chriſt hauing alwaies ſpecial reſpect vnto his audiēce, dyd teach the fiſhers by talking of nettes, preaching vnto the Iewes by

diuers parables, & called the gentyles by the eloquence of Paule: ſo I, in handlyng of this miracle, hauing reſpecte vnto thys audyence, wyl aply the wonderful great charitable prouiſion of Chryſte, vnto the Kynges Maieſtye: the fayethful diligence of the Apoſtles, vnto the nobilitle: and the dewe obedyence and hertye thankefulnes of the multitude, vnto all other of the communaltye. Not doubtynge but that charitable prouiſion of liberall benefytes, wyll be a thynge moſt pleaſaunt and honorable for the Kynges gracious Maieſtye: and faithful diligence in diſpoſing great benefyts moſt cōueniēt, & cō
               mēdable for al that be in high authoryty: & finally, humble obediēce & vnfained thākfulnes to be moſt neceſſary, requiſite, & loked for, at thys tyme, in all inferiours & commune ſort of people in Englande.
            
               Marke a litle after the begynning of the ſixt Chap. of Iohn, and ye ſhal heare, when as much people commynge vnto Ieſus hauynge nothynge to eate, what Ieſus did. I wyl paſſe the diſcription of the wildernes with ye cauſes & the maner of the peoples going togither, & begin at yt which Chryſt dyd, whē they wer comming towardes hym.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           IEſus lifting vp his eyes, and ſeeynge muche people come vnto hym, ſayde vnto Philyp: From whence ſhall wee bye bread, that theſe may eat. Thus he ſayed tempting hym: for he hym ſelf knew what he would do. Philippe aunſwered vnto hym: Two hundreth penye worth of bread wyll

not be ſufficiēt vnto theſe ſo that euery one myght take a lytell. One of hys diſciples Andrew, Simon Peters brother, ſayth vnto hym: There is one boye here, which hath .v. barely loaues & .ii. fyſhes, but what ar thoſe amongeſt ſo many? Ieſus ſayd, Make the men to ſit doun. Ther was muche graſſe in the place: The menne therfore ſat down about the nūber of .v. thouſands Ieſus toke the bread, and after thanckes geuynge, did diuide it vnto his diſciples, and the diſcyples

to them that were ſette: And lykewyſe of the fyſhes, ſo muche as they woulde. And when they were filled, he ſayed vnto hys diſciples: Gather vp the broken meates remayning, that nothynge be loſt. They gathered therfore, and filled .xii. baſkets ful of thoſe meats which remained, after that they hadde eaten. The men therfore ſeeynge what a ſygne Ieſus hadde done, ſayde that thys is trulye the Prophet whych cummeth vnto the world.
                     
                  
               
            
            
            
               O Mercyfull Lorde, what a grefe is it to ſe thoſe which a man loueth hartely, with ſuche diſeaſes infected, that euerye thinge miniſtred by the Phiſicion to do them good, by theyr own vnquietnes & miſuſinge of the ſame doth encreaſe theyr greuous daungerous ſicknes? For theſe people, hauing great occaſion of comfort, by reaſon yt in this place, throughe the true preaching of gods worde, al ſinne is playnly and frely rebuked, and thoſe thinges eſpeciallye whiche dooe appertayne vnto magyſtrates, wherby anye man of indifferent iudgemente, maye thinke that theſe magiſtrates beinge preſente, and willingelye hearynge, be purpoſed to amende: Theſe people I ſay, that thus haue a greate occaſion of comforte offered vnto them, by theyr owne miſtakinge of it, dooe tourne all to theyr further

gryefe and daunger. For they ſpeake vnreuerently, and vntruly ſlaunder the magiſtrates, not only with the faultes that bee here named, but alſo with rebukynge, impriſoninge, and forbiddinge of the Preachers. And when as by the ſame mouth of the true preacher, theyr venemous tounges be rebuked, thē they ſpare not to ſay, that the Preacher hath learned his leſſon in Iacke an apes court: doing as much as lyeth in them, to make other men, neither to reuerence the magiſtrates, nor beleue the Preacher. What they them ſelfes mean thereby, peraduenture by reaſon of blyndeneſſe, they wot not. But we knowinge▪ the craft of the deuill, as Paul writeth .ii. Cor .ii. perceiue that he would haue nothing in thys place layed to the Rulers charge: Not fearynge howe muche be ſpoken to thoſe of the people,

whiche be paſt any amendment by words: But al yt the deuil feareth, is leſt that the rulers be put in remembraunce of the greate daunger that thei be in, for ſuffring to great enormities vnpuniſhed amongeſt the people.
            I therfore truſting to do moſt good in that whiche the deuyll laboureth the moſt to hinder, wyll laye great and many fautes vnto them that haue moſt power, & authorytye. For ſure I am, that rulers ordeyned of God to ſee the ignoraunte inſtructed, and the euyll punyſhed, be in greate daunger of Gods vengeaunce, for the greate and manifold enormytyes whiche do grow and ſpryng of ignorance for lacke of knowledge, & of diſſolutenes for lacke of due correccion.
            And you people be ye ſure that the more theyr daunger is, for lack of prouiſion and puniſhmente for

other mens faultes, the greater is the damnacion of them that cōmit and do theſe faultes.
            Nowe I truſtinge to God, and not fearinge the deuyll, wyll proceade to declare and applye thys parte of ſcripture vnto thys Audyence, ſo that for no man I wyll cloke or flatter any vyce.
            Ieſus lyftnge vp hys eyes, and ſeinge muche people cummynge vnto hym. &c.
            Here note two thynges: in the people note cōminge vnto Chriſt, and in Chriſt, note charitable prouiſion for the people. For in thys people dothe Chriſt declare by example, & proue in experyence hys doctryne to be true, whiche he had afore taught, ſayinge: Fyrſte ſeeke for the kyngdome of God and the ryghtuouſnes thereof, and al theſe other, meaninge neceſſaryes, ſhall be miniſtred vnto you. For here they folowinge Chryſt, to ſeke the kyngdome of God, had not onlye

this kingdome of God, this bread of lyfe, thys worde of ſaluacion preached vnto theim, but alſo all theyr diſeaſes healed, & their hungry bellies with good meates plē
               tifully filled.
            Yea the plentye of theſe people hauinge inoughe euen ſo muche as they woulde, was farre more then the plentie of crafty Lawers, diſceitful Merchauntes, couetous greedyguttes, & ambicious prollers, whiche canne neuer haue inough: but alwayes continewe in vnſaciable hunger, and nede of couetouſnes. As the .xiiii. Pſal. declareth: Diuites eguerunt: The riche haue felt nede & hunger: but they which ſeke ye lord lacke no goodes
            He that ſeeketh to be ryche, bhe neuer ſo poore a ſlaue, or ſo myghtye a Lorde, he falleth into dyuers temptacions and ſnares of the deuyll: but they that ſeeke the

Lorde, ſhall lacke no goodnes. Seeke for to be rich, & thou ſhalt fynd ſorow, myſery, and miſchiefe: Seeke for to be godlye, and thou ſhalt find confort, welth, and proſperitie, with al maner of felicity.
            If thou wilt be godly, thou muſt folowe Chryſt: thou muſt not folow the ſteppes of hys fete, which be taken vp into heauen out of thy ſyghte, but thou oughteſt to folow the doctryne of hys worde, which is here left vpon earthe, to guyde the ſteppes of thy lyfe, in the way of peace. And whyther wyll goddes word gyde the in the tyme of thy trouble and neceſſytye? Surely vnto the Lorde, whych ſaith: Propter miſeriam inopum. &c. For the miſeryes ſakes of the comfortleſſe, and ſyghynges of the poore, now wyl I ryſe, ſayeth the Lorde.
            O Lorde, ſeeynge thou haſte manye people in Inglande, that

as yet be in myſeryes without confort, and in pouertye, and lacke helpe, how dooeſt thou aryſe vnto them? Vnto this the Lorde aunſwereth, in the .xxxiiii. of Ezechiel: Suſcitabo ſuper eos paſtorem unum. &c.
            
            I wyll ſet vp ouer theym one paſtor, euen my ſeruaunte Dauyd, he ſhall feede theym, and he ſhall be theyr paſtor, and I the Lord wyll be theyr God. Thys prophecye was wrytten longe after Dauids tyme. Wherefore by Dauid here named, is ſygnyfyed and meante ſuche a Kynge as ſhalbe as faythfull and diligent to kepe, feede, and cheryſh hys ſubiectes within hys owne Realme, as was Dauid to his people wythin Iſraell. Wee hope, truſte and beleue, that oure gracious Kyng, indued wyth the faythfull diligence of Dauid, is ordeyned of God, to gouerne, cheriſh and feede vs the people of

thys his realme. Wherefore accordinge to the example of Chryſt Ieſu, moſt Chriſte and Gracious Kynge, for the reuerence of God, which hath ſet you vpon the hygh hyll of honor and authorytye, lyfte vp your gracious eyes of charytable pitie, and behold muche people througheoute all Englande, comminge to ſeke reliefe, eaſe and comforte, ſente frome God vnto them, by your excellente Maieſtye. For althoughe there hathe bene to much mercy ſhewed▪ vpon the generacion of vypers, the vngracious rebelles: Yet is there manye poore people, whiche lyke ſymple ſheepe, ſhorne to the bare ſkynne, haue as yet lytle prouiſion & great neede. Euen as .v. thouſandes in wildernes folowed Chriſt and his Apoſtles, ſo manye thouſandes in Englande, paſt all other hope and refuge, folowe your gracious maieſtye

and honourable Counſel. For theyr patſons, whiche ſhould lyke ſhepheardes feede them, doo lyke theues, robbe, murther and ſpoyle them. And theyr landlordes which ſhuld defend them, be moſte heauye maiſters vnto them: Yea, all maner of officers doo not theyr duties to kepe the people in good order, but rather take ſuch fees as maketh the people veraye poore. Who ſo hathe eyes, and wyll ſee, may eaſely perceiue that thoſe perſonages, which be moſt in number and greateſte in value throughout al Englande, be no ſhepherds houſes to laye vp fodder to feede the poore ſhepe of the paryſh, but theeuyſh dennes, to conuey awaye great ſpoyle from all the rych men of the paryſh. I ſay ther is no perſon there, to releue the poore & nedy with natural ſuſtinaūce in ke
               
                  •
               ynge of houſe, and to fede all ingenerally

with the heauenly foode of goddes worde by preachinge: But there is a perſons deputy or fermer, which hauing neither habilitye, power, nor authorytye to doo the perſons dutye in feedyng and teachinge the pariſh, is able, ſufficient, and ſtout inough to chalenge and take for hys mayſters dutye the tenth parte of al the paryſh. Likewiſe other officers take many fees, and do few dutyes: And eſpeciallye landlordes take exceadynge fynes and rentes of theyr tenauntes, and doo no good vnto theyr tenauntes.
            Now my Lordes, bothe of the laitie and of the clergy, in the name of god, I aduertyſe you to take heede: for when the Lorde of all Lordes ſhal ſe his flocke ſcattred, ſpylte and loſte, if he folowe the trace of the bloude, it wyll leade him euen ſtreyght waye vnto thys

court, and vnto your houſes, where as theſe great theues which murther, ſpoyl, and deſtroy the flockes of Chryſt, be receyued, kept, and mainteined.
            For you maintain your chaplens to take Pluralities, & youre other ſeruaunts mo offices then they can or wyl diſcharge.
            Fye for ſynne and ſhame, eyther gyue your ſeruauntes wages, or els let them go and ſcrue thoſe which do gyue them wages. For now your chaplaynes, your ſeruaunts, & you your ſelues haue the perſons, the ſhepherds, & the offycers wages, & nether you nor they, nor other doth ye perſons, the ſhepherds or the officers duty, excepte peraduēture ye imagin that ther is a pariſhe prieſt, curate, which doth the perſons duti. But although ye do ſo imagin, yet the people do feel and perceiue that he doeth meane

no other thing but pay your duty, pay your dutye. Yes forſouth he miniſtreth Gods ſacramentes, he ſayeth hys ſeruice, and he readeth the homilies, as you fyne, flatring, courtiers, which ſpeake by imaginacion, tearme it: But the rude lobbes of the countrye, whiche be to ſymple to paynte a lye, ſpeake foule and truly as thei finde it, and ſaye. He miniſheth Goddes ſacramentes, he ſlubbers vp his ſeruice and he can not reade the humbles. Yet is there ſome that canne reade very well, but how many of thoſe be not either ſuperſticious papyſtes, or els carnall goſpellers, whiche by theyr euyll example of lyuyng, and worſe doctrine, do farre more harme then they do good by theyr fayre reading & ſaying of ſeruice. But put the caſe, as it maye be, that there be at a benefyce in ſome place at ſomtime, ſome good

curate, all thoſe ſummes wyll make but a feewe in number, and yet ye ſee many perſons in manye places abſente from theyr benifices, whiche if they be ſeldome abſente, may be good, but if they be contynually or for the moſt part abſent, then can they be neither good, honeſt nor godly. For if theyr dutye be vndone, then can no man excuſe them: if it be done, then is it by other and not by them: and then whye dooe they lyue of other mennes laboures? He that preacheth the goſpell, ſhoulde lyue vpon the Goſpell, as God hathe ordeyned: As for thoſe, Qui mollibus ueſtiuntur, in domibus Regum, whyche goo gaye in Kynges houſes, and either moſell the labouringe oxe, or els ſpoyl the poore pariſh in the country, be of the deuyls ordynaunce. As there is in all offices ſome putte in by Chryſte, ſome by the deuyll: ſo is

there is perſonages, ſome ſente from Chryſt as ſhepherdes to fede, & ſome from the deuyll, as theues to deuoure. Yea amongeſt all kyndes of offycers, ſome be true Prophetes and ſheppeheardes in dede, and ſome haue ſhepe ſkynnes, and be raueninge wolues in dede. The one taketh paynes in doyng of hys dutye, and the other ſeketh gaynes in profeſſyng of hys duty. Take heede of thoſe, for they ar erraunt theeues.
            Alas, if all thoſe whiche take the names and profeſſyons of offycers, for deſyre of luker and honor, and do not execute the dutyes belonginge to theyr offyces wyth painful diligence, be errant theues as they be in deede, then is ther mani a ſtrong erraunt theefe amongſt thē yt be called honeſt, worſhipful, and honorable men.
            For they haue the names, the

authorytyes & vauntages of thoſe offyces gyuen & payed vnto them, the dutyes of the whyche be verye ſlenderly or nothyng at al executed amongeſt the people.
            If I were in anye other place in al England, I could and wold vſe another trade of preachynge afore another audience: but beinge called of God by your appoyntement, vnto this place at this tyme, my conſcience doth compell me to vſe this trade and no other, afore this ſolemne audience. Wherfore with dreede and feare of God, with charitable pyty of the people, with moſte reuerend loue and homage vnto your honors, I muſte needes cry wyth the Prophete Eſaye: Principes Sodome, populus Gomorre: 
               ❧ Heare the woorde of the Lorde ye Prynces of Sodome, ye▪ people of Gomorra: Quo mihi multitudo uictimarum ueſtrarum. What care I for

the great number of your ſacrifyces, Dicit Dominus, ſayth the Lord: rebukyng all the ſacrifices, Cerimonyes, and feaſtes of the Iewes which he him ſelf had commaunded to be obſerued and kept: by the which thyng leſt in wrytyng he doth teach and commaund me how to ſpeake of your well doyng here in England. Heare therfore ye Prynces of Sodome, and ye people of Gomor, thus ſayth the Lord: What pleaſure haue I, yea what care I for all your Englyſh Bibles, Homelies, & all your other bookes? ſet forth no more godly ſeruice to honor me wyth: I hate them al wyth my herte, they are greuous vnto me, I am wery of them: Yea, it is a great payne for me to ſuffer them. Why, O Lord theſe be good, theſe be godly, and theſe be neceſſarye thynges.
            Truthe it is, the faulte is not in

the things that be ſet forth, but in you yt haue ſet them furthe. Manus enim ueſtre plene ſunt ſanguine: For your handes are ful of bloud.
            Your handes, your ſeruyce and your houſes be full of perſons liuynges preachers liuinges, and offycers lyuynges. And by you, the perſon hath his dyſpenſacion, the preacher is put to ſcilence, and the offycer vnpunyſhed, for neglectynge of hys dutye. And ſo through the negligence of the kepers (good order, which is ye pale of the parke of this cōmunewelth dekaied) the dere therof moſt dearly bought wyth Chryſtes bloude, haue ſtrayed oute of theire owne feedynge, to dyſtroye the corne of all mens liuinges: Where as very neceſſytye hath compelled you with ſuch force to driue thē backe, as muſt needes diſtroye manye of thoſe dere. Thoſe people I mean,

whych you haue cheryſhed & kept & as yet doo loue and pitie aboue al other iewels, commodities and pleaſures. Alas, theſe that take the liuinges, and doo not the dutyes of Perſons, Preachers, land lordes, Bailyes, and of other officers: Theſe flaterers, theſe wolfes in lābes ſkinnes, theſe deuils in mens vyſers, haue cauſed you to be thought and taken as cruell oppreſſers of thoſe people, whoſe 
                  ••••
               ous wulde 
                  ••
               age ye dyd ſuppreſſe and 
                  〈◊〉
                vnder, of veraye charitable pitie towardes them, & all other, whyche wyth that rebellious rage, ſhoulde haue be al togither diſtroied, if the help of your power and authoritye hadde bene any longer diff
                  ••
               ed.
            Surely, vntyl that theſe prollets for themſelues, theſe children of the dyuell, theſe ſowers of ſedicion be taken out of the way, either

by reformacion, or by diſtruccion, your charitable pity and prouiſion for the people, and theyr reuerend loue & obedience towardes you, ſhall neuer be ſene, felte, and knowen. Nowe, as Helye was giltye of the whordome, extorcion, and abhominacion of his ſonnes, ſo are youre hertes ful of crueltye, and youre handes full of bloude, not ſo muche by doyng, as by ſufferynge all theſe euyls. Wherfore Lauamini, mundi eſtote: Waſh, & make your ſelues cleane, with the teares of repentaunce. Auferte malum cogitacionum ueſtrarum ab oculis meis: Away wt the euyll of your thoughtes from afore myne eyes. Open youre heartes, that the ſworde of Gods word maye come to wipe awaye couetouſnes, whyche is the roote of all euyll, planted in youre hertes. For yf that roote contyneuether, than cā no good ſpringe

from you: but euen the moſt pure and holeſome worde of God ſette forth by you continuinge in couitouſnes, wyll be abhominable in the ſyghte of God, offenſyue vnto the people, & damnable vnto you your ſelues. Wherefore, Quieſcite agere peruerſe: Seaſſe to peruerte, manye thynges from euyll vnto worſe. Diſcite benefacere: Learne to do wel, in conforminge al thinges that be a miſſe, vnto a good order. Querite Iudicium: Serche for ryghteous iudgement which is almoſt banyſhed out of Englande. Alas what a iudgemente is thys, a ſuperſticious papiſte, whyche hath made the faulte ſhall haue a penſion out of a Chauntrye, ſo longe as he lyueth, and a poore paryſh, whych hath greate nede and done 
                  •
               is faulte ſhall loſe and forfayte many Chauntries vtterly for euer Subuenite oppreſſo: Helpe the oppreſſed

people that be loaden with heuye burdeyns of payinge wages to manye offyces, and faynte for lacke of releife, & dewe ſeruyce of the offycer. Iudicate pupillo: Iudge ſo to the fatherleſſe chyldrens behofe, that wardſhip mai be a good prouiſion for fatherles chyldren, and not an vncharitable ſpoyle of yong mens lands. Defendite uiduam: Shielde the widow from al mens iniuryes, and compell them not to mary your vnthrifty ſeruauntes.
            Thus hath God by Eſaye in hys tyme, and by me at thys tyme deſcribed Rulers Faultes, wyth a waye how to a mend them. Therfore, Principes Anglie: Ye heade Rulers and gouernors of England, fyrſte ſee, acknowledge, amende your owne faultes: and then, peruſynge all vnder▪ offycers, conſyder and note how few ſhepheards and offyces doo feede and kepe,

by doynge dutyes, and how many theeues and wolfes do robbe and ſpoyle the flockes, by takyng fees here in Englande: and then ſhall ye perceaue that there muſt nedes be manye ſheepe, that wyth theyr hertes, myndes, and expectacion, do folowe the Kynges Maieſtye, and you of hys honorable counſel ſo farre paſt the houſes and cities of their owne prouyſion, that if they haue not ſpedy reliefe at your handes, manye of theim is lyke to fainte and decaye by the way.
            Therfore thys conſidered and knowen, as Chriſt liftinge vp his eyes dyd teach you to ſee and conſyder the people▪ ſo learne by that whiche foloweth in Chriſtes dooynge, what ſhalbe your dutye after that ye ſe and knowe the multitude, the ſtate and condicion of the people.
            And he ſaid vnto Philyp:

From whence ſhall we bye breade, that theſe maye eate? But thys he ſayde to proue hym: for he hym ſelfe knewe what he would do.
            Chriſt ſaid to Philip as euerye Chriſtē Kyng ought to ſay to his Counſell: From whence ſhall we that be gouernors, kepets and feders, bye & prouyde with our own coſtes, labor, and diligence, bread, foode and neceſſaryes, that theſe may eate and be relieued, which be our ſubiects in obedience, brethrē in Chriſt, and felow heyres of the heauenly kyngdome?
            Pharao wyth hys Counſell in Egypte, conſulted howe to bryng the welthy people vnto miſery: ſo that he is a very Pharonicall tyāt, whych laboureth by oppreſſiō
               
to thruſt down the welthy people: And he is a faithful chriſten king that humbleth him ſelf by diligēce to releiue, conforte, and ſet vp the afflycted people. For the one, by worldly policy, would haue much honor, and the other of godly charitie wil do much good. Chriſt alſo ſaid this, to proue and trie Philip, knowyng him ſelf what ſhuld be done. So that here, Kynges and great men may learne to trye, and proue the honeſtie, wit, and fidelitie of theyr Coūſellers, in ſuch matters as they them ſelues be ſo perfect that they can diſerne wyth what diſcrecion and mynd the coū
               ſeller doth anſwere.
            Philip aūſwered, that two hūdreth peny worth of breade wyll not ſerue vnto theſe, ſo that euerye one myghte take a lyttell
            
            In the which anſwere, as concernynge his witte, he declareth it to be to ſlender to prouide for ſo great a matter in ſo ſhort tyme.
            And hys mynde ſemed to be ſuche as would not haue Chriſt to trouble hym ſelfe wyth ſo great cares but rather as the other Euangeliſtes do declare, to ſende the people away, and let them prouid for them ſelfes. The ſame minde and affeccion was in Peter, after that Chriſt hadde tolde hys Diſciples howe that we muſt go to Ieruſalem to ſuffer ſore paines and miſerable death. For then Peter tooke hym a ſyde and ſayde: Mayſter fauour your ſelf, doo not enter in to ſuch daunger and ſorowes.
            And it is not vnlyke, but if youre Mageſtye; wyth youre Counſell ſpeake vnto youre nobles for prouiſion now to be made for the people: ye ſhall fynde ſome that bee

Philippians and Peters, whyche by ſettynge afore youre eyes the hardnes of the matter, the tendernes of your yeares, and the wonderfull charges that ſhould be requiſite, wyl moue and counſel you to quyet youre ſelfe, to take youre caſe, yea to take your paſtime, in haukyng, Huntyng or gamnyng. Vnto whom your Mageſtie may aunſwer, as Chriſt dyd vnto Peter: Auoyde fro me Sathan, thou hyndreſt me by thy carnall temptacion, to doo that thyng whyche God hath moued me vnto by hys gracious inſpiracion. Thou haſt no taſt nor ſauour howe delicious God is vnto a pure conſcience, in Godly excerciſe of good worckes. But al that thouregardeſt & feleſt is voluptuous pleaſure in worldly vanities. And therefore yu doeſt not perceiue, how yt they which be indued with a ſpecial grace of god

may fynd more pleaſure & paſtime in godly gouernaūce, to kepe togither & ſaue ſimple mē, then in hau king and huntynge, to chaſe and kyll wylde beaſies. Yea, a godly kyng ſhall finde more pleaſure in caſtinge lots for Ionas, to trye out offenders, whiche trouble the ſhip of his commune wealth, then in caſting dice at haſarde, to alow & maintaine by his example, ſuch thynges as ſhould not be ſuffered in a commune wealth. Yea ſurely, a good King ſhal take farre more delyte in edifiynge wyth conforte and deckynge wyth good order the Congregacion of hys people, the Churche and houſe of God, the heauenly Citye of Ieruſalem, then in buildinge ſuche houſes as ſeeme gaye and gorgeous, and be in deede but vyle earthe, ſtones, tymber and claye. Suche lyke aunſwer ought your Mageſtye, & all noble men to make, if ye fynde

any of your Counſellers more canal than ſpiritual, more worldlye then godly. Or els tourne awaye your eares from ſuch Philipians, & heare other, as Chriſt did.
            Then ſaide vnto him one of his Diſciples, Andrew Simon Peters brother, Ther is a boye here that hath fyue barely loanes and two fyſhes, but what auaile thoſe amōge ſo manye?
            Note here that this boye was ſhe Apoſtles page, & theſe loues and fiſhes were their vittayles. For as appeareth in Marke, whē thei had made ſearch howe manye loaues they them ſelues had, thys anſwere was made, yt they had .v. loues & .ii. fiſhes: but what be they amōgeſt ſo many? As who ſhould

ſay: although theſe be al yt euer we haue & ſeme more mete to be kept amongeſt a few, thē to be giuen to many, yet for becauſe thei yt becum whyche beynge many haue more nede then we: therefore ar we willinge to giue thē to be diſpoſed, & wiſh yt they were of more value to do more good amōgeſt ye people.
            Theſe men cared more for the Commune people, then they dyd for them ſelues, and therfore were very mete to be Counſellers, and neare about a great Kyng.
            Here we perceyue what ſymple Phylippe, and good Andrewe thinke, but here is nothyng declared of couetous Iudas counſell. No, for Chriſt beynge fully purpoſed to doo a good deede doeth neither aſke, nor heare anye counſell of couetous Iudas: teachyng all them whych intende any goodnes, neuer to aſke nor admit anye

counſel of thoſe whom they know to be couetous. For truely the couetous mans councel, although it ſeme neuer ſo good and honeſt, yet is it in dede nought and deuiliſh. For what could ſeme better counſel then yt a litle ointmēt, the ſwete ſmel of the whyche continued but a while among a few, ſhould haue ben ſould for thre hundreth pence, the greate price of the whyche beſtowed amongeſte manye poore, ſhould haue done them good for a great ſeaſon?
            The Euangelyſt doeth ſhewe howe that Iudas dyd gyue thys counſell, not for that he had anye care of the poore, but bycauſe he was a thefe, and bare the bagges.
            Iudas pretence was wonders godlye, to ſell the oyntmente for a great ſumme of moneye, to relieue the poore wyth, but hys purpoſe was deuelyſhe, to get the mony in

hys bagges, and kepe it to hym ſelfe. And thoſe in England whyche dyd pretende, that beſides the aboliſhinge of ſuperſticion, wyth the landes of Abbeys, Coliges and Chauntries, the King ſhould be enryched, learnynge mayntayned, pouertye relieued, and the cō
               mune wealthe eaſed, and by thys pretence purpoſely haue enriched theym ſelues, ſettynge a brode incloyſtered papiſtes, to get their liuinges by giuing them pencions, yea, and thruſtynge them into benefices to poyſon the whole commune welth for the riſignacion of thoſe pencions: & ſo craftly cōueying much frō the King, frō lerning from pouertye, & from al the commune wealth, vnto their own priuate vauntage: Theſe mennes counſell ſemed better then Iudas counſell was: and their couetouſnes, by their owne deedes appeareth

no leſſe then Iudas couetouſneſſe dyd. Well, beware, for if ye play Iudas part on ſtyll, & make no reſtitucion, vntil ye go to hangyng, ye are lyke to fynde deſperaciō at the end of your life, becauſe ye wold not by reſtitucion amend your life. Ye noble mē, & eſpecialli you of the kings coūſel, for the reuerence of God, pitie of the cōmen wealth, and ſafegarde of your ſelfes, awaye wyth theſe Iudaſſes, let them go hange them ſelues: excepte perauenture ye thyncke it fytte and neceſſary, that you fyrſt hang them afore thei betray you. For vndoutedly, he that hath the couetouſnes of Iudas in his hert he wyll playe all the other partes of Iudas, if he euer haue ſuche oportunitie as Iudas had.
            A way with Iudas, and learne at Andrew, to ſaye vnto thys kynge and his councel intendynge to relieue

the multitude of hys people here in Englande, learne ye noble men to ſaye: Here is a boye: Here be ſeruauntes and retayners of oures whyche haue fyue loaues and two fyſhes, manye benefices, ſome prebendes, wyth dyuers offyces: yea, and ſome of vs our ſelues haue mo offyces then we can diſcharge. Pleaſeth it your maieſtie to take theſe into your hands, which haue bene kept for vs, that they now in thys great nede, maye be better diſpoſed amongeſt youre people. Quid hec inter tantos? Theſe be verye ſmall thynges towardes the amendemēt of ſo many lackes in ſo great a multitude. How be it theſe wyl ſerue, ſo that there maye be mo good Perſons, good preachers, and good officers placed a brode in euery countrye, which in doing theyr offices, keping of houſes, and preachyng of gods worde

may teach the ignoraunte, relieue the poore, punyſhe the fautye, and cheryſhe the honeſt, and ſo repayre the pale of good order about thys comen welth. For the loue of God giue your ſeruauntes wages, and cauſe thē to reſtore theſe liuinges, whych coming of the ſweate of the labourer, be in dede the relife of ye poore, the mayntenaunce of honeſtye, and the reward of vertue, yea the verye pale, wall, and bulwarkes of the commen wealth. The Apoſtles gaue all that they had of theyr owne, freelye vnto other: ſtycke not you to reſtore that now whych ye haue of longe tyme vncharitably kept from other.
            Heare what foloweth: whan theſe fiſhes & loaues were broughte vnto Ieſus, make (ſayeth he) the people to ſit downe. God alwayes beſtoweth his benefites vpon theim that ſit doune in quietnes, & powreth

furth hye vēgaūce vpō thoſe that be vnpacient, vnquiet, & full of buſineſſe. For as appeareth in Geneſis, the people gathered together in the playne of Sanner, & made a greate vprore, buildyng a tower lyke rebels agaynſt god, to get thē a name. Howe be it god deſtroied their hādyworke, cōfoūded theyr lāgage, & ſcatered thē abrod.
            The Scribes & the Phariſeys came vnquietly, temptyng Chriſt, and required a ſygne from heauē. Chriſt rebuked them ſharply, and ſhewed them no ſygne, but called them a frowarde and aduoutrous generacion. So the people in England gathered together, they woulde make maiſteryes, and bee notable felowes: yea, the towre of theyr preſumpcion ſhuld be built vp vnto heauen, in dyſpite of gentyll men and nobilitye: they haue partlye felte, and we haue ryghte

pitifully ſene howe ſore God was therwith offended. Nowe I heare ſaye there is as yet remaininge in Englād ſūm ſtiffe necked Iewes, which come preſumptuouſly temtyng God, and ſay: it theſe our rulers beſent of God, to take better order then other haue done, well then, let theym begynne betime to gyue vs a notable ſygne & token, for els we wyll not beleue, truſte, nor obey them.
            Wel, I wyl tel you that thus whyſper: Euen as Chriſte was Poſitus in reſurreccionem et ruinam multorum in Iſraell: Set to reſtore and decaye manye in Iſraell: So be Chriſten rulers in euerye comune wealth, ſet and ordayned of God, to beate doune & kepe vnder theſe ſturdye rebels, whyche be ſo euyll thē ſelues, that they cannot thinke that any man doeth intende to do them good, & to rayſe vp, conforte

and cheriſh the ſimple pacient people, whyche be of a good truſte towardes theyr rulers, knowynge that they theim ſelues haue deſerued no euyll: or els if they haue done euyl, yet by repentaunce and amendemente, do not doute to obteyne mercye at theyr rulers handes. So God hath ordeyned rulers to cheryſhe ye, if thou be meke quyet and paciente, or els to punyſhe the, if thou be vnquyet, buſy and ſtubborne. Learne at Paule. Rom. xiii. If thou do wel, to truſt well of thy rulers, and if thou doo euyll, not to be wythoute feare of theyr powers, for he beareth not the ſwerde wythout a cauſe. Take hede therefore ye rulers, for gods ſake, and pitye of people, ſeynge that God hath geuen you a ſwerd to cut of rotten cankred members for the ſafegarde of the hole body, knowyng no cāker to be ſo daungerous

as rebellion in a commen wealth: If ye fynde one perſon infected wyth that canker, awaye wyth him, for ye ſafegard of the bodye of that houſe. If one houſe be infected, away wyth it, for the ſafegarde of that toune. If the toune be infected, awaye wyth it, for the ſafegarde of the contrey. Yea, if a ſhyre or contrye be all poyſoned, awaye wyth it, for the pitye, and ſafegarde of the hole bodye of the commen welth. So▪ ye ſe, that the ſharper that youre ſworde is, and the ſooner that ye ſtrike rebellion, the more pyty ſhewe ye in cutting away the leſſe, and ſauynge the more part and porcion of the people, beynge all of one bodye, of one realme and common welth. Conſider that Chryſte wente from Ieruſalem vnto wildernes, to drawe the Gentle people from amonge the ſtoborne ſcribes: and ſo Chryſten

rulers muſte nowe nedes defer the tyme to drawe the people that be good and truſt well, from amonge this frowarde generacion, whiche of preſumption loke to haue order taken as they require, and appoynte the tyme, the place and the thynge. Wherfore, ye that be good quiet people, beware of theſe buſye felowes, and as thys multitude whiche oughte to be youre example, folowed Chryſt in to the wyldernes, ſo folowe you Chriſten rulers, goddes offycers, youre chiefe gouerners in Englande. And as they dyd not murmure, ſayinge: why ſhall we ſitte downe here in the wyldernes, beyng an infinite number, where no meate is, ſeynge that in the cityes where was more meate, and leſſe gatherynge of the people, we had neuer feaſte gyuen of hym by hys Apoſtles?
            
               So I ſaye, do not you grudge and ſaye: why ſhall we quyet oure ſelues nowe, truſtynge to reliefe, where wee ſee nothynge▪ and were nothynge at al releued when there was great plentye of landes, and goodes of Abbeys, Colegis, and Chaunteries? Do not murmour ſo vngodlye, but ſee that there be no faulte in you, and ye ſhal fynd no lacke in GOD. Suerlye, excepte ye do ſytte downe quietly, ye ſhall ſoner prouoke goddes vengeaunce to your damnacion, then deſerue any reliefe of goddes officers, to your comfort. Sit downe and be quyet, for the ſame rulers & miniſters are ordeyned of god to feede you wyth plentye: whych be commaunded of God to make you fyrſte to ſet downe in order & quyetnes. Yea, and herke all ye that be godlye Rulers: there was much graſſe in the place, god had

prouided muche graſſe for theym that loked for no carpets: geuyng all godly gouernours example to prouyde thynges neceſſarye for thoſe people that loketh for no ſuperfluities. But alas, here in England, ſuperfluous gorgeous building is ſo much prouided for ryche mens pleaſures, that honeſt houſes do decay, where as labouring men ought to haue neceſſary lodging. It is a commen cuſtome with couetous landlordes, to lette their houſynge ſo decaye, that the fermer ſhalbe fayne for a ſmal reward or none at all to gyue vppe hys leaſſe, that they takynge the groundes into their own handes, may tourne al to paſture: ſo nowe Old Fathers, poore Wydowes, and yong children, lie begging in the mirie ſtretes.
            O mercifull Lorde, what a number of poore, feable, haulte

Blynde, Lame, ſycklye, yea, wyth idle vacaboundes, and diſſembelinge kaityffes mixt among them, lie and crepe, begging in the myry ſtreates of London and Weſt▪minſter?
            Nowe ſpeakyng in the behalfe of thefe vile beggers, for as much as I know that ye vileſt perſon vpon earth, is ye liuely image of almightye God, I wyll tell the that arte a noble man, worſhypfull man, an honeſt welthye man, eſpeciallye if thou be Maire, Sherif, Aldermā baily, cōſtable or any ſuch officer, it is to thy greate ſhame afore the worlde, & to thy vtter dānacion afore god, to ſe theſe beggig as thei vſe to do in the ſtreates. For there is neuer a one of theſe, but he lacketh eyther thy charitable almes to relieue his nede, or els thy due correction to punyſhe hys faute. A great ſin and no les ſhame is it for

him that ſayeth he is a Chriſtē mā to ſe Chryſt lack things neceſſary, & to beſtowe vpon the deuil ſuperfluouſli. It is Chriſt Ieſus hi ſelf that in the nedy doth ſuffer hūger, thriſt & cold: It is the deuyll hym ſelfe, that in the wealthye fareth deintely, goeth gorgeouſly, & vſeth ſuperfluitie. Looke Mathewe the xxv. & there ſhal ye ſe playnly that it is Chriſt which lacketh ſufficient in the neady: and therefore the deuyll beyng contrary to Chryſt, contrariwyſe hathe to much in the wealthye.
            You alſo that do prouyde that your cattel do not longetary pinned in a folde where there is no graſſe, whye do you ſuffer youre owne brethren in Chryſt, wythout prouyſyon to lye in the ſtreates, where is muche myer? Theſe ſelye ſoules haue ben neglected thorow oute all Englande, and eſpeciallye

in Londō and Weſtminſter: But nowe I truſt that a good ouerſeer a godly Byſhop I meane, wyll ſe that they in theſe two cities, ſhall haue their nede reliued, and their faultes corrected, to the good enſample of al other tounes & cities.
            Take hede that ther be much graſſe to ſit vpon, there as ye commaūd the people to ſit downe, that there be ſufficiente houſynge and other prouiſiō for the people ther as ye commaūd the un to be quiet. The men ſatte downe about fyue thouſandes in nūber. If they had not bene obedient to ſitte downe, Chriſt wold not haue bene liberal to haue gyuen them meate.
            Meate was prouided for the Cōmens of England, and readye to haue bene deliuered. But when they were bydden to ſit downe in quietnes, they roſe vp by rebelliō, and haue loſt all the chere of that

feaſt. Yet that notwithſtanding, I truſt that thoſe which ſat quietly in dede, ſhal ſone be fed with plē
               tye, if they ſit ſtyll vntyll it maye conueniently be diſpoſed. I praye GOD they maye, I truſte they ſhal. The Euaungeliſt ſaith that the men ſat, namyng neyther women nor Chyldren, how be it there was both women and Chyldren, as appeareth in the other Euangeliſtes. And men be here named onely, becauſe al women and children did folow the example, and obey the cōmaundemēt of mē children of the fathers, and women of their huſbandes.
            Let not therefore your wyues and chyldren, when they come abrode, be ſo bold openly, as to ſay or do any thinges of them ſelues, but as they haue example and cō
               maundement of you. Now the multitude placed in quyetnes,
            
            Ieſus toke the loues, and when he hadde giuen thankes, he deuided them vnto his Diſciples: and the Diſciples vnto them that were ſet downe: and lykewyſe of the fyſhes, ſo much as they would
            Here learne fyrſte of Chryſte, to take nothynge, be it neuer ſo lytell, but wyth thankes rendered therefore vnto God: For of God ſurelye thou haſte receiued it, by what meſſenger or meane ſoeuer thou came vnto it. Then ſecondarilye, learne at the Apoſtles to geue vnto other, that which the Lord hath geuen vnto the, that thou mayeſt truly ſay wyth the Apoſtel Paul. Quod accepi a domino, hoc tradidi uobis. That whiche I receyued of the Lorde, haue I geuen vnto you.
            
               Beware that thou playe not the wycked ſeruaunt, which kept his talent hyd, and not delyuered vnto any vſe, for then it ſhal be taken frō the, and thou ſhalt be caſt into vtter darkenes.
            Nowe, to applye this miracle vnto this preſent time, the kynges Mageſty may learne at Chryſt to take of his ſeruauntes, Prebendes, Benefices, Improperacions and all maner of Offyces, that be not preſently occupyed & executed of a faythful diligent officer, and after thanckes geuen vnto God therfore, to deliuer them vnto his Counſell and Nobilyty to be diſpoſed amongeſt the people of hys Realme, whych be in ſuch hunger and lacke of faythful officers, and houſe kepers, and godli preachers that they muſt nedes faint, excepte they be ſone prouided for.
            And in thys dyſtrybucion of offyces

and benefyces, your Mageſtye wyth your Counſell had nede to ſtand and beholde the dealyng of your Nobles, as Chriſt dyd of his Apoſtles. For it is not vnlike but as there was amongeſt Chriſtes Apoſtles, ſo wyll there be amongeſt euery Chryſten Kynges Counſellers and Nobles, ſome Iudas whych is to be truſted no further then he can be ſeene. For in ſyghte Iudas doth as other of hys felowes do: but beyng out of lyghte he ſolde hys Maiſter. And ſo the moſt couetous of them all, wyll be afrayde to do any thynge amyſſe, yt you loke vpon: but if your backes be turned, then wyll couetous Iudas ſell dearly that whych hys liberal maiſter gyueth frelye. As for example of late dayes, the Kynges Mageſtye that deade is, dyd gyue a Benefyce to be appropryat vnto the Vniuerſitye

of Cambrydge. In liberam et puram eliemoſinam: As fre and pure almes. Howe be it, hys handes were ſo vnpure, whiche ſhould haue delyuered it, that he receiued .vi. hundreth poundes of the Vnyuerſytye for it. Whether that this .vi. C. poūds were conueied to the kings behoofe pryuelye for that almes, whyche by playne wrytynge was geuē frely, or els put into ſome Iudas pouch, I would it were knowen. For nowe, by ſuche charitable Almes, the king is ſlaundered, the pariſh vndone, and the vniuerſyty in worſe caſe then it was afore. Pleaſeth it your Mageſtye, wyth your honourable Counſell, for the reuerence of God, the pytye of the poore, and the godlye zele that ye haue to good learning, heare what hath bene done in your tyme.
            Your Mageſty hath had gyuen & receiued by Act of Parliament,

Colleges, Chauntries, & guyldes for mani good conſideracions, and eſpecially as appeareth in the ſame Act, for erectinge of grammer ſcholes, to the educacion of youthe in vertue & godlynes, to the further augmentynge of the vniuerſities, and better prouiſion for the poore and nedy. But now, many Grammer ſcholes, and muche charytable prouiſion for the poore, be taken, ſold, and made awaye, to the greate ſlaunder of you and youre lawes, to the vtter diſcomfort of the pore, to the greuous offence of the people, to the mooſte miſerable drownynge of youthe in ygnoraunce, and ſoore decaye of the Vniuerſities.
            There was in the North countrye, amongeſt the rude people in knowledge (whyche be moſt readye to ſpend theyr liues and goodes, in ſeruinge the king at the burnyng

of a Beacon) there was a Grammer ſchole founded, hauynge in the Vniuerſitie of Cambrydge, of the ſame foundacion .viii. ſcholerſhips two felowſhippes, euer repleniſhed wyth the ſcholers of that ſchole, whych ſchole is now ſold, decayed, and loſte. Mo there be of lyke ſort handled: But I recyte thys onelye, becauſe I knowe that the ſale of it was once ſtayed of charytye, and yet afterwardes broughte to paſſe by brybrye, as I hearde ſaye, and beleue it, becauſe that it is only brybrye that cuſtomablye ouer commeth charytye.
            For gods ſake you that be in authorytye, loke vpon it.
            For if ye winke at ſuche matters, God wyl ſcoule vpon you. Thinke not that I do burden you wt more than that which God by hys ordynaunce, not wtout your willes & cō
               ſentes, hath charged you wythal.

For by whoſe faute or negllgence ſo euer it was, that thynges afore tyme haue ben vncharytably abuſed, luerlye it is your charge, whiche be nowe in authorytye, to ſe at thys tyme all ſuch thynges as yet remayne out of order, rightuouſly, ſpedely, and charitably redreſſed. And as I do perceyue, that the abuſe of theſe thynges afore tyme, hath offended God, troubled the common wealth, and brought ſome men towardes ſhame & confuſion: So do I wyſhe, praye, and truſt, that nowe the redreſſe of the ſame maye be to gods pleaſure, the peoples cōfort, & to ye honor & eſtabliſhment of them that be in moſt highe authorytye.
            Heare therefore, and I wyl tel you more: There were in ſome townes .vi. ſome .viii. and ſome a doſyn kyne, gyuen vnto a ſtocke for the relyefe of the poore, and vſed

in ſuch wyſe, that the poore cotingers, which could make any prouiſion for fodder, had ye milke for a very ſmall hyre, & then the number of the ſtocke reſerued, al manner of vayles beſydes, bothe the hyre of the mylke, and the pryces of the yong veales, and olde fatte wares, was diſpoſed to the reliefe of the poore, theſe be alſo ſoulde, taken, and made awaye. The Kynge beareth the ſlaunder, the poore feleth the lacke, but who hath the profit of ſuche thynges. I canne not tell: but well I wot, and al the worlde ſeeth, that the Acte of Parlimente made by the Kynges Mageſtye, and hys Lordes and Commens of the Parliamente, for the mayntenaunce of learnynge, and reliefe of the poore, hathe ſerued ſome, as a moſt fit inſtrument to rob learning and to ſpoyl the pore.
            If you that now be in authorytye

do not loke vpon ſuch thynges to redreſſe them, god wyl loke vpon you, to reuenge theym. Here haue I reherſed theim, that the Kynges Mageſtye, wyth you of hys counſell maye learne not onelye by the doctrine & examples of ſcripture, but alſo by experience in hys own land, to ſe and conſider howe hys benefytes, put into the handes of hys nobles and offycers, be diſpoſed and vſed amongeſt his inferiour people.
            For if landed men & offycers by keping of houſes, & doing of theyr dutyes in theyr countryes, do beſtowe amonge the people, all that they haue receiued of god, by the kynges gyft, theyr fathers inherytance, or other waies: then ſhal god giue ſuch enereſe, yt euery man ſhall haue inough.
            As Salomon, the .xi. of the Prouerbes teſtifieth: Alii diuidunt
               
               propria, et ditiores fiunt: alii rapiunt non ſua, et ſemper in egeſtate ſunt: Some diſpoſe and gyue theyr owne, and become tycher and rycher: ſome doo rauine and ſpoyle that whiche is not theyr owne, and be euer in lacke and neede. As ye ſee in daylye experience, thoſe that do theyr owne duties in executinge theyre offyces, and beſtowe theyr owne goodes in kepynge good houſes, baue euer ſuche plentye, that all other men maruayle from whence god ſendeth it. And thoſe yt do no duties, nor kepe no houſes, but brybe in theyr offyces, and polle theyr teuaūtes, take ſo much and haue ſo litel, that all men wonder how the deuyl they waſte it.
            Nothynge is more true then the Goſpell: Date, et dabitur uobis: Gyue & it ſhal be gyuen vnto you. Gyue plentifully vnto other, and god wil gyue more plentie vnto you.
            
               For God wyll alwayes be afore hand, in giuyng good giftes. For as appeareth in thys goſpell, when the Apoſtles hadde giuen vnto the people ſo muche good meate as they deſyred, then ſaieth the Euangeliſte.
            When they wer filled, Ieſus ſayeth to hys dyſciples: Gather vp the broken meates that remaine, ſo that nothynge be loſt. They therefore gathered and fylled .xii. baſkets ful wyth the broken meates remaining of that which they had eaten.
            Here they gaue but .v. loues &, two fiſhes, & ther was giuē vnto thē .xii baſkets ful of meates.
            The Wyddowe of Sarep that

gaue but one handfull of flowre, and a litle oile vnto Elias, and had gyuen vnto her againe ſo much as ſerued her and her ſonne, al the time of the great drought .iii. Reg .xvii. Learne therfore that couetous bribry & extorcion hath neuer inough: and charytable lyberalytye euer hath plentye.
            Here alſo maye rych men learne, when and howe to fyll theyr ſtore houſes. Surely, euen as the Apoſtles dyd fyll theyr baſkettes, when the people haue inoughe, then by gatherynge vp that whiche elles ſhoulde be loſt. So dyd Ioſephe in Egipt, ſuffer no corne to be loſt in the yeares of plentye, but ſtored it vp in barnes, to releue the people wyth, in the tyme of darth: Not as couetous Carles do here in England forſtall the markets, and by corne at al tymes, to begyn and encreaſe a dearthe.
            
               Bleſſed be they that ſell, to make good cheape, and curſed be they that bye, to make it deare. For Salomon ſayeth. Prouerbes .xi. Qui abſcondit frumenta, maledicetur in populis: benediccio autem ſuper caput uendencium: He that hydeth vp corne, ſhall be curſed amongeſt the people: But bleſſynge be vpon theyr heades, that ſell.
            Nowe, to teache Chryſten rulers theyr dutyes, in the example of Chryſtes Apoſtles: marke howe the Apoſtles dyd fyrſt miniſter vnto the people, and than gathered vp for them ſelues, teaching thereby all Chryſten miniſters, landelordes, offycers, and rulers, fyrſte to miniſter vnto the people, euerye one the dutye of hys owne vocacion, afore they gather of the people, rentes, tythes, or fees by the name and aucthorytye of that vocacion. Qui non labor at, ſayeth Paule,

               non manducet: He that doeth not labour, ſhould not eate. He that doth no worke, ſhoulde take no wages: he that doeth no dutyes, ſhoulde take no fees. Alas, thys is goddes woorde, wrytten in hys wyll and Teſtamente, ſealed wyth Chryſtes bloude, and yet the cuſtomes and lawes of Englande be cleane contrarye. For it hathe bene cuſtomeably vſed, yea, and by lawes commaunded, to paye wages, tythes, and fees, althoughe no labour, no offyce, no dutye be done. Yea, although he be not a labourer, a paſtor or an offycer in dede, but onlye by a pretenced name, vnto whome theſe for the moſt part be paied.
            For he that hath the propertyes & uſeth the trades of a falſe theife, & cruell murtherer, can neuer be a faythful offycer in dede, althoughe he be ſo named by hys owne flatery, in the Patrons preſentacion,

in the Byſhoppes induccion, yea and in the Kynges Patent, ſealed wyth the brode Seale. I had nede to take hede how that▪ I ſpeake openly agaynſt any thynge in any mans Patent, ſealed wt the kings great ſeale: Much more nede hadde you to take hede, how that ye do any thing expreſſedly againſt goddes wyll and Teſtamente, ſealed wyth Chryſtes precious bloude. It is expreſſedly agaynſte Goddes Teſtamente, to clothe a Wolfe in a Lambes ſkynne: to call a thefe, an officer, and a cruell murtherer a charytable paſtoure: to call euyll by the name of good: and good by the name of the euyll. Eſaye .v. Ve qui dicitis malum bonum. Wo be to you that call euyl good. To you I ſay, which not only by ſayinges but alſo in wrytynges, do name & call theiues, murtherers, & wolfes that be euyll, by the names of officers,

paſtors, and lambes, whiche be good. I do not onlye meane Perſons, Prebendaryes, and other benefiſed men, but alſo all manner officers, whiche haue wages, fees, or liuinges, becauſe you geue them ſuch names, and not for that they do ſuch dutyes.
            Theſe be al Wolfs, and the names and titles that you gyue them, be nothynge els but ſhepe ſkynnes. Some ſaye, they wyll take better heede hereafter, but that whiche is nowe paſt, can not nowe be called backe, and amended. Yea, and it were great pytye, ſeynge that they haue payed the fyrſt fruites vnto the Kinges Mageſty, and no ſmal reward vnto other men, perchaūce bought theyr offyces dearelye, now to put them out of thoſe lyuynges, wyth the loſſe. of. all thoſe charges whiche they haue beſtowed in rewardes, as other wayes, to gette

ſuch lyuynges.
            Wo, wo wo vnto you hypocrytes that ſtumble at a ſtrawe, and leape ouer a blocke, that ſtrayne out a gnat, and ſwalowe vp a camell, that pytye more the loſſe of mens brybrye, whiche was geuen to corrupt ſome men, then the treading vnder fote of Chriſtes bloud, whiche was ſhead, to ſaue all men, that dooe imagin it pytye to dryue the theues, murtherers and wolfes frō amongeſt ye lambs of God, redemed wt Chriſts precious blud, & cōmitted vnto your gouernaunce and kepynge.
            As God ſhal helpe me, I ſpeake wyth feare, pytye, and reuerence: if you do not rather pulle the ſhepes ſkinnes ouer the wolfes eares, and hang theyr careaſes vpon the pales, then ſuffer theym to contynewe ſtyll, God wyll plucke you downe wyth ſome ſodein miſchiefe,

rather then mainteine or ſuffer you in ſo hygh authorytye, to vſe ſuch vncharitable, vngodly, and cruell pytye. You knowe that ſome of thē haue bought theyr benefyces, haue bought theyr offyces, than muſt ye nedes know, that eyther Chriſt is a lyer, or els that they be entered in as theues, to ſpoyle, murther, and to deſtroye.
            If you ſuffer theues, murtherers and wolfes to take theyr pleſures amongeſt Goddes lambes, I tell you playne, God wyll not longe ſuffer you to be ye hedſhepherds, & gouernours, & feders of hys lābes.
            And take hede you people that on the otherſide ye tunne not into an vntollerable ſtobernes, deniyng your rētes, your tithes, or other duties: for ye ſcripture forbyddeth you vtterly, to deny or withdrawe any thīg frō thē: thou art cōmaūded if he contēd to take thy cloke to geue

hym alſo thy cote. What ſoeuer is aſked, rather gyue more, than by denyinge of that, not to ſhewe thy ſelfe to be an innocent ſhepe that gyueth hys fleeſe, but a noyſome Goat, that ſtriketh with the horne. You are alwayes bounden to geue the fleſe. It is the magiſtrates duties, to conſider and note, whether they be theues or ſhepherds, dogs or woulfes, that taketh the fleeſe. Medle not wyth other mennes duties, for if ye do, ſurely ye ſhal finde no remedye, but prouoke vncolourable vengeaunce.
            Nowe to tourne to oure particuler purpoſe, lette all theym that do receiue offices, landes, power, or authorytye frome God, by the kynges gyfte, or by other meanes, Firſte beſtowe & diſpoſe the dutyes of thoſe thynges faithfullye amon geſt the people, afore they gather vp to theim ſelues the reuenues &

commodities of the ſame from the people. And then when as no man can come to meat, but by doyng of labour, nor none to receyuynge of fees, but by doing of duties, ſurely euery man ſhal haue as much as he deſerueth, & no man ſhall lacke that which he needeth.
            For he, that by doing of greate duties deſerueth the moſte, by atteininge the fees and rewardes due for the ſame dutyes, ſhall haue the beſt. And he yt is in nede, hauinge no truſt to get any thyng by idleneſſe, crafte, or flattery, ſhalbe compelled to vſe that labour & honeſt exerciſe, whyche ſhall relyeue hys nede ſufficiētly. Yea, by thys mean no man ſhall ſpende hys tyme in idleneſſe, nor vſe any labour or dyligence, wythout due recompence, For nede ſhall dryue all men from ſlouthfull idleneſſe, vnto labour & diligēce: and where as no laboure

nor dylygence lacketh hys iuſt rewarde, there euery labouring and diligent man, ſhal haue ſufficient plenty: So ye ſee how thys doeth conſequently enſue, that euery mā ſhal haue ſufficient inough & plentye, wher as men do firſt diſpoſe, miniſter, & giue according to theyr dutyes, & afterwards receiue kepe & ſaue that which God doth ſende as a rewarde, encreaſed & augmented, for doing of theyr dutyes.
            So dyd the Apoſtles, after the faythful diligent diſpoſyng of the v. loues and .ii. fyſhes receiue and keepe theyr rewarde wonderfullye augmēted, to repleniſh and fyl .xii. baſkets. So God graunt, that all officers in Englād may wyth ſuch faithful diligence do theyr duties yt it may pleaſe God to gyue to all the people ſufficient inough, & vnto euery miniſter, the baſket of his honeſt deſire, heaped vp bi the brim
            
               The men therfore ſeynge what a ſigne Ieſus had done, ſayd that this is ye Prophet, whiche cometh into the worlde. This is euen he whom Moiſes, the law, & the prophetes do teache, to be the fully & only ſufficient ſauiour of ye world. Moſes ſaying, in ye .xviii. of Deut. A Prophet of thy nacion & of thy brethren, lyke vnto me, ſhall the Lorde thy God rayſe vp vnto the, hym ſhalt thou heare. The lawe, as a tutour, leadeth & bryngeth al men to thys ſauyour, to receyue of hym that perfeccion, which the law it ſelfe lacketh. The Prophetes dyd tel long afore of this ſauiour which is now comen in our tyme, after theyr dayes. Thys was the peoples confeſſion of Chryſt, after that they were by ſo great a miracle; ſo plentyfullye fed. Chriſte ofte afore had wrought wōderfull miracles, diſputed learnedly, & preached

playnely: but by al thoſe meanes did he not ſo muche perſwade the people, and win theyr heartes, as by thys one miracle, in feeding & cheryſhinge the people. Yea, and whoſoeuer liſteth to mark thorowe out all Englande, he ſhall ſe that a meane learned perſon, keping an houſe in hys paryſhe, and beyng of godly conuerſacion▪ ſhal perſwade & teach mo of hys pariſhnets with communicacion at one meale, than the beſt learned doctor of diuinitie kepynge no houſe can perſwade or teache in hys pariſh by preachyng a doſen ſolemne ſermons.
            Lyke wyſe the gentle man that kepeth a good houſe in his cōtrey ſhalbe in better credit with ye people for hys liberalitye, then the beſt orator or lawier in England, for all hys eloquence. I do not prayſe thoſe men whych brybe and pol al the yeare to kepe riot in theyr houſes

for a fortnyght, a moneth, or a quarter of a yeare: But thoſe I ſe beloued, truſted & obeyed, that accordynge to theyr habilitie, keepe good houſes continually.
            And the chiefe cauſe why the commens doo not loue, truſt, nor obey the gentlemē & officers, is, becauſe the gentlemen and officers buylde many fayre houſes, and kepe fewe good houſes, haue plentye of eloquence to tell fayre tales, but vſe lytell faythfull dylygence in doing of theyr duties. Wherefore, ſende forth, and place in euerye countrye godly preachers, wel diſpoſed perſons, and faithful diligent officers of all ſortes. Yea, but where ſhuld we now fynd liuyngs for al thoſe?
            Forſoth I do tel you: Out and away with the wily foxes, the falſe flatteryng theues, & the rauenyng wolfes, and than ſe how many loues, how many offices, prebendes▪
               
and benefices ye finde voyde, howe mani you haue amongeſt your ſelues that youre boye caryeth, that your chapleynes, your ſeruaunts, and your houſhold officers haue, & let all theſe be broughte forth: and althoughe at the fyrſte ſyghte they ſhal ſeme to litle, and fewe to ſerue ſo greate a Realme with ſo manye ſhyres, beyng all tunne nowe oute of ciuil order into rude wildernes, Yet, after equal diuidyng & faythful diligent miniſtring of thoſe loues and fyſhes, of theſe prebends, perſonages, and all kynd of offices amongeſt the people, God of hys goodneſſe ſhall geue ſuche increaſe vnto the people, hauynge therby ſufficiente plenty of Chryſtes holy worde of good ciuil order, & of charitable reliefe, that there ſhal be remaynyng ſo much tithes, offrynge, rentes, fees, & rewards, as wyl fyll the .xii. baſkets of the Apoſtles, I

meanethe barnes, the houſes, and purſes of all fayethfull diligente miniſters and offycers. Then ſhall thys one acte perſwade and allure the hertes of al Englyſhmen, more then all that euer was done afore: For when they ſhall ſee, that by thys Kyng and thys Counſell, the wilye foxe of ſuperſticion is vtterlye ban̄yſhed, the falſe thefe of flaterye apprehended and taken, and the cruel wolfe of couetouſeneſſe ſlain and hanged vp by the heeles, ſo that the preachers, the perſons, the officers, and all manner of paſtores reſtored to theyr places, doo feede, cheryſh, and kepe theyr flockes whiche were afore pylled▪ ſpoiled and deuoured: then ſhall they of hertye courage, with one minde, and one voice confeſſe and acknowledge, that thys is a Kyng ſent frō God, in dued wyth the wyſdome of Salo mon, and the faythfull diligent

ſtoutneſſe of Dauyd hys father, nowe guyded by godly counſel to bryng out of myſery, and proſper in welth vs the people of thys hys Real pe.
            
               Dixit Dominus
The Lorde hathe ſpoken it.
            God graunt you grace to do it, with thanks & prayſe to hym for euer.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprynted at London by Iohn Day dwellinge ouer Alderſgate, beneth ſaint Martyns. And are to be ſold at his ſhop by the litle conduit in Chepeſyde at the ſygne of the Reſurrection.
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum. Per ſeptennium.
         
      
   