
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The Breuiary of Britayne.
            
            As this most noble and renowmed Iland, was of auncient time deuided into three, Kingdomes, England, Scotland and Wales▪
            
            
               Contaynyng a learned discourse of the variable state, & alteration therof, vnder diuers, as wel natural: as forren princes, & Conquerours.
            
            Together with the Geographicall description of the same, such as neither by elder, nor later writers, the like hath been set foorth before.
            
               Writen in Latin by Humfrey Lhuyd of Denbigh, a Cambre Britayne, and lately Englished by Thomas Twyne, Gentleman.
            
            1573.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right honorable, Edward Deuiere, Lorde Bulbeck, Erle of Oxenford, Lorde great Chamberlayne of England: Tho. Twyne wisheth long life, perfect health, encrease of honour, and endlesse felicitie.
            
            
               NObilitie is a precious gift, whiche so glittereth in the eyes of al men: that there is no one corporall thyng in this worlde, wherof we make a greater accompt. For so is it esteemed of all, desired of all, and reuerenced of al. Vertue, saith TVLLY, and before him PLATO, if it might be seene

with our bodely eyes: doubtlesse it woulde procure merueilous loue, and good likynge vnto it self, the shew therof would appeare so faier, and amiable.
            The vniting of which two most noble graces, with al other furniture of Nature, & Fortune with in your person, right honorable, and my very good Lord, hath so bent my iudgement, and brought me into such likyng, & admiration therof that I haue rested no smale time, not only not satisfied in being one of the admiratours: but also desierus to be one of the participatours of those your honours most laudable dispositions, wherunto I do

now hūbly submit my selfe. And in token of my dutiful meaning herein: am so hardi, as to presēt your honour with this simple traueyle, which I so terme, in respect of my paines in translatyng the same. Howbeit I am perswaded, that it cost M. Lhuyd, who first, and not longe since wroate the same in Latin, no smale labour, and industry in the gatheryng, and pennyng.
            Regarding your honour to be amongst therest: a very fit patrone for it, in consideration, that beynge, as yet, but in your flower, and tender age, and generally hoped, and accompted of in time, to become the cheefest

stay of this your common welth, and country: you woulde receaue into your salf tuition, the writen name, and descriptiō of that Britayne, whiche, as it is in part your natiue soyle: so your duty biddeth you to defend and mantayne it. Here on, when your hono
                  •
               r shalbe at lea sure to looke, bestowynge suche regard as you are accustomed to doo on bookes of Geographie, Histories, and other good lernynge, wherin I am priuy your honour taketh singular delight: I doubt not, but you shall haue cause, to iudge your time very well applied. And so much the rather, for that in the studie of

Geographie, it is expediēt first to know exactly the situation of our owne home, where wee a bide, before that wee shalbe able to iudge how other countries doo lie vnto vs, which are farre distant from vs, besides that it were a foule shame to be inquisitiue of the state of forreyne landes, and to be ignorant of our owne. As your honour beynge already perfectly instructed: is not now to learne at my 
                  •
               ande. But for my part, it shal be sufficient, that your honour would dayn to accept this smale present, or rather therein my harty good wyl, which beyng no otherwise able to gratefie the

same: shall neuer cease to pray to God, that he would alwayes direct you in the commendable race of vertue, and learnynge which you haue begun, augment your honour with many degrees and in the end: reward you with immortall felicitie.
            
               Your honours most humble at commaundement:
Thomas Twyne.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ THE PREFACE OF THE TRANSLAtours to the Reader.
            
            
               
                  WHen I first tooke in hande this Booke, (gentle Reader) & was determined to translate it into English: I considered the great iudgement, and learnyng of the Author, & mine owne simplicitie, and vnskilfulnesse. By conference wherof: I was eftsoones driuen from my determination. For I perceiued how dangerous a thyng it was for me, who, God knoweth, am but a simple antiquarie, and but slenderly practised in the antiquities of this Ilande: to geue foorth my absolute sentence in suche matters as are in controuersie, not only amongst the moste approued, and best learned auntient writers in this behalfe: but also between suche as haue been very well seen therin in our time, wherof some be dead, and some be yet liuyng. Which I saw yt of necessity I must doo. As for this one example, among many. Although it be not yet fully

agreed vpon, what towne in Englande the auntient name of Caleua doth signifie, and the place therof, be also as vncerteine, as vpon whiche side of the Thames it should lie: yet followynge myne author so neare as I may: I am enforced to determine some way, I am sure not without mislikynge of many. The like reprehension I haue incurred, in the Englishyng of names of diuerse places moe, some English, some Scottish, but especially, VVelsh, or Britysh. In so much yt I was determined to haue set them downe, as I had founde them in M. Lhuyds Latin booke which he, for that he wroate in Latine: had, so nigh as he coulde, made them al Latin words in sounde, & termination. But beyng therin much lightned especially by the helpe of the rightworshipfull M. Doct. Yale of London: I trust I haue deserued lesse blame in yt, then in any other one parte of my translation, how be it, for my litle skill in yt tongue: I am the more I hope, to be borne with all. And where as the authour in the Latine copie, recitynge the peculiar

Letters, & the pronunciation of them, with the proprietie of the British tongue, in stéede of a double letter, as DD, or a lettre with an aspiration, as LH, would, for breuety sake, haue them writen with the same letter & a pricke vnder the foote: for want of ye like letters: wée haue throughout the whole worke, expressed ye same to that very effect in ye double letter, or with aspiration, from place to place, wher he hath vsed ye same vnder pricked letter. So that hereby, sauing; for his conceit of writing: there is no errour committed at al. And herein I thought it needeful to admonish thée.
            Moreouer, if there shall haply appeare any fault, by vs now committed, either in misnamynge any person, Towne, or other thynge, wronge placing of wordes, euell allegation of writers, altering of the authours meaning by false poynting, one woord put for an other, or such like, the truth wherof I coulde not exactly try out, by diligent animaduersion, or due conferrence in so short time: I most hartely craue pardon, and must néedes impute the most

parte therof vnto the falsenesse, an disordre of the Latine copie, printed at Colone. Whose errata, are moe then I haue commonly seene in a booke of no greater quantitie, & yet if the Printer woulde haue noted all: he shoulde haue noted twise so many as he did, besides that there are many errata in erratis.
            
            But perhappes some wil merueile, what is my reason that I haue termed this worke in English, the Breuiary of Britayne, since it is not intitled so in Latine? To them I answere, that if they deeme of the Latine title a right: they shal perceaue yt I haue not strayed one iote from the authours meanyng. For, where he calleth this booke Commētarioli Britannicae descriptionis fragmentum, that is to say, a fragment of a litle treatise, or discourse of the description of Britayne: waygh, and iudge indifferently (good Reader) how muche I haue gone byside the purpose.
            And here peraduenture, it may be looked for, accordyng vnto the custome of some translatours, I should fine; and

picke my penne, to set foorth the commendation of mine authour, as in very deede, some of them had neede to do. But I feare me much, least in myne ouer rash attempt, in takyng so worthy a writer in hand, not beyng furnished with any greater skyll, and learnynge in this his kinde, then I am knowne to be: I haue deserued iust blame, and M. Lhuyd, if he were liuynge: woulde haue desired me of lesse acquaintance.
            Whose passyng earnest traueile, in attaynyng skil, and knowledge: hath deseruedly purchased vnto him immortal fame, and so much the rather, for that he hath therin endeuoured him selfe to doo his countrie good, wherevnto all men are naturally bounden. And not only contented to take the paynes for his owne knowledge sake, but willing to pleasure other therby: hath communicated the same vnto the worlde.
            Which commendable example of his, I trust shalbe a prouocation vnto some other in this Realme, that haue traueiled longe time, and taken much paines in the searching out of antiquities, and

anncient Monuments of Britayne, not without their greate charges (Whose singular learnyng without suspition of partialitie, I may not commende) to attempte the l
                  •
               k
                  •
               
               ▪ 
               
                  〈◊〉
                that they be hindred b
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
               l
                  •
               ng to do nothyng th
                  〈…〉
               tie ought to be furtherers, an
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               o others. And for my parte, I 
                  〈…〉
               en the paynes with hazard of mine e
                  •
               emation for the English Readers sake, whiche vnderstandeth not the Latine 
                  •
               ongue. To whom I thought it as 
                  〈…〉
               h appertayning, to know the state, and description of his owne country: as to the learned be he Englishman, or stranger. Only for recompence, gentle Reader, let me haue thy good woorde, and lawfull fauour: and I aske no more. Farewell hartly, and enioy it.
         
         
            
            ¶ A freind, in prayse of the Authour.
            
               THE British soyle, with all therin that lies,
               The surging Seas, which compasse it about
               In what estate of heate, or colde of skies
               It stands, with many thinges of other rout:
               
                  Lhuyd in this booke hath put thē out of doubt.
               Which though in viewe, it be of body smale:
               in breif discourse it doth comprise them all.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Ptolom his pen it seemes he had in hand.
               Somtimes in Seas, with NEPTVNE he did dwel
               IVNO to skies pluckt him to view the land,
               Els surely could he not haue done so well,
               That thus so right of euery thing doth tell,
               As though he stoode aloft, and downe did looke,
               And what he saw: wroat straight into his booke
            
            
               ¶Ech Hill, ech dale, ech water worth the name,
               With Forests wide, and many a standing Wood,
               Ech Citie, Towne, ech Castle great of fame,
               Ech King, & prince spronge forth of noble blood,
               Were bad his reigne, or were it iust and good,
               So much as skild him for to touch therin:
               To tell the truth he forced not a pin.
            
            
               ¶Thy coūtry Lhuyd, is bounden much to thee,
               Which makest it vnto vs not only knowen:
               But vnto such as in far countries be,
               Wherby thy fame the greater way is flowen,
               And eke thy countries praise the more is growē,
               So by one deede two noble thinges are chanced:
               
                  Britayne, and Lhuyd, to heauen are aduanced.
            
            
               
               ¶ In Latine thou, the learned sort to please,
               In single payne, a double skill didst show.
               In English Twyne hath turned, for greater ease
               To those, the ROMAN tongue that do not know.
               The worke is one, though tongues be twaynel trow.
               The Latin thou, the English Twyne did twyst,
               The learned laud you both, disprayse who lyst.
            
            Finis.
         
         
            
               Thomae Brounei Praebendarij VVestm. in Commentariolos Britannicae descriptionis Humfredi Lhuyd Denbyghiensis, Cambri Britanni.
            
               FLumine Lhuyde fluis, laxis effusus habenis,
               Dulcis, & irrigno flumine LHVYDE fluis,
               Nereides, virides
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Deae, pater Inachus aiunt,
               Parnassi ex ipso vertice Lhuyde venis.
               In mare dulcisono Lhuydus fluit amne Britannū:
               Clamant Cluydae flumina, Lhuydus adest.
               Et nouus ille, nouis auxit faelicius vndis
               Fontes, Annales, inclite Brute tuos.
               Nomina vera docet Regionis, fluminis, vrbis,
               Et cuius
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   loci quae sit origo, docet.
               Vt vere scripsit: sic vero interprete gaudet,
               Sed Lhuydus Latij fluminis amne fluit.
               Anglus hic interpres, Romanum iam facit Anglū.
               Scripsit vter
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   bene: laus sit vtri
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   sua.
            
         
         
            
            
               Ed. Grant, Scholemaster of VVestminster: in cōmendation of this treatise of Britanie, pende in Latin by Hūfrey Lhuyd, and translated into English, by Tho. Twyne.
            
            
               IF for to write of Brutus broode,
               eche Britaynes brayne be bounde,
               For zeale he owes to country soyle,
               and eke his natiue grounde:
               Then Wales may boast, and iustly ioy,
               that such a Britayne bred,
               which hath with serious serche of brain
               and toylyng trauell spred,
               Throughout the coasts of Britany,
               
               and forrayne countries strange:
               The liuely fame of Brutus name,
               that through the world doth range.
               That longe lay hid in dungeons darke,
               obscurde by tract of time,
               And almost smouldred with the smok
                     •
                  
               
               of ignorances crime:
               But now reuiude and polished,
               by Lhuyd his busie brayne:
               And brought to light, & former frame,
               by his exhausted payne.
               
                  Whose diligence, and iudgement great
               I can but muse to see,
               That with such skill doth paynt
               the prayse of Brute, and Britanie,
               
               That with such loue to countryes soyle
               doth bryng agayne to light:
               The shinyng shape, and stately stampe
               of that was darckned quight.
               By whose endeuour Polidore,
               
               must now surseace to prate,
               To forge, to lie, and to defame,
               kynge BRVTVS worthy state.
               By whose great paynes, proude Hector
               
               must now leaue of to bable,
               Such vaunts: as of his Scottish soyle, Scot,
               he whilom seemd to fable.
               By Lhuid their brags be beaten downe,
               their forgyng lies be spide,
               And Britaine needs must chaleng fame
               that erst it was denide.
               
                  Lhuid findeth forth hir former fame,
               and antique names doth tell:
               And doth refute their forged lies,
               that did of rancor smell.
               
                  Brutes worthy race is blazed here,
               by trumpe of flickering fame:
               And Lhuid, it is a flowyng flud,
               that hath reuiude the same.
               
                  Who, though enterred now in earth:
               yet shall he neuer die,
               But liue amongs his Britanists,
               
               by this his Britanie:
               
               whose thread of life wold god the Fates
               
               had yet not sought to spoyle:
               Then had wee had a larger scope
               of Brutus sacred soyle.
               Go litle volume, go thy wayes,
               by Lhuid in Latin pende:
               And new attir'd in English weede,
               by Twyne that thee doth sende,
               To Brute his broode: a labour sure
               that well deserueth prayse:
               Go shew thy selfe to Britanists,
               
               whose glory thou dost rayse.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            ¶ Lodowick Lhuyd, in prayse of the Author.
            
               GO on, be boulde, thou litle booke,
               sounde foorth thy aucthours fame,
               Aduaunce the trauell tried of him
               that christened first thy name.
               Thy state exilde, thy age vnknown,
               thy line that longe was lost:
               Is now returnd, and known againe
               in auncient Britaynes cost:
               
                  From Scythia shore, from Phrigia feilds,
               where longe thy selfe haue laine,
               From raging Rockes, and crased cragges,
               thou art come home againe.
               Thy patron graunde, and auncient Sire
               
                  Aeneas Troiane stoute:
               Did neuer toile on land and SeaS,
               as thou hast rangde aboute,
               From Mountaines high wherto thy selfe
               alone wast wont to talke:
               
                  Lhuid, taught thy steps to treade in Court
               with Princes wise to walke.
               If then Solinus merit fame,
               that Caesars stirpe haue pende:
               The same ought Lhuyd of right to claime
               that Brutus line defende.
               If Curtius be aduauncde on high,
               
                  Alexanders fame to feede:
               Then well ought Lhuyd commended be
               to honour Hectors seede.
               What praise had Liui then in Rome,
               
               or Herodot in Greece:
               That prayse ought neuer Humfry Lhuyd
               
               in natiue soyle to leese.
               Who, being aliue: could Argos make,
               with sugred talke t
                     〈…〉
                  e:
               And now being dead, 
                     〈…〉
                  t Argos make,
               with hundred eies to weepe.
               
                  Who, though his corps is clothd in clay▪
               
               in mouldred dust to lie:
               In spight of Parcas, yet his fame,
               doth skale the empire skie.
               And though that age out liueth youth,
               yet death doth age exile:
               Though fame suruiueth death againe,
               yet time doth fame defile.
               So youth to age, and age to death,
               and death to fame in fyeld:
               And fame to time, and time to GOD,
               
               this Lhuyd knew well to yeeld.
               Sith then he founde Misenus trumpe
               to sounde againe the fame
               That once was wonne, and then was lost:
               extoll each one his name.
               And gyue him then his due desert,
               enroll his noble minde:
               That first haue taught, his countrimen
               their countrie state to finde.
            
            Finis.
         
         
            
            
               Laurence Twyne, to his brother Tho. Twyne, in prayse of his Translation.
            
               AL that which learned Lhuyd of late
               in Latine did endite,
               Of Britaynes race, their auncient state,
               their guise, and countries rite:
               Loe now in English tongue by true
               report, and cunnings skill,
               
                  Twyne hath set forth th' unlearned sort,
               their pleasure to fulfill.
               Wherin who list to looke with heede,
               straight Britaynes state shall know.
               And wherwithall this noble land
               in auncient time did flow.
               
                  Lhuyds paynes was much, in latine stile
               which wrote the same before:
               But Brother, sure in my conceit
               thou thanks deseruest more,
               Of Britaynes, and of British soyle,
               which makst them vnderstand.
               A thinge more meete (me thinks) for them
               then for a forren land.
               Wherin as thou by toyle, hast wonne
               the spurres, and prayses got:
               So reape deserued thanks of those,
               for whom thou brakst the knot.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               Iohn Twyne, to the Readers of his brothers translation.
            
               
                  AS they of all most prayse deserue,
               that first with Pen did show,
               To vs the sacred lawes of God,
               wherby his will wee know:
               So, many thanks are due to those,
               that beate their busie brayne,
               To let vs learne our earthly state,
               in whiche wee here remayne.
               Amongst the rest that euer wroate:
               none hath of vs deserude
               Like prayse to Lhuyd, who lo, his foyl
                     •
                  
               
               hath here to vs preferd.
               Wherin thou mayst the whole estate,
               of this our natiue land,
               What so is worthy to be knowne:
               by readyng vnderstand.
               And, cause the aucthour wroate ye same
               in tongue, enstrangd to some:
               
                  Twyne hath it taught ye English phrase
               in which it earst was dumbe.
               Accept it well, and when thou readst,
               if ought therby thou gayne:
               For recompence yeld thy good will,
               to him that tooke the payne.
            
            Finis.
         
         
            
            
               A Table contayning the principall matters entreated of in this booke, largely digested into the Alphabeticall ordre, as followeth.
            
               
                  AEstiones. Fo. 52
               
                  Albania, whence so called. 49 described, 47.
               
                  Albion, why so termed. 4
               
                  Anglysey in Wales. 57
               
                  Animositie of Britaynes. 62. their auntient maners. 61
               
                  Arfon. 64
               
                  Aron martir, where buried. 82
               
                  Attacotti inhabitours of Albania, of Scottish originall. 45
               
                  Augustine the Monke. 13. his intollerable arrogancie. 71
            
            
               B
               
                  Bardi. 7
               
                  Bath, how of olde time termed. 18
               
                  Bedfordshyremen. 24
               
                  Benbroche. 78
               
                  Bernhard of Newmercate. 83
               
                  Bernicia. 28
               
                  Boadicia, or Bunduica, a valiant que
                     ••
                   85. 89
               
                  
                  Bodotua. 48
               
                  Boëthius reproued. 21. 24. 33. 38. 49. 81.
               
                  Bogwelth, or Buellt. 83
               
                  Brecknock. 83. by what Englishman first subdued. ibidem.
               
                  Brennus, whose sonne, and brother. 53 why he slew himselfe. 54. what language his Souldiers vsed. 54. his Court, or Palace. 72. was a perfect Britayne. 53
               
                  Brenni, where they dwelt. 55
               
                  Brigantes, were neuer in Scotland. 30. their Cities names. 29
               
                  Britayne, why so named. 8. how deuided. ibid. the Etimology therof. 8
               
                  Britayne the lesse, or the Second. 35
               
                  Britayne the first, seconde, thyrde, and fourth. 35
               
                  Britaynes how they celebrate Easter, 67. their Ualiencie, 69
               
                  British names corrupted by ye 
                  Romās. 5
               
                  Britons nigh Fraunce. 10
               
                  Brustius crueltie. 83. his miserable death. ibidem.
               
               
                  Bristow. 18
               
                  Buckynghamshiremen. 24
            
            
               
               C
               
                  Cadeuenna. 73
               
                  Caesar, what he termeth a Citie. 32
               
                  Caerbro castle in the Wyght. 17
               
                  Caer Andred, by whom ouerthrown. 15
               
                  Caerlile. 47
               
                  Calice. 14
               
                  Cambria, why so called. 49
               
                  Cambra. 53
               
                  Cambridge. 23
               
                  Camalodunum. 21
               
                  Camudolanum. ibidem
               
                  Cangorum where it standeth. 66
               
                  Cantimanduas treason. 34
               
                  Cantorbury, why so called. 15. metropolitane of England, and Wales, ibid.
               
               
                  Caradoc described. 33
               
                  Cardigan. 75
               
                  Castle of Clun. 34
               
                  Castle of Douer. 14
               
                  castle of Emlyn. 79
               
                  castle of Lion. 70
               
                  Cataracus, where he 
                     •
                  aught with Ostorius. 34
               
                  Catguilia. 79
               
                  Ceretica described. 75. 79
               
                  Chepstow. 81
               
                  Chester. 27
               
                  Chichester. 16 Cicester. 19
               
                  
                  Citie of Legions. 82
               
                  Cities of Brigantes. 29
               
                  Clun castle. 24
               Cōmendation of the Bathes at Bath 18
               
                  Conouia, by whom builded. 65
               
                  Cornish, & Welshmen one nation, 18
               
                  Cornwall. 17
               Crneltie of Brustius. 83
               
                  Cumberland, by whom in olde time in habited. 30
               
                  Cymbri 15
            
            
               D
               
                  Danes came in. 13
               
                  Danica Sylua. 74
               
                  Dannij 30
               
                  Dauid, how termed in British. 77. trā
                  slated ye Archbishopricke to Meneue. ib.
               
               
                  Death of Brennus. 54
               
                  Death of Brustius. 83
               
                  Deheubarth. 74. why worse then Gwynedh. 75
               
                  Deera, in old time called Brigātia. 30. 28
               
                  Demetia. 77
               
                  Denbigh. 66. described. ibidem.
               
               
                  Deuani. 26. how called of old by the Rom. ibi.
               
               
                  Description of Albania. 47
               
                  Description of Cambria. 49
               
                  Description of Caradoc citie. 35
               
                  Description of Ceretica. 75. 79.
               
                  Description of Denbygh. 66.
               
                  
                  Description of Tegenia, or Igenia. 68
               
                  Description of Wales. 62
               
                  Diuision of Britayne. 9
               
                  Diuision of England. 12
               
                  Diuision of Wales. 62
               
                  Diuision of Venodotia. 64
               
                  Diuisions are dangerous. 93
               
                  Dorchester. 24
               
                  Doruentani, why so called. 27
               
                  Douer. 14
               
                  Douer castle by whom builded. 14
               
                  Druydes. 42
               
                  Dunetus Abbot. 71
               
                  Dunwallon forsaketh his kyngdom. 68
               
                  Diuerse kynges possess
                     •
                   diuers partes of Wales. 63
            
            
               E
               
                  Edward the first, entred Wales. 58
               
                  Edenburgh, by whom builded. 48
               
                  Egbert first Monarch of Lohëgr. 19
               
                  Eluyl. 74
               
                  Elbodius archbishop of Northwales. 67
               
                  Emlyn castle. 79
               
                  England deuided. 12. by whom first so called. 13
               
                  Englishmen whence descended. 12
               
                  
                  Erles of Glocestre. 58
               
                  Etymology of Britayne. 8
               
                  Etymology of Gaulle. 56
               
                  Euboniae. 49
               
                  Example of Gods iudgement. 69
               
                  Exceter. 17
            
            
               F
               
                  Famyly of Stuarts in Scotland. 34
               
                  Famyly of Grayes in England. 67
               
                  Famyly of Fitzalanes. 72
               
                  Flauia. 35
               
                  Flemmyngs, driuen out of their owne country, what place they possessed. 57
               
                  Flint towne. 69
               
                  Forest of Deane. 74
               
                  Franci, whence supposed to haue sprōge 53.
               
                  France bounded. 56
            
            
               G
               
                  Gadini. 47
               
                  Glocester, by whom builded. 19
               
                  Golden numbre confuted, & reiected. 68
               
                  Gwynedh. 58. whence the kynges therof so called. 64
               
                  Grancestre. 23
               
                  
                  Gyldas reprooued. 93
               
                  Gyldo. 42
               
                  Gylford. 16
               
                  Gyllus vsurper. 42
            
            
               H
               
                  Hamo with his. xii. knightes. 80
               
                  Hastinge. 93
               
                  Hebrides. 49
               
                  Hengiscus sent agaynst the Scots, and Readshankes. 12
               
                  Henry the seconde vanquished. 92
               
                  Henry the fourth. 59
               
                  Henry the seuenth. ib.
               
                  Henry the eight, 60
               
                  Henry Erle of Lincolne, builded a castle. 66
               
                  Herald, last kyng of Danish bloud. 25
               
                  Hereford, where it lieth 74
               
                  Herryng takyng. 65
               
                  Hibernēses afterward called Scots. 44
               
                  Hierome Russelle reprooued. 28
               
                  Hierhauts, and Hierhautrye by Welsh men diligently retayned. 7
               
                  Holt. 70
               
                  Hopa. 72
               
                  How many cities, so many kyngdomes in Britayne. 32
               
                  
                  Huntingtonshire. 
                  
                     •
                  4
            
            
               I
               
                  Iceni, what region they inhabited. 23
               
                  Idiome, or proprietie of the British tongue. 3
               
                  Iernaei. 4
               
                  Ilands about Anglysea. 64
               
                  Ilcestre. 18
               
                  Irishmen called afterward Scots. 44
               
                  Irland. 49. by whom first endued with Christianitie. 63
               
                  Iulius the martyr, where buried. 82
            
            
               K
               
                  Kennethus, kyng of Scots. 38
               
                  Kent. 14
               
                  Kynton. 74
               
                  Kynge of Englandes eldest sonne Prince of Wales. 59
               
                  Kynge Arthur. 91
               
                  Kynge of Powys, why swallowed into the earth. 69
            
            
               L
               
                  Lancashyremen, how termed of old. 32
               
                  Landas where it standeth. 80
               
                  Landonia 47. of the Readshankes how called. 48
               
                  
                  Lhanydlos. 73
               
                  Lasciuiousnes of the Scots. 43
               
                  Latitude of Wales. 57
               
                  Legion cities site described. 82
               
                  Lemster. 74
               
                  Letters of the Britaynes, their ordre, forme, and pronunciation. 1.
               
                  Leycestershyremen. 25
               
                  Lyncolnshyremen. 24
               
                  London, by whom builded, amplefied, the names therof, 19. a colony of the Romans. 20
               
                  Longitude of Wales. 56
               
                  Lucopibia how termed, and where it standeth. 30
               
                  Ludlaw. 74.
               
                  Lychfyeld. 25
            
            
               M.
               
                  Meatae. 48
               
                  Màilor deuided. 70
               
                  Malmsbury. 19
               
                  Maluernhilles. 74
               
                  Manchester. 32
               
                  Mandubratius sent for Caesar into Britayne. 19
               
                  March, a kyngdom of England. 27. 32
            
         
         
            
            
               Authours, whose names, and woorkes, are cited in this Booke.
            
            
               Ammianus.
               Annius.
               Antoninus.
               Appianus.
               Aristoteles.
               Athenaeus.
               Aurelius Victor.
               Beatus Rhenanus.
               Beda.
               Boëthius.
               Berosus.
               Caesar.
               Capgraue.
               Claudianus.
               Crantzius.
               Diodorus Siculus.
               Dion.
               Eliote.
               Eutropius.
               Frossartus.
               Giambularius.
               Gothus.
               Gyldas.
               Gyraldus.
               Haymo Armenius.
               Hieronomus.
               Hierono. Russellus
               Herodianus.
               Huntingtonensis.
               Iuuenalis.
               Lampridius.
               Lazius.
               Lelandus.
               Lucanus.
               Maior.
               Mamertinus.
               Malmsburiensis.
               Marcellinus.
               Marianus Scotus.
               Marius Niger.
               Mela.
               Meyerus,
               Orosius.
               Panuinius.
               
               Parisiensis.
               Paulus Diaconus
               Pausanias.
               Plinius.
               Plutarchus.
               Polybius.
               Polydorus.
               Postellus.
               Ptolomaeus.
               Sextus Rufus.
               Sidonius Apollinaris
               Spartianus.
               Solinus.
               Suetonius.
               Sigisbertus.
               Tacitus.
               Regino.
               Rhicuallensis.
               Robertus Coenalis.
               Virgilius.
               Virunnius.
               Volateranus.
               Vopiscus.
               Wilhelmus Paruus.
            
         
         
            
            
               The Epistle of the aucthour. To the most adorned, and best deseruynge to be reueren
               ced of al that loue the knowledge of the Mathematicks. Abraham Ortelius of Andwarp.
            
            
               DEARLY beloued Ortelius, that day wherein I was cōstayned to depart from London: I receyued your Description of ASIA ad before I came home to my house: I fell into a very perillous Feuer, which hath so torne this poore body of mine, these. x. continuall dayes: that I was brought into despayre of my life. But, my hope Iesus Christe, is layde vp in my bosome. Howbeit, neither the dayly shakynge of the continuall Feuer, with a double Tertian, neither the lookyng for present death, neither the vehement headache without intermission: coulde put the remembrance of my Ortelius, out of my troubled brayne. Wherfore, I send vnto you my Wales, not beutifully set forth in all

poinctes, yet truly depeinted, so be that certeyn notes be obserued, which I gathered euen when I was redy to die.
            You shall also receaue the description of England, set forth as well with the auntient names: as those which are now vsed, and an other England also drawne forth perfectly enough. Besides certein fragmentes written with mine owne hande. Which, notwithstandynge that they be written foorth in a rude hande, and seeme to be imperfect: yet doubt not, they be well grounded by proofes, and authorities of auntient writers.
            Which, also (if God had spared me life) you should haue receaued in better order, and in all respects perfect. Take therfore, this last remembrance of thy Humfrey, and for euer adieu, my deare friend Ortelius.
            
            
               From Denbigh, in Gwynedh, or Northwales, 
                  the. xxx. of August. 1568.
               
               Yours both liuyng, and diyng:
Humfrey Lhuyd.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ THE BREVIarie of Britayne, &c.
            
               
                  
                     FOR so much as▪
                   in my last letters which I wrote vnto you (right learned Sir:) in the which I promised within few dayes after, to send you the Geographicall Description of all Britayne, set foorth with the most auncient names, as well Latine, as Brittysh, wherin, I must muche disagrée from th' opinions of learned men: I thought it expedient, first in a fewe wordes, to disclose theffect of my purpose to all, & by what argumentes, and aucthoryties of the learned I am mooued, partly to change, & partly to ascribe vnto other, (otherwise then those which wrote before me haue done:) ye names of Coū
                  treyes, Townes, Ryuers & other places. Whiche before I take in hande to do: I purpose to entreate a lytle of the knowledge of the Britysh tongue, of the signification of the Letters, and the maner of pronouncinge the same.
               
                  Wherby the trewe name, both of the whole Iland, and of many places therin, may be manifest. The ignorance of whiche tongue: hath driuen many notable men to suche shiftes, that endeuorynge to winde them selues oute of one: they haue fallen into many moe, and those more grosser errours.
               
                  The ordre, and signification of theOrder, and signification of the letters. letters is this, as followeth.
                  
                     A. B. D. E. H. L. M. N. O. P. R. S. T.
                  
                  They haue the very same pronounciation in the Britysh tongue, whiche they haue in the Latine well pronounced. C. and. G. haue the same force, and signification beynge placed before all the Uowelles: that they haue before A. and O, in the Latine tongue.
                  
                     CH. expresseth the nature of. χ. called chi among the Grecians, and hath no affinitie with the pronounciation in Frenche, or Englysh of the same aspiration, but is sounded in the throte, like Cheth in the Hebrew. Double DD, as it is cōmonly written amongst our countrey men, or amongst the learned,

after this maner DH, is pronounced lyke the Greeke Delta, or lyke the Hebrew Daleth without Dagas. We vse F, alwayes for V, when it is a consonant, as Lhanfair, is in reading called Lhanuair, for V, is alwayes a vowell. In steede of the latine F: wee vse PH, or Ff. We make I, continually a vowell as the Gréekes do, and is pronounced as the Italian I, or rather as as the barbarous, & vnlearned Préestes in tymes past sounded E. We haue also a peculiar Letter to our selues, whiche the ruder sort fashion lyke LL, but the better learned wryte with LH.
                  
                  I am not ignorant, that the Spayniardes haue in vse LL, and so haue the Germanes LH. As in the proper names of Lhudouicus, & Lhotharius the Emperour in Panuinius: is euident.
                  But neither of thease expresseth ours, howbeit, I take it rather, that ye 
                     Mexicani,
                     Mexicani▪
                      whiche inhabite the newfounde worlde, do vse that Letter, whiche the Spayniardes expresse by LL, but bycause I was neuer amongste them: I doubt whether it be so or not, for ours

is sharpe in the hissinge. For this letter L, is pronounced with a stronge aspiration, puttyng the tongue hard to the téeth, beyng halfe open, holdyng the lippes immouable, the right pronounciation wherof: is not easely learned, but by muche excercise. V, hath alwayes the force of a vowell, and hath almost the sownde whiche the Frenche V, hath, or the Hebrew Kibutz. For V: we vse single F, the consonant.
                  Besides the fiue vowelles, which the Latines vse: we haue other twayne, wherin we follow the Greekes.
                  Firste duble VV, and soundeth not much vnlike the Latine V, or to speake more playnly: as the simple heretofore were wont in Latine falsly, and barbarously to pronounce O. The last of the Letters, and vowels is Y, which we must examyne, hard to be pronounced somwhat like Ypsylon, as the learned of th'uniuersitie of Drford do pronounce it. L. X. &. Z. are nothyng néedfull to the writynge of our wordes.
                  For K: we vse C, as we said before: we haue also many Dipthōgs, in which

both vowels, yea: if there be three (as it chaunceth often:) keepe their full sounde, or some parte therof.
                  ¶Hauynge thus muche forefasted ofThe proprietie of the tongue the nombre, and nature of the Letters: let vs drawe neare to the proprietie of the tongue, where we must note, that lyke as the Greekes, and Latines, in thendes of their wordes, haue variations, and cases: so this tongue contrarywise, hath the same changynge in the beginning of the wordes. Wherby it cōmeth to passe, that euen the best learned, through ignorance of the language haue byn verye muche abused in the names of Prouinces, countreyes, and other thinges: let vs therfore briefely runne ouer this proprietye.
                  Euery Britysh worde, whose first radicale is P, T, or C, hath in wryting, or discourse of talke to auoyde euell sownde three variations, so that radicale P, is somtime turned into B, into PH, and into MH. T, into D, into TH, and into NH. C, into G, CH,
                     
and into NGH. as appeareth in these examples. An Head is called Pén in our tongue, out of the head: o bén, or his head, i bén: with an head, á phén: or her head, i phén: my head, fymhén.
                  
                  Heare you see a strange mutation of this letter, whē it is called in one place Pén, in another Bén, in the thirde Phén. and last of all Mhén. Likewise Fier in British is called Tán, out of fier, ó dan: with fier a than, my fier fynhán. In like maner C, is changed: for loue is called in our tongue Cariad, out of loue, ó gariad: with loue, á Chariad: my loue Fynghariad. Also B, with D, and G, radicals: haue their peculiar variations, as for example sake: Bara, which signifieth Bread, out of bread ó Fara, where F. hath the force of V consonant: my Breade, fymara. And like as B. is changed into F, and M: so is D, into DH, and N: as Duw, with vs the name of God, which is so likewise pronounced by the Frenchmen, (though it be not written with the same letters,) out of God, ó Dhuw: my God, Fynuw. G. in the first place vanisheth away, in

the second place, it is turned into NG: as, Gwr, which signifieth, a man: out of a man, ó Wr: my man, Fyngwr. Besides these: LM, & KH, haue one onely variation, as: Lhyfyr, a Booke: out of a Booke, o Lyfyr. Mon, the Isle of Angleysey: out of Angleysey, ó Fonn: Rhufayn, Rome: out of Rome, ó Rhufayn.
                      The other be neuer radicales, as: D, F, T, H, L, K. or els they be not changed: as PH, CH, N, and S.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THis Foundation, beyngeThe description of Britayn layde, which hath troubled manie learned men: let vs now come to the Geographical Description of the Ilande. And first of all, let vs briefly lay foorth what diuers men haue diuersly written of the name therof.
               
                  Aristotle, a graue Author, in hisAristotle. Booke, De Mundo, Of the worlde: whiche he wrote to Alexander: affirmeth that there be two verye great Ilandes in th`oceane, beyonde Hercules Pillers, liyng aboue the Celtae, whiche he calleth Brittanicas, namely Albion,
                  
and Ièrnai, which name of Albion, both ours, and also the Romane Histories do acknowledge as very auncient, and deriued from Albion, the Sonne of Neptunè, there regnynge aboute the yeare of the worldes creation. 2220. whereof (God willing) wee wil speake more at large in another place. But, wheras some say, that it is so named, by reason of ye white cliffes: it is plaine ridiculous. And I wonder, that men otherwise circumspect enough, could be blinded in such light, as to haue darkened all the names of places, and men, with latin Etimologies, or deriuations: seyng it is well knowne, that the Latines at that time possessed but ye least parte of Italy. And that the Apuli, and the Calabri: spake the Greeke tongue, and the Tusci: the Ethrus
                        •
                     an tongue, and almost the residue of Italy was possessed by the French men▪ wherby, neither the Latin name, nor their tongue was knowne to the borderers. Into whiche errour: Robertus Coenalis, a French man, very well learned, with diuers other, hath fallen, while he endeuoreth

to set foorthe the names of countries, and cities of both Britaynes, the Iland, and the continent: in expositions, and deriuations from the Latin Wheras th`author, forgetting himself: saieth in an other place, ye first of all the Romanes, Iulius Caesar behelde yt parte of Fraunce, and this our Britayne, and that the same places were so termed by the auncient inhabitants, before euer they heard of ye Romane name. Wherby I, as one not sworne to mantaine the opinion of any man, but following Reason: the faithfull guide, and leader of the wife: do constantly avouche, that the deriuations and deductions of the▪ antique names of Britayne, & the parts therof: are not to be sought out of the Greekes and Latines, but forth of the most auncient Britysh tongue. For, how shamfully the Latines haue corrupted the names of the Kynges, and places of the lande, while they studie for the finesse of their tongue: it is manifest to al those, which being furnished with any skill of the tongues: come to reade the Romane histories. For so,

very falsly, they haue called 
                     Hermannus, Arminius: Ernestus, Ariouistus: Dictrichus, The odoricus, and the inuincible kynge of Britayne Meurigus:
                   they haue called A
                        •
                     uiragus, and now of late yeres, Polydorus hath termed Rhesus, the sonne of Thomas, Rychard.
               
               Since therfore it is euident, that wée must not trust vnto ye Romane names: let vs come to our owne naturall tongue, by meanes wherof, wee shal bring the true name of Britayne to lighte, whiche to accomplish the better: wee must something say before.
               
                  Caesar, which first of all the Romanes
                  CAESAR hath celebrated the name of this Iland in the Latine tongue: called it Britannia. Whom, almost, all other Latine writers imitating: haue not changed the same name. Notwithstandynge, onely Syr Thomas Eliote a Knight,
                     S. Thomas Eliote. (whose learninge is not to be contemned) hath stande vp of late amongst vs, who contendeth, not without good reason, and probabilitie, that it was called in olde time Prytannia, whiche he proueth by a very auncient Copie that he

had in his handes. But, where he saieth that it was termed so in Greke, for the plentie, and abundance therof: surely I (which doo quite reiect suche deriuations:) do not allow it, yet yeldyng rather to the name of Prytannia, then Britannia, the authoritie of which auncient fragment: I wil endeuour to confirme with weightie reasons. But because in so doing, I shall appeare to bryng forth certaine paradoxes, and opinions not heard of before: the better to satisfi
                     •
                   both my countreimen the Britaynes in Wales, and others: I will lay foorth my purpose before all mens eyes, not cleauyng so precisely to mine owne opinions, but that if any man can bryng me more better, and more certayne: I will quickly yelde vnto them. In the meane while (alwayes reseruinge the iudgement of the learned) you shall haue mine opinion.
               When I chaunced of late yeres, to come to the sight of Polydorus Virgilius the Italian, and Hector Boethius the Scot, their British histories, wherof

the first maynfully sought, not onely to obscure the glory of ye British name, but also to defame the Britaynes them selues with sclandrous lies. The other while he goeth about to rayse his Scots out of darknesse, and obscuritie, what euer he findeth that the Romanes, or Britaynes, haue doone worthy cōmendation in this Ilande: all that he attributeth vnto his Scottes, like a foolish writer.
               Wherfore, beyng prouoked by these iniuries, that I might the better guard my sweet country from suche inconueniences, vnto my smale power: I began to peruse all suche auncient hystories, both Greeke and Latine, as euer had wroten of Britayne, or the Britaynes: causing not onely all such sentences, but eche woord also to be copied foorth, to the intent that thereout, as of a thicke and plentifull wood: I might gather sufficiēt timbre to frame a British hystorie. And not only continued in readyng straunge writers: but also the most antique fragments of our Poetes, which at this day (retaining therin,

as in all other thinges els, the olde name) are called Bardi, together withBardi. hystories written in the British tongue, which of late so farre as I suppose: were by me first translated into English. And not onely conferred the deeds: but also the names of Kynges, and places, in both tongues, where I haue noted,Prydain. that Britannia was first called Prydain amongst vs, as appeareth in the most auncient bookes of pedegrees. Wherin the Welshmen are too too curious, hauing amongst them cōtinually certaine regesters of pedegrees, and discentes (which some call Hierhauts)Hierhauts which perpetually doo recorde in writynge and memory the names of parentes, with their children, contriuinge them into Tribes, as thei wer deuided in olde time. They thinke as well of them selues, as either the Frenchmen, the Turkes, or Latines, deriuing their originall from the Troians. In these bookes (as I saye) it is many times founde, that this Iland was called Prydain: as Paun post Prydain, that is to say: the cheefist Post or Piller of Britayne.
                  
A certeyne writer also, whiche wrote many hundreth yeares agoe amongste the olde valiant Britaynes: sheweth the same, besides that the Poetes, and those whiche they call Bardi, at this day doo frequent commonly that woorde, as: Post Prydáin olh, Pryd à nerth that is to say: the piller of all Britayne, the beutie and strength. Moreouer it is vsually founde in all our bookes: Ynys Prydain, that is to say the Iland of Britayne, and Phrainc à Phrydain, that is: Fraunce, and Britayne. Wherby, those that vnderstande the tongue, may easely gather, that our Britaynes called this Iland Prydain in their language, which the Latines for the hardnesse, and euill sounde therof, haue reiected, and haue called the countrey Britannia, and the people Britanni, for the more gentle, and pleasant soundes sake. Whiche I wil prooue by these stronge arguments followyng.
               Euery Britysh woorde (as wee haue sayde before,) whose first radicale is P: hath three variations in construction, namely into B, PH, and MH. The

name of Britayne amongst vs, sometime beginneth with B, sometime with PH, and sometime with MH. Wherefore the first radicale therof must needes be P. And another infallible argumēt thereis, that B is not the first radicale of that name. Theris no British woord whose first radicale letter is B: that abideth any change into P, or PH. But the name of Britayne amonge the Britaynes, (as the proprietie of the tongue requireth) sometimes beginneth with P, sometime with PH, as I haue shewed before: wherfore the name of Britayne hath not B, for his first radicale letter. Neither is it necessarie that we
                     •
                   should seeke ye deriuation of this name from the Greekes, since wee may finde the reason of it in our owne tongue, wherin, almost, all names of men, and places: are of them selues significant. Pryd, amongst vs signifieth comlinesse or beutie: Cain, signifieth white. So yt by ye ioyning of these two wordes together, & taking away C, in composition, for the better soundes sake: is made Prydain, that is to say, a white, or excellent

bewtie, or comlinesse. As who shoulde say, the first borderers therto, called it a fayre and fertile lande. But, seynge this is but a bare coniecture: I am not against it, but that euery man holde his owne opinion. Neither am I ignorant, that some very well learned men, and expert in the British tongue, doo write the Ilandes name with B. which I thinke they doo, rather followynge therein the Latines, then iudginge the same to be the true name, knowyng the proofes which I haue before alledged to b
                     •
                   so vndoubtedly certaine, that themselues cannot deny thē.
               Perhaps, here wil stande foorth som enemie to the British name: sayinge, that by these arguments, I do disproue both the commyng of Brutus into this Ilande: and Polydorus himselfe, with his Britysh hystorie. But, god forbyd, I should be so impious, in such wyse to dispise the maiestie of Antiquitie. Nay rather, when opportunitie shalbe offered: I purpose to confirme, (by bringinge foorth many weighty reasons, and authorities, whiche I haue readie in

stoare for a British Hystorie) both his cumming: and also to establish the credite of the British hystorie. Nothinge regardinge the folly of those, who, bycause they finde not the name of it in the Romane hystories: boldely denie that there is any suche in the worlde at all: seynge, vnto those that shall reade Halicarnasseus, and Liuius, so much disagreyng, and also considerynge the obscuritie of the Latine name at yt time, when Brutus passed out of Italy, into Greece: it shall easely appeare, that through the default of writers, & necligence of such as wrote afterwardes, (amonge whom Liuius, euen of the Romanes themselues, is touched with want of trust) many thinges of greater importance then ye departure of Brutus, are yelded to obliuion. And although Caesar call the Britaynes 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is to say, borne in the same countrey where they dwell. And Diodorus siculus saieth, that they were from the beginning: yet, doo I beleeue that Brutus came into Britayne with his traine of Troians, and there tooke vpon him

the gouernement of the auncient inhabitantes, and of his owne men, & therof were called Britaynes. For our coū
                  trymen vnto this day, doo call a Britayne: Brituun,
                   (whiche woorde cometh not from the auncient name of the Ilande Prydain, but from Brutus, the kynge) and our hystories call the Britaynes in the plurall numbre Brytaniaid, and Brython, whiche woordes are deriued from the name of Brutus. For, in deriuation of woordes, our countrymen doo often turne V, into Y, the ignorance wherof: did very much troubleLeland. my freende M. Leland.
               
               But bycause this, whiche wee haue sayd, touchyng the name of the Ilande, and the first inhabitantes therof, seemeth sufficient for our purpose: wee will now intreate of other matters.
               
                  Britayne, which more rightly, howDiuisiō of Britayne. beit more strangely, ought to be called Prydain: is deuided into three partes, Lhoegria, Albania, and 
                     Cambria. Lhoegria, is called of our countrymen (reseruyng as yet the old name) that same parte of Britayne, which beyng possessed

by the English Saxons, & the Iuthi, peoples of Germany: is now of all nations called England. For, when Britayne, by Maximus the Tyranne, was bereft of all the youth, a greate parte wherof was slayne with him at Aquilaeia: the residew stoutly inuaded, and possessed a parte of Fraunce called Armorica, sleayng, and driuyng thence the country dwellers. Wherby that country at this day, is called by the name of the Lesse, and the Continent Britayne.
               
               And here I must not let passe with silence, that BEDE the Englishman, Volaterranus, and Polydorus Italians, were shamfully ouerseene, in saying that this Ilande tooke his name of that other, beynge euident to all men, that the same was termed Armorica, (whiche in our tongue is as muche to say, vpon the Sea) and this ours, Britannia. Neither was there euer any of the auncient Britaynes, or Britons in Fraunce (so farre as I knowe) before Sidonius Apollinaris, whiche liued a litle after this migracion, that lefte anie remembrance of it.
               
                  But in an Epistle to Vincentius, of Aruandus secretary, which accused his Lorde of highe Treason, thus he writeth: This letter seemed to be sent to the kyng of Gothes, or Gutland, diswadynge him from peace with the Emperour of Greece, and shewynge that the Britaynes, vpon Ligeris, ought to be set vpon. So farre he. But if, (as they dreame) and also Coenalis, whiche hath erroniously followed them, ye 
                  Britaynes had possessed some parte of Fraunce, before that time, and suche a parte, as shoulde haue byn called Britayne (as they doo affirme impudently enough:) it should not haue escaped vnspoken of, of all the Romane writers, vnto whom Fraunce was as wel knowne as Italy. Howbeit our countrymen say, that the Cornishmen, and those were one nation,Cornishmen. whiche bothe the kynges names, beyng like in bothe countries, as: Conane, Meriadoc, (by whiche name a par: cell of Denbygh shyre in Northwales is called to this day:) Hoel, Alane, Theodore, Rywallone, with diuers other, and also the proper woordes, and names for

all thinges almost one (although in theyr ioynynge, and construction of speach they seeme a litle to differ, as it chaunceth somtimes in one countrie:) do proue manifestly. Our countrymen call it in theyr mother tongue Lhydaw: which woorde seemeth to me to be derined from the Latine woorde Littus, signifiyng the shoare, as who should say it were a country liynge on the shoare of Fraunce. For like as the Latines doo change D. in all our woordes into T: euen so our countrymen do turne their T, into D, and doo alwayes, in woords whiche beginne with L: write them with aspiration, as: Lhadron, borowyng the woorde Latrones, from the Latines, yt is to say in English Theeues.
               But to returne agayne, from whēce wee haue digressed: when, as I haue sayd before, the youth of Britayne was lead by Maximus into Fraunce, & those that were left at home, were oppressed by the most cruell, and sauage nations the Readshankes and Scottes: lookyng for no succour from ye 
                  Romanes, whiche were then otherwise busied, aboute the

yeare of our Lorde, 450. They calledSaxons. vnto them the Saxons, whiche were then practising Pyracie on the coastes of Fraunce, and Britayne, & gaue them wages to ayde them. And whereas some write, that before that time, the Britaynes neuer knew the Saxons: it may appeare to be false out of sundrie Authours. For Claudianus, where he inueigheth against Eutropius, speaketh of them in these woordes: aboute the yere of our Lorde, 400.
               
                  What I may do, since thou my prince hast bin:
                  Thinges not farre hence can shew, for Tethis doth begin,
                  To waxe more milde, since Saxons thou hast quailde. &c.
               
               Lykewise, of the forteth Consulship of Honorius:
               
               
                  The Orchades were wet, with bloud of Saxons slayne.
               
               And in another place, Britayn speaketh
               
                  And me (she sayth) with countries
                  neare about, who was destroyd
                  Almost, defenced well hath Stilico.
                  
                  By whose helpe now it is, that Scottish warres I doo not doubt,
                  
                     Ne doo I dread the Picts, ne doo I feare the Saxon rout,
                  By standinge on the shoare, to see them come with doubtfull windes. &c.
               
               Also Sidonius Apollinaris, whiche wrote aboute their commyng into England: hansomly describeth their Pyracie, in an Epistle to Lampridius.
               
               
                  
                     Wee may behold the vvannish Saxons here,
                  
                  
                     Vsd to the Sea before: to dread the shoare.
                  
                  
                     From of whose heads, where outward they appere
                  
                  
                     Their bittes content to hold not any more,
                  
                  
                     The shires their toppes of heare do clip, & shore
                  
                  
                     So that their lockes cut hard vnto the skinne:
                  
                  
                     Do make their head decreace, but face to winne.
                  
               
               And in his Panegiricus vnto Socer:
               
               
                  But also the Amorick coast, the Saxons pyracie
                  Wel hoped for▪ to whom, the British salts but playe it was
                  All naked, and with clouted boate, the graysh Sea, to pas.
               
               Moreouer, Sextus Rufus. in his booke de Notitia Prouinciarum, of the knowledge of Prouinces: speaketh of the Earle of the Saxon shoare, alonge both the Britaynes. These (I say) beynge sufficiently knowne to the Britaynes
                  
before: they sent them against the Scots and Readshankes, vnder the conduct ofHégischus. one Hengischus. Whom, when they had ouercome: they entred a Trayterous league with them, and like false men, turned theyr face agaynst theyr maisters. And hauing slayne the whole nobilitie of Britayne by crafte, at Ambrose hill, and sendynge for ayde from amonge the Englishmen, and Iuthj, beyng Germans: they vsurped ye same countrie which wee call Lhoëgria. And after almost infinite battels: they draue the auncient inhabitantes into ye ends, and edges of the Ilande, and parted the same between themselues, deuidyng it into many kingdomes, namely Kent, the South Saxons, the VVestsaxons, the Eastsaxons, East Englishmen, the kingdome of March (whom Lazius, a man very well learned, and well deseruing of posteritie: in vayne seeketh for, in Germany, supposing the hystorie of Bede to be written of the inhabitantes of Germany, and not of England,) and Northumberland, which was also deuided into twayne, Bernicia, and Deira.
               
               
                  Whose kynges, beynge Paganes: destroyed with fier, and sworde all Churches, Monasteries, and Libraries. And after that they had receaued Christianitie, by Augustine the Monke:Augustine Monke. they fought many battels, both among them selues, and against the Britaynes. Untill that, aboute the yeare of ourEgbert. Lorde 620. Egbert kynge of the westsaxons, beynge made Monarch of all, began to rule alone, and first of al commaunded that the countrie should be called England, and the people Englishmen. Englishmen were a very famous people of Germany, wherof the Captaynes, and cheif of Saxony (as Crantzius reporteth) were longe time called Captaynes of Anglaria. And there remayneth yet (as I haue read) a Castle, where they sometime abode, termed now Engern, in the frontires of Westphalia, between Osnabrugh, and Heruordia. Wherby it cometh, that our countrymen, retayning the first name: doo call all Englishmen Saison, and theyr tongue Saissonaëg, and know not what this words England, or an Englishman
                  
meaneth. Shortly after, the Danes ouer came the Englishmen, & possessed this Lande, vntill the yere of the incarnateWilliam bastard. word, 1066: VVilliam bastarde of Normandy, wt his Normans, vanquishynge bothe Englishmen, and Danes: vsurped the coūtry. From which stocke almost the whole nobility of this Realme, vnto this day, doo fetche their descent.
               But let vs returne to Lhoëgr, whicheLhoëgr. in times past was enuironed with the British Oceane, the riuers of Seuerne, Dee, and Humber, but now, since the Realme of England stretchefoorth beyonde Humber to Twede: wée wil also stretche foorth the name of Lhoëgr so farre. And although the Englishmen doo possesse beyonde Seuern, Hereford shyre, the Forest of Deane, and many other places: yet wee holde, that they dwell in VVales, not in Lhëogr, and are taken almost euery where of all other Englishmen for Welshmen. But the riuer Dee, is accompted at this day one of ye auncient bonds, sauing yt in certein places, both ye people & the welsh tongue haue incroched more into England.
               
                  These thinges beynge thus presupposed: let vs now discend, to the particulared escription of Lhoëgr, or England. In which the countrie called Cantium of the Romanes, of our countrimē 
                  Caint, of Englishmen Kent: commethKent. first vnto our view. From whēce there is but a narow cut ouer into Fraunce, to the hauen Gessoriacus, which is now termed Bollen, as S. Rhenanus gathereth out of the auncient Chart of warly descriptions. And not only Marcellinus, amongst the old writers, speaketh of the sea towne of Bollen, in the life of Iulian the Emperour: but also in his Panegiricus, called Constantinus, the sonne of Constantius: these are founde: 
                     Constā
                        tinus, ye father being made Emperour, at his first cumming, with an innumerable fleet of enemies, pend out ye fierce Oceane, & enuironed tharmy, which lay vpon ye shoare of the towne Bollen, &c.
                   
                  Coenalis affirmeth, the hauen Gessoriacus, is Caslete of Flāders, which towne standyng vpon the top of an high hill, xiiij. miles from the Sea: sufficiently declareth the authors vnskilfulnesse.
               
                  And, I take Iccius to be the same hauē, whiche now they terme Caletum, for 
                     Calitium, Calice. But I cannot agreeCalice. with those, whiche make Selusas of Flaunders, to be Iccius, beyng vnlike, that the Romanes woulde haue vsed so longe a course by Sea, when they might haue passed ouer sooner, & more commediously, from that place. There were in Kent, in olde time: three famous Portes, well knowne to the Romanes: Doris, Rhutupis,
                   and 
                     Lemanis. Doris, vndoubtedly is the same, whiche both Englishmen, and Britaynes, reseruinge the auncient name, at this daye doo call Douer. For wee call Water,Douer. 
                  Dour, or Duúr. And I am not ignorant, that the Douarians stoutly defende, that theyr towne, heretofore was called Rutupium, and that Aruiragus kyng of Britaynes, builded there a noble Castle. Yet. I had rather giue credite to Antoninus, who speaketh of bothe. And I suppose, that to be Rutupium, which of the Englishmen is called Repcestre, nigh Sandwiche, not farre from the yle of Thanat. For that I lande wee call:Thanat.
                  
                  Ynys Rhuochym, as much to say: Rutupina, wherof the shoare deserued to be termed Rutupinum, and the Porte Rutupis. Lemanis,
                   or as some call it Linienus, is that Riuer which is now called amongst the Englishmen: Rotler,
                  Rotler. and floweth into the Oceane sea, nigh Apuldore. Moreouer besidesRye and Wynchel▪ sea. these famous Portes: are Rye, and VVynchelsea, two townes, & farther within the mayne lande Durobreuis, and Durouernum, the same Englishmen do call Cantorbury, that is to say:Cantorburie. the court of the Kentyshmen, and with vs Caërgant, and is cheife Metropolitant Sea of al Englande, and VVales. The tother is termed Rofcester. But Antoninus placeth Vagniacū, between London, and Dorouernum, & between that and Durouernum: Durolernum, but what names they haue, at this day: I am not altogether ignorant. Howbeit, it is manifest, yt these townes tooke their names of Water, whiche is Duur in British, and Duriuerne amongst vs: playnly signifieth water which floweth out of a place where Alders growe.
               
                  Wherby I am perswaded, that the same towne in times past therof obtained his name.
               But, before I depart forth of Kent: I must breifly touche that great Wod, wherof both British, and English writers haue spoken. The Britaynes call it Coëd Andred, but the Englishmen Andedreswald. And Huntington affyrmeth, that it conteineth in length: one hundreth and twentie miles, and in bredth thirtie miles, and that the worthy citie called Caër Andred, and Andredecester stoode therin, which Dalla, kyng of the Southsaxons, vtterly ouerthrew, so yt there remayneth no token, nor rubbish therof. The Kentishmen, and Southsaxons to this day doo call a place, where Wodde hath byn, VValden,
                  Walden. not knowyng for all that, whence the woorde is deriued. When others, but falsely call it VVelden, others VVylden. For the English Saxons cal a Wodde VValden, as the Germans doo now terme a playne without trees VVolden, as in these woordes: Cottiswolden, and Porke wolden it appeareth.

Next vnto the Kentishmen, on the Southside of the Thames: are those, whiche in times past were the seconde kyngdome of Southsaxsons, and were termed Southsaxon, but is now deuided into twoo shyres, Southsex, and Southtrey. And I am of beleife, that Neomaguin was their Citie, whereGylford. Chichester. 
                  Gylford now standeth. Chichester, the cheefest Citie of Southsaxons, was called Caërceri in British. After these come the Atrabates, whiche now are called the people of Barkshyre, whose principall Citie in olde time, was calledWalingford. 
                  Caleua, but now VValyngford. Wherein I cannot consent to those, which cal Oxford, Caleua,
                   standing on the North shoare of ye 
                  Thames. There is also a village named Cilcester, not far from Basinge, which before time was called Caërsegent, and Segontium of the 
                     Romans. Antoninus, also mentioneth Pontiū, which appeareth now to be calledReadyng. Spynhālād nigh Neuberi. Neubery. 
                  Reading. Thantique name of Spinae which signifieth Thornes, continueth to this day in ye one side of Neubery, which is as much to say: as New courte.
               
               
                  From whence, a good way of, vpon the riuer Cunetio: standeth a famous Citie called Cunetio by the Romanes, butMarlborow. now Marlborow. Betweene these, and the Sea: lye the Simeni, whose Metropolitane or cheif Citie is Venta, which in fore times was a Citie of greate renowne, and of ye 
                  Britaynes called Caërwynt,
                  Wynchester. of ye Englishmen VVynchester. And at the Sea, there is the great port, called now Portesmouth, at whosePortsmouth. Portchester Southampton. The wight mouth there standeth a Citie, called of olde Caërperis, but now Portchester. Also Tris Antonis, an hauē, now South hampton, retaynyng the olde name.
               Ouer against these: lieth the Ile of VVyght, celebrated by the auncient Romane wryters, and first subdued by Vespasian. The same is in length. xx. miles, and. x. in bredth, in forme like to an egge, in some places seuen miles distant from the mayne shoare, and in others but twayne. It hath very rough, and craggie Cliffes, it is very plentifull of Corne. The cheifest and only market towne of all the Iland: is Newport. There is also a Castle calledNewport.
                  
                  Caërbro, that is to say, the tract forCaërbro Castle. Nettes, expressynge the Britysh antiquitie. The VVestsaxons when they had driuen away ye 
                  Britaynes, added the same to their dominion, vntill Cadwalla, a Britayn, hauing slaine Aruald: recouered it to him self. Englishmen call it the VVyght, Britaynes terme it Gwydh, whiche in our tongue signifieth, perspicuous, or easy to be seene, as: Gwydhgruc, that is to say, a perspicuous heape, Gwydhfa, a perspicuous place, by which terme, the most highest Mountayne of all Britayne, in Carnaruanshyre is called. The inhabitants of this Iland are wont to glory, that their country is destitute of three greate discommodities, that are founde in other countries, to wit, Foxes, beggynge Fryers, and Lawiers. They are vnder the precincte, and dioces of Southampton. By the same Sea shoare alonge, follow the Seueriani, called now the inhabitantes of VVylshyre, whose cheef citie is Caërseuerus, called also Caër C
                        •
                     
                     radoc, and now by Englishmen Sarysbury.
                  Sarisbury. Twixt these is S. Ambrose hyll,
                  
celebrated by reason of the slaughter of the Nobilitie of Britayne there committed. Also Shaftes bury knowne of olde to the Britaynes, by the name of Caërbaladin, and Caërsepton. At the Westside of th
                     •
                  se lie the Durotriges, called of vs Durugueir, of the Englishmen Dorsetshyre men. From whence more westerly are ye 
                  Damnonij, wée cal them at this day: Dyfynnaint, whiche signifieth deepe, & narow valleys, & not of the Danes, as some affyrme. These are called in English Deuonshyremē: and they lye betweene two Seas, the Seuern, and the British Oceane. Their principall Citie is Isca, called also AVGVSTA, before time, Caërwisk, of the water passynge bie, but now of the Englishmen, Excestre.
                  Excester. Howbeit I know well enough, that some affyrme that before it was called by the olde Britaynes, Penuchelgoëd.
                  
               
               Last of all cometh Cornauia, of theCornwal. inhabitantes, and our countrymen, called Cernico, of Englishmen Cornwal. Here it is to be noted, that the Saxons did thr
                     •
                  st the Reliques of the auncient

                  Britaynes into those streightes. Who, because they vsed the Britysh tongue, whiche the Saxons vnderstoode not: they termed them Cornwalas, that is to say Welshmē of Cornauia, or Cornwall, as they called also our countrymen Welsh Britaynes, after the German guyse. This is the true Etimologie, or cause of the name, and farewel to them, whiche pleasinge them selues in the inuention of the name: doo call it Cornu Galliae, to saye, an horne of Fraunce, wherein Polydorus, as in other thynges also: vttereth his ignorance. As for mine opinion: very auncient bookes doo confirme it, written in the saxon tongue, and the name also, wherby those, whiche inhabite the countrie: do vsually cal it. They speake the British language, & al their wordes almost, are founde like vnto ours, but that they differ sumdeale in construction of speache. The promontorie of Cornauia, now Cornwall, is famous amongst our countrymen, cōmonly called Penrhyngwaed, yt is to say: the promontory of bloud, whiche I suppose to

be called of Ptolomaeus: Antiuestaeum.
                   Beyonde the Damnonij, or Deuonshire men, nigh the course of Seuern: lieth sometime the region of Murotriges, wee call it Guladyr haf, Englishmen: Somersetshyre, where are many notable auncient places séene, as ye Mounts of Caërmalet, otherwise called Camalet.
               
               There standeth also Iscalis, now Ilcester,
                  Ilcester. and the Isle of Auolonia, whose Citie is Venta, now Brystow, but in antique time ye 
                  Britaynes called it Caër oder yn Nant Badon, that is to say, the Citie Odera, in the vally of Badon. Another towne of the Belgae, with Ptolomaeus, Aquae Calidae,
                   that is of hot water, with Antoninus, Aquae Solis,
                   of water of the Sunne, the Britaines cal itBath. 
                  Caërbadon, the Englishmen Bathe, and is very renowmed for holsom BathesCōmendation of the Bathes at Bathe. of hot waters. Of whiche thynge I am a most certayne witnesse. For when as by the stroke of an horse whiche I had caught at Myllayne in Italy, I was greuously pained with the Sciatica, continually the space of one whole yeare, and hauing assayde the helpe of many

excellently learned Phisitions, was nothynge the better: I vsed these Bathes, but only sixe dayes, and was restored to my former health. Between these, and the Thames head: were the Dobuni, now Claudiani, whose cheefe towne in old time was called Coriniū, of the Britaynes Caër Cory,
                   the EnglishCicester. Glocester. men now terme it Cycestre. And Claudia, commonly called Glocester, a famous Citie standyng vpon Seuern, the head of all the shyre: I suppose not to haue bin knowne to the Romanes, but was afterward (as Gyldas reporteth) builded by Glouy a Britayne, who, after that the Romanes were driuen thence: reygned there, and not so named by Claudius Caesar, as hereafter shal be shewen. In the same shyre also, standeth Malmesbury, called before timeMalmsbury. 
                  Caërbladhon. These shyres doo make the thyrde Kyngedome of Saxons, in Britayne, whiche they call VVestsaxons: whose kynge was Egbert, whoEgbert. hauinge subdued all the other: first of the Germans, obtayned the Monarchie of Lhoëgr.
               
               
                  Thus hauynge described the countries, that lie on the Southside of the Thames: let vs now come to the other in ordre.
               And first ouer agaynst Kent, on the other side of the Thames: lie the Trinouantes, whose prince was Mandubratius,
                  Mandubra tius. or as other write Androgorius, our countrymen cal him Aud
                        •
                     wy, the same sent for Caesar int
                     •
                   
                  Britayne, and when he was come: asisted him with his power, and followed him into Italy, and Thessalie. Theyr chief CitieThe foundation of London. was builded by Brutus, and was called Troynewith, that is to say, New Troy, howbeit there be some whiche call it Trenouantum, bycause Tre, signifieth in British, a Towne. But afterwarde it was called of Belus, whiche dwelt there: Dinas Beli, that is to say Belinus, Palace or Courte. Last of all, of Lud, brother to Caswallane, whiche wonderfully adorned it with beutifull buildynges: it began to be called Caërludd, and Lhundain, that is to say Luds Citie, and also London. And I am not ignorant, how Polydorus seeketh Trinouantū
                  
                  
aboute Northampton, but the authoritie of sacred antiquitie is of more force with me, then any bare coniecture of a straunge, and vnknowen person. Wee yelde these names to London, although Ptolomaeus lay thē nerer to the Thames, & the negligence of the Transcribers hath called Londō
                      a Citie of Kent. And Marius Niger: afterward the other parte of the great bosome, for the other side the Trinouātes doo holde, into the middle wherof, the Riuer Thames doth flow. 
                  Polydorus Virgilius the Vrbinate, goeth aboute to proue out of Tacitus by arguments of litle force, that the Trinobantes, are Inlande people, when as his reasons seeme to próoue the contrary. For where as he sayeth: if the Trinobantes had bin nigh London, Suetonius should haue had no salfe passage thither: Nay rather Polydorus, if it had bin in the midst of the Ilande, it had byn harder for him to haue come to London, through the thickest of his enemies, for his way lay through them from the Isle of Anglesey, from whence he cam.

Wherefore it is more likely, that the Trinobantes, were inhabitants of Essex, as all, sauynge a few obscure, and vnknowen writers doo affirme. Who suppose, that with the Iceni their neigh bours, whiche now be the people of Norfolke and Nordouolke, they had conspired the death of the Romans, and had spoyled with 
                     ••
                  er, & sword, al yt euer was in their way vnto Verolanū, s
                     •
                  ayinge threescore and ten thousande Romans, and were returned backe againe salfe, and sounde, before Suetonius cō
                  mynge, as Tacitus a
                     •
                  oucheth. And that theyr rage extended not vnto London: the cause was, as the same author reporteth, for that London was a Colony of the Romanes, and a greate mart citie of theirs, famous for plentie of trauaylers, which resorted thither for tra
                        •
                     aque of Marchaundize, aboundynge with vitayle, and stoutly defensed with munition, and garysons against all aduentures, as all men doo know. Hereby it appeareth, how weak Polydorus argumentes be, especially who so well knoweth that part of England, and that

                  London was the Citie Trinouantum, whiche was afterward called Augusta, as Marcellinus reporteth.
               With these reasons beyng sufficiently instructed: I say, that the Trinobantes inhabited that parte of Britayne, which after the cummynge of Saxons: made vp theyr fourth kingdome, which they called Eastsaxons, and another called Midlesaxons, whose principall citie is London at this day, which somtime was vnder the kynges of the Mercij, or March. Ptolomaeus mentioneth a nother besides this citie Trinouantū, called Camudolanum, whiche I take to be all one with Camalodunum, as I iudge by readyng Roman histories, although Ptolomaeus speaketh of Camalodunū, for it stoode not farre from the Thames, and was by Claudius appoynted ye first Colony of the Romanes, and not neare the Brigantes, as Polydorus, much lesse in Scotlande, as Boethius dreameth. And for the more playnesse hereof: I thinke it good to brynge forth ye words of Dion, who had bin somtime 
                     Consul. Claudius, after that he had receiued the

message: forthwith cōmitted the matters appertaynyng to the citie, and the Souldieurs: to Vitellius his college, (whose consulship, as also his owne he had proroged for sixe monthes longer) him self departed from Rome to Ostia, where he tooke shippe, and arryued at Massilia, and takyng the residew of his iorney, partly by lande, and partly by water: came too the Oceane, and passed ouer into Britayne, and came to his armie which lay by the Thames, looking for him. Whom when he had receaued in charge: he wente ouer the Water, with certeine Barbarians, whiche drew to him at his commynge, 
                     •
                  e spred his Banners, fought, and obtayned the victorie, and wanne Camalodunū, the regall seate of Cynobellinus, and tooke many prisoners, partly by force, & partly by yelding. Hereby it appeareth euiuidently, yt 
                  Camalodunum standeth not far from the Thames, in which place Ptolomaeus placeth Camudolanū. And I suppose, yt this was the Colony of Claudius Cesar, famous for ye churche, which they cal now Colchestre, the olde nameColchestre.
                  
beyng made, as I thinke, by ioynyng the water, and the Churche together, a cōmon custome amonge the Britaynes, as Henlhan, yt is an olde Churche, Lhanelwy, a Churche standyng vpon the riuer Elguen or ye Church Elguen, which the Englishmen and Bishops now a dayes, call (but not well) the See of S. Asaphe. Besides an infinite numbre moe, wherby I am perswaded, yt those places, which in Latin beginne, or ende in these terminations Lan, or Lam: were of olde so termed of Churches, in ye British tōgue. Moreouer, out of this place of Dion, it is gathered, how much a man without shame, yt 
                  Polydorus virgillius is, who doubteth not to affirme,Polidorus reproued. yt 
                  Claudius Caesar, vanquished the Britayns without any battaile, & most imputently calleth them dastards, whom Caesar himself, Tacitus, Dion, & Herodian: terme by these names, most warlike, cruell, bloudthirstie, impatient bothe of Bondage, & iniuries. But an infamous beggage groome, ful fraught wt enuie, & hatred, what dareth he not do, or say? I omit his Scholemayster

                  Boethius, who, besides these lies, speaketh of a mightie warre, whiche Claudius made vpon the people of the Orchades, affirmyng the same to be true, too too impudently. For thou mayst easely iudge (good reader) how muche Lande and Sea, the Roman Emperour with a greate armie, coulde marche ouer in xvi. dayes only, duryng whiche time he abode in Britayne, when Tacitus also, a most faithfull writer, affirmeth, that in the first yeres of Agricola: the Iland of Britayne was knowne, and the Isles called Orchades wereOrchades. then vnknowne, but first founde out, and subdued by him. This, Dion testefieth to be true, in the life of Titus the Emperour, neither speaketh Suetonius against it, where he sayeth, that Claudius taried in Britayne but a very few dayes. Howbeit Eutropius, and after him Orosius, seeme to thynke otherwyse, not knowinge exactly, how farre distant the Orchades be from Kent. But since reason, and truth, certaynly perswade vs to the contrarie: let vs sticke vnto them, as vnto twoo moste

faithfull guides, neglectynge the iudgement of Polydorus, with his Hector. Next to the Trinouantes: were the Iceni, whom I suppose to haue inhabited that region, whiche maketh the fift kyngedome of Germans, whiche is the East Englismen, and their citie Venta, whiche now of the Englishmen is called Northwe
                        •
                     . And I am priuy also,Northwey that there are thought to be other Iceni in the West, but I thinke it more probable, that these Iceni are put for Tigeni, of whom I will speake hereafter. And the kyngdome of East Englishmē: comprehended not only the Iceni, but also Cambridgshyre, whose cheife citie in olde time, the Britaynes calledGrantcester. 
                  Caërgrawnt, the Englishmen Grantcester, of the water that passeth bie, but now corruptlye is commonly calledCābridge. 
                  Cambridge, and is a noble Uniuersity, wherin florisheth all good learnyng.Ile of willowes. Not farre of is the Isle of VVyllowes, not of Eeles as some haue wroten. For Helig in the British tongue signifieth Wyllow trees, wherwith those Fennes doo abounde. All these, in fore

times were called Girui. Ioynynge to these are the Parisi, whose chief Citie Pettuaria: is now begunne to be calledPeterborow. 
                  Peterborow.
               
               Beyonde the Mydland Saxons, west ward: were the Catychlauni, now Hertfordshyremen, and Buckynghāshyremen, on the Hill, whose Cities are Salinae, and Verolanum, wherof this last, tooke name of a riuer VVer, for before time it was called in British Guernhan that is to say, a Churche standing vpon the Riuer Ver, afterward Caër Municip, bycause it was a municipin, or incorporate Towne belongynge to the Romans, Englishmen terme it Verlamcester, and VVatlyngchester. ThisWatlingchester. Citie was destroyed, through the rage of the Saxons, how be it there remayne the tokens, and foundations of the Walles to this day, nere to S. Albans Churche, on the other side of the water. But, where as some doo thinke, that the Thames sometime ran that way: it is to be laughed at. Howbeit, it is certayne, that there was a greate standing water hard by the Citie walles, where

now are pleasant flourishyng Medows in whiche, as I am informed: there was an Anker of a ship founde of late, wherby, and also by the corrupt copie of Gyldas, that coniecture is risen. After these, come the Oxfordeshyremen, on the North side of the Thames, whose Citie is called by Englishmen Oxenford, our countrymen terme it Rhyd
                  Oxenford. 
                  ychen, that is to say, the Ford of Oxen, but what name it had in olde time, it is altogether vnknowen. Yet some affirme, that it is Caër Vortigeru, that is, Vortigers Citie, and by him builded, wherto I cannot agree. For Gyldas writeth, that the same Citie was builded in the West parte of the Ilande, and I thinke it be in the kyngdome of VVales, beynge called now after his name Gurthronion, Our freende M. Leland the antiquarie, ernestly defendeth, yt it should be called Ouseford, yt is to say, the Ford of Isis, against whom as one hauyng very well deserued of ye 
                  Britaynes, and much exercised in auncient Histories: I dare not contend. For it is certaine, that it standeth vpon Isis,
                  
and that tracte of time corrupteth the names of many places: it is also euident. But whatsoeuer name it had at the beginnyng: it hath a very bewtiful,A worthy cōmendation of Oxford. and helthsome situation, and a country which ministreth althynges necessarie abundantly, and a most famous schole of al good learnyng, as all doo confesse, whiche haue seene the other Uniuersities of Europe. Not farre from this Citie, stoode Caërdor, so called of the Romanes, a Citie not vnknowne to the Englishmen, a Bishops see, now called Dorchester, whereas the Thames
                  Dorchester dischargeth him selfe into Isis, from whence the name of Tamesis, the Thames proceedeth. Towardes the North be the Buckynghamshyremen, and beneath them the Bedfordshyremen, and more northerly the Huntyngtonshiremen, whose auncient names are not knowen. After these are the Lincolnshyremen, of olde Coritani, so far as the riuer Trent, the Britaynes in old time called it Caërludcoy, the Romanes Lindum,
                   the Englishmen Lindecolyn,
                  Lincolne. and at this day Lincolne. Notwithstandyng,

afterwarde, the Normans called it corruptly Nychol, as I haue manie times noted in auncient charters, and recordes of the Erles therof, written in the Frenche tongue, and all that Prouince was called Lyndesey. NextLeycester. vnto these at Trent, be the Leycestershyremen, so called of Leicestre, which in olde time were called Caërbier. At the South: appeare the Northampton shyremen, so called of the Riuer Auon whiche cometh alonge by the Towne,Auon. for AVON in British signifieth a Riuer, and the Saxons hearyng the Britaynes so terme Riuers: supposed that it had bin the proper names thereof, wherby it came to passe that many notable Riuers in England were called by that name. After these, at the West: follow the VVarwickshiremen, whose principall Citie Caër Wythelin, was founded by Guythelnius, a Kynge of Britayne, afterwarde of the Roman legions which went no farther: Caërlheō, lastly of a noble Britayne, whiche beutified it with many fayre buildynges: Caërgwayr, and of the Englishmen is

called VVarwike. Next after these areWarwik the Staffordshiremen, amongst whom is Lychfeild a Bishops See, that is toLichfeild. say, the Feild of dead folke. For the Northern Englishmen, cal death: Lych and the vnluckie night Rauens, Lych
                     
                        •
                     oules. Some affirme that here, not in Legancestre, Etheldrede kynge of Northumberlande, most cruelly slew twoo thousande Monkes, of the famous Monasterie of Banchor, men excellently learned, and suche as (contrary to the custome of others) gat their liuynge with trauayle of their owne handes.
               Whiche blouddie war he would neuerAn horrible fact of Augustines the Monkes. haue begunne, had it not bin at the motion of yt bloud thyrstie Monke, whom they call Augustine. The cause was, for that in some poynctes, they seamed to disagree from the Churche of Rome, and refused to be vnder the iurisdiction of the Archebishop of Cantorbury, hauyng alreadie of their owne the Archbishop of Legion. This was the chearitie, and religion of that man, to make away such good, & godly men as coulde not abide his intollerable pride. But

touchyng these matters: godwillynge, wee will speake in another place.
               On the otherside of VVarwykeshyre, are the VVorcestershyremen, next to the Dobani, their Citie Vigornia, was of olde time called of the Romans BRANGONIA, of ye 
                  Britaynes to this daye Caër Vrangon, and of the Englishmen is cōmonly called VVorcestre,
                  Worcester. and is builded at the East side of Seuern. Where is to be noted, that all the greater Cities, that lie vpon the East shoare of the Riuers, Seuern, and Dee: were builded to resist the irruptions of the Britaynes into Lhoëgr, that is Englande: like as the Romans erected many notable Cities, on the West shoare of the Rhyne, to restraine the forcible inuasions of the Germans into Fraunce.
               Adioyning vnto these are the Shropshyremen, whose auncient Citie is Vricouium, called afterwarde of the Englishmen VVrekecestre, and shorteWroxcestre. 
                  VVroxcestre, all raysed downe to the grounde in the Saxon war, from whose reliques foure miles of: lieth Salopia,
                  
the head Citie of all the shyre, notable for two Bridges, and almost compased with the Seuern. The same in olde time was called Pengwern, that is to say, the head of a place where Alders growe, and was the seate of the Kinges of Powyse, from whence the English name Schreusbury is deriued, although I remembre, that in auncient records,Schreusburie. I read it termed Salopsbury, and Slopesbury. Our countrymen call it 
                     Ymwythig
                   at this day. Next after these are the Deuani, or Ches hyremen vpon the Riuer Dee, where as be certen Wells out of whose liquor: very good, & pure White Salte is sodden.
               Besides the Citie it selfe, famous for the Roman monumentes therin, which by reason that the Roman Legiōs wintered there: is called by the Britaynes at this day Caër Lheō ar ddourdwy, that is to say, the Citie of Legions, vpon the Riuer Dee, for difference sake betwixt that, and another of that name vpon the Ryuer Osca. It appeareth out of Antoninus, that the same, in times paste was called in Latin Deua, of the riuer

whiche wee terme Dourdowy, to say, the water of Dee. The Englishmen call it Legancestre, and afterward clippyngChester. ye name shorter: called it Chester, and the Citizens doo glory, that they haue the body of Henry the fourth Emperour, whome they affirme to haue yelded vp the Empyre, and haue betaken him selfe to an Hermites life.
               And so are they likewise perswaded of Herald, who was the last kynge of the Danish bloud.
               More East from these are the Doruentani, now Derbishyremen, so termed of theyr cheifcitie Dwrguent, whiche is as muche to say, as, white Water All these shyres, and conuentes, with a great parte of VVales, as farre as the renowmed ditche of Kyng Offa, (of whiche wee will speake hereafter) made vp the sixt kingedome of English Saxons in Britayne, which of the ryuer Merse was called the kyngedome of Mercij, or March.
               
               Here now I cannot sufficientlye merueile, how VVolfangus Lazius, a man excellently learned, and very well

deserued of all that be studious of antiquitie, in his greate worke of the Migration of nations, should be so muche deceaued, as to say that the Mertij, or people of March, were Marcomanni, and ye their kynges Penda, Offa, with all the rest: reigned in the lower Germany. Beyng most euident in all hystories, that there was neuer any such kyngdome there, and that these kynges & peoples, whom he affirmeth to haue dwelled in Germany: inhabited that country of Britayne, whiche wée now describe. Likewise, while he endeuoreth to lynke together, the discentes, and pedegrees of the Norman bloud of the kynges of England: he handleth them so confusely, & so far besides truth that it seemeth he neuer read, either the names, or order, or deedes of ye kinges: but it is rather likely, yt he learned thē by hearesay of some babling vnlearned foole, that had no regarde of his good same, or honestie. As a nother hath 
                     •
                  oone of late dayes, a man famously learned in the Mathematikes, in his Geographical chart of this Ilande.
               
                  And besides these, Hieromus Ruscellus, in his Ptolomaeus lately printed at Venice, while he goeth aboute to set foorth new names, correspondent to the olde: confoundeth places an hundreth miles distant one from another, namely
                     A foule errour. 
                  Colchester, and VVynchester. Neither in other places ar his gheasses any thynge more certayne, wherefore, I exhorte men not to trust him in this behalfe. There remayneth the seuenth, and last kyngedome of Saxons in Englande, whiche they termed Nordan Humbrorum, because it standeth at the Northecoast of Humber. The same was afterwarde deuided into two kyngedomes, of the Deeres, and Bernices. The kyngedome of Deera, contayned all the country from Humbre, and Trent: to the Riuer Tyssa. Bernicia, reached from Tyssa, to the Scottish Sea, whiche they call now Fyrthew, the Britaynes terme this same Brennich, & the other Deifyr. The inhabitantes of this region, especially south warde: are called Snotyngomenses, but now most cōmonly Notingamshiremē.
               
               
                  Next vnto these are Yorkeshyremen, 
                  who, of the Romans were called Brigantes, of whom Tacitus writeth thus. Petilius Caerealis, fought many batailes wherof some were not vnblouddy, agaynst the Citie of the Brigantes, which is reported to be the place of resorte to the whole populous prouince, and obtayned a greate parte of the Brigantes, either by victory, or els by fight. All these, the liyng champion of the Scottysh name, Hector Boëthius, sticketh, not to put into his Gallouidia, and to proue the same by argumentes, gathered out of Ptolomaeus, and Tacitus.
               
               But how much Ptolomaeus was deceaued, trustyng to the report of others, in describing the length, and bredth of places in Britayne: (for he writeth, that Scotland lieth forth to the East, & that the farthest Promontorie therof is viij. degrees more Easterly, then any place of England, whiche in this paralelle do make aboute 240 miles, whiche is altogether vntrue, seyng Englande standeth more to the East, then Scotlande 
                  
                     ••
                  the,) is as cleare, as day light to all

those that haue tasted of Cosmography. But Ptolomaeus is to be pardoned, beyngPtolomaeus excused. an Egyptian borne, and excellently well learned in Mathematicals, who hath done the best he coulde, but not foolish and impudent Boëthius, borne, and brought vp no farther of, then Scotlād. He speaketh thus of Tacitus, that he beyng a graue author, affyrmeth, that the Brigantes, were a Spanish broode, dwellyng in a farre corner of Britayne, farther then any durst auouche, that at his time the Britaynes had passed. O impudent face, where aboute did Tacitus speake thus of the Brigantes?
               
               He seemeth to deriue the Siluri, by a colour from the Spanish broode, because they lye ouer agaynst Spayne, Gallouida, is farther from Spayne then any Region of Englande, or VVales.
               
               And that in Tacitus time, the Brigantes were first knowne to the Romans: I confesse it, but he findeth it not in Tacitus, and not mindefull of him selfe, (as it behoueth a lier to be) he calleth not to remembrance, that he wrote in another place, that Claudius the Emperour,

adioyned also vnto his Empyre the Orchades, whiche lie beyonde Scotland. But let vs bid faythlesse Hector a dieu,
                   and let vs now also, see what the auncient writers haue writen of ye 
                  Brigantes. Ptolomaeus, reciteth the CitiesCities of the Brigantes. of Brigantes: Eboracum, Epiacum, Calatum, Bimonium, Caturactoniū, Rhigodunum, Isurium, Olicana, wt others. All men know that Eboracum, is that Citie whiche the Britaynes call Caër Efroc, the Englishmen Euerwyke, and now shorte Yorke. Of the rest wee dooYorke. but coniecture, as Bimonium to be Bincestre, Calatum,
                   which Antoninus, and Bede cal 
                     Calcaria:
                   to be Helicastre, now Tadcastre. Rhigodunum: Rippon, and 
                     Olicana: Haligfex. And that Isurium is called Aldburg. There was neuer any man yt dreamed, yt these Cities were in Scotland. But Antoninꝰ ascribeth thē to the Brigāts, & placeth them in ye way which leadeth to London from ye Ually Praetoriū, for yt there was a vally from the riuer Soluathianus, to the mouth of Tine: al do knowe. I conclude therfore, yt it is impossible, that ye 
                  Brigants were

euer in Scotland. In so muche, that the remembrance of this name, remaineth vntill this day, amongst vs. For when we sée any man not duly obeing lawes & cōmaundements, him wée cal Chwaret Brigans, that is to say, one that plaieth the Brigant. And like as they were rebelles, agaynst the people of Rome: so doth he contempne the lawes of Magistrates, and of Elders. And surely I am of beleefe, yt all Deera, before time was called Brigantia. Ptolomaeus, placeth the Vernicones, and Taiazalos, betweene the Riuers Tine, and Tweede. This country alonely now, refayneth the name of Northumberland, when alNorthumberland. the region before time, from that riuer, to ye 
                  Scotish Sea: was called by yt name. For there is no riuer in all Britayne yt hath the name of Humbre, but only ye water, into whom many notable streames do flow. Wherby our freend M. Leland, not wt out good cause supposed yt the same should be called Aber, whiche amonge the Britaynes signifieth an arme of the Sea, either swiftnesse, or fall of any water, either into the Sea:

as Aberconwy, Abertiui, Abertawy, that is to say, the mouth of Conway, Tibius, and Tobius: or into some great Riuer, as Aber hodni, Abergeuenni, to say the fall of Hodnus, and Geuenus into Osca. Moreouer, wee call mouthes, and entrances of Riuers: Aber, without addynge any thynge more thereto: as in Carnaruanshyre, between Conouium, and Banchorium, in the same maner, so yt I thinke Aber, to signifie as much as Aestus doth, whiche is the rage, fall, or force of Water, as is most agreeable with Ptolomaeus. Aboue these, were the Damnij, whose cheife Citie Antoninus maketh Vandagora to be, not far from the valley Ofdam, wherby I coniecture, that they be those, whiche wee call now VVestmerlandshyremen.
               
               The Selgouij, and Otadeni in timesWestmerland. past, inhabited Cumberland. At the verie brimme of the Uallie, standeth a most auncient citie, Ptolomeus calleth it Lucopibia: Antoninus, Luguballia,
                   the Britaynes, and Englishmen, terme it Caerloyl, and it standeth in the Frontirs of the Nouantes. Not farre from

this Citie, as Malmsburiensis reporteth, there was a Stone founde with this inscription: In token of Marius victorie, whiche token of triumph: I suppose to haue bin erected by Meurigus, (whom some of the Romans haue termed more aptly Aruiragus, othersome Marius) in token that the Readshankes were there vanquished, Rodericus
                  Readshaks vanquished. beyng theyr kynge, whiche at that season, as the Saxons did, exercised Pyracie in our Seas, vntill at length one parte of them setled in Albania, and other in Fraūce. And it is wel knowne, that these countries, together, with Gallouidia, so farre as the Riuer Cluda, vnto the yere of our Lorde 870, were in ye 
                  Britaynes possession, at what time beyng by the Scottes, Danes, and Englishmen disquieted, with many batayles, and in the ende their kynge Constantinus slayne, at Lochmaba in Anā
                     dra: they were enforced to returne into VVales to their countrymen, and dryuing away the English Saxons: forcibly chalenged to them selues the greater parte of the country which lieth twixt

                  Conway, and the water of Dee, whiche they possessed, and there appoynted a kyngdome, whiche of the riuer Cluda, on whose shoare they dwelt: is of our countrymen called Struteluyd, of Marianus Scotus corruptly Streadiylead of the VVallanes. They had many conflictes agaynst the kynges of England, as the same author reporteth, vntill at length their last kynge dying at Rome: they submitted themselues to the princes of Gwynedh. This Marianus, the chiefest Hystoriographer of his time: one of late hath caused to set foorth in Printe, being imperfect, and lackynge the better parte, of set purpose as him selfe confesseth, because of the ambiguitie of the British Hystorie. In like maner Sleydan, while he turneth his abbridgement of Frossard into Latine, beyng too too muche partiall to the Frenchemen: either ouerpasseth with silence the most noble & valiant deedes of the Englishmen: or variynge from his author, reporteth them otherwyse then Frossard hath written. Wherefore me seemeth, that the sayinge of

                  Martial the Poet verye well agreeth with them.
               
                  That which now thou doest turne,
                  
                     O Fidentine: the booke is mine.
                  But when thou turnest him ill:
                  then he begins for to be thine.
               
               But this much by the way.
               The laste of the Northumberlandshyremen, and almost of all Lhoëgr: follow the inhabitantes of Lancashyre to be intreated of, whom the Ryuer called of the Englishmen Merssee: deuideth from the Kyngedome of March,
                  Kyngdome of March. of whom the kyngdome of March in Englande was so called. It is soone prooued out of Ptolomaeus, that these were called Ordouici, in olde time.
               For the Ordouici (saieth he,) lie more Southwest, then the Brigantes doo.
               Since therefore, that Yorkeshyre is the kyngedome of Brigantes: in vayne with Boethius, wee seeke them in Scotland, and muche more in Northfolke with Polydorus. Wherefore renouncing these fables: for my part, I am perswaded, that the ORDOVICI,
                  
are not only the Lancas hyremen: but also the Deuani, or Ches hyremen, and Shrops hyremen, beyng recompted of Tacitus for a greate Citie. In thisA Citie. place I call a Citie as Caesar doeth, an whole conuent, or kyngedome. For looke how many Cities there are: so many kyngedomes in olde time were in Britayne, whiche seuerally wagyng batayle agaynst the Romans: were all the sooner ouercummen. Amongst the Cities of these kingdomes: Ptolomaeus reciteth Mediolanū, called nowLancastre, 
                  Lancastre. Mancunium as appeareth out of Antoninus: is called Māchestre. Their kynge in times past was Cataracus,
                  Manchester whose fame was knowne aboue the Skies, who, the space of nine continuall yeres: very muche molested the Romans with Warre, at length was taken by treason of a Woman, and led to Rome in triumphe. And Claudius the Emperour, deserued no lesse prayse for vanquishynge Cataracus: then did Scipio for Syphax, or Lucius Paulus, for Perses, as Tacitus writeth, two moste puissant kynges, brought home in shew

to the people of Rome.
               
               And here can I not maruel enough what came in minde to that Boëthius, not the Troiane, but the Scotte for.
               
                  
                     Ahlas? what one was he, how farre
                  from that same Hector? sore
                  He chaunged was, that in Achilles
                  
                  spoyles, came home before.
               
               Impudently to affirme, that he was a Scot, seeyng that there was no suche nation at that time in the worlde. But if there were: it was so enfolded in darkenesse, that it was vnknowne to the Romans, and Britaynes, or as, Haymo Armenius writeth of a certayn nation: it had so bleared the eyes of all peoples, and countries, that the Scots were inuisibly conuersant between the Romans, and Britaynes. Polydorus also writeth, that he was kynge of the Ordulacae, when neither Tacitus, nor Ptolomaeus mentioneth the same, butAnn. lib. 12 of the Ordouici. And Tacitus reporteth that he was not onely gouernour of the Ordouici: but also of the Siluri. Which Siluri dwelled not in Scotland,
                  Siluri.
                  
but in Southwales, as in another place it shalbe prooued more playnly. And I remember very well, that a few yeres agoe, when I was in the frontirs of Shrops hyre with others, about certain businesse of my Lordes, the right honoble Erle of Arundell, where some parte of his inheritance lieth: I chaunced to fall into the view of a place, exceedingly well fortefied, both by nature, & art. The situation whereof, was vpon the toppe of an high hill, enuironed with a triple ditche of greate depth. There were. iij. gates, not directly but a shoshe the one agaynst the other, and on three sides, steepe headlonge places, and compassed with twoo Riuers, on the lifte hande with Colun, or Clun, on the right with Themis, which our countrymen call Teuidia, and accessible, but on the one side therof.
               These thinges when I beheld: I vnderstoode by the inhabitants that this place was called Caër Caradoc, that is to say, the citie Caradoc, and yt there haue bin many fierce battayles fought there, agaynst a certaine kyng called Caradoc
                  
who at last was vanquished, and taken of his enemies. For our coūtrymen ca
                     •
                   not only walled Cities, & townes, but also al maner places which are entrenched, and walled: by ye name Caër, as I wil proue afterward by example of manie, & diuers places of VVales. Wherfore, whē I perceaued yt this place was within the confines of the Siluri, & the Ordouici, (for it is scarse two miles distant from Colun, or Clun castle, which isColun castle. the patrimony & enheritance of ye most noble and auncient family of Fytz Alanes in England:) & that it so agreed in al points wt the description of Tacitꝰ, yt nothing could be wanting: I dare boldly affirme, yt this is the very selfe same place, in which Ostorius cōtended with Cataracus in bataile, & vanquished him, from whence fliyng, & puttyng himself in trust to the faith, & creditie of Cartimandua, the queen of Brigantes: was by her betrayed. Moreouer, yt name of Cataracus is at this day so peculier to the welshmen: that many princes, & noble mē, ar called by yt name, amōgst whom, at yt time, Trahernus ye son of Caradoc,
                  
ruled Northwales: Fleanchus, (as the Scots say) sonne to Banguho, after that kynge Macabaeus had slayne his father: by flight escaped into Wales, on whose daughter by secret accesse, (but infortunate, and miserable to the parentes) he begat VValter, who was the first ofStuarts. the Stuarts in Scotland, that was of renowme from whom, vnto this day, the kynges of Scotland doo vaunt themselues to haue descended. But I suppose it more likely, that he whom they reporte to be the nephue of Trahernus the Scot, borne of his daughter, and his father a Scot, in Northwales, (a thynge much disagreeynge from the truth) rather to be one of Trahernus owne children, whiche by Gryffine, sonne vnto Conane, together with Caradoc, Gryffine, and Meylere Rywallons sonnes: was vanquished, and slayne. And that this VValter escaped by flight into Scotland, and there attayned to greate honour. And this can be no great fraude or disgracyng to ye name of the Stuarts, that they are descended from the bloud of the most noble, and antique British

kynges, from whiche also most honorable famely: the same Owen Tuder, grandfather to king Henry the seuenth of that name kynge of England: lineally descended by the Fathers side, as we wil declare in our description of VVales, and not from any meane, or base degree, as false, and impudent Meyerus a Flemmyng, sticketh not to affirme.
            
            
               
                  
                     NOW that wee haue
                  ¶ The description of Scotland.
                   wandred ouer all England, called LHOEGR: let vs next in ordre proceede to the seconde Region of Britayne, which of our countrimen is called Albania, of the inhabitantes Scotland. This same in old
                     •
                   time was of the Romans called the seconde Britayne. For Sextus Ruffus reciteth fiue Prouinces of Britayne, Maxima
                     Maxim
                           •
                         Caesariensis. 
                     Caesariensis,
                   which I doo take to be that part of Britayne, whiche by Iulius Caesar was made tributary to the Romans, to wit: Kent, the Kyngedome of Southsaxons, and the Region of Atrabates.
                  
The second is Flauia, which by like coniecture, beyng therto mooued, I suppose to be that, which by Vespasian, who descended of ye family Flauia: was by him set vpon, and subdued, that is to say, the Ile of Wight, which afterward was made part of ye 
                  VVestsaxons king dome. The thirde, I iudge to haue bin termed by ye name of the first Britayne, which lieth forth from the Thames to the Vally, or Trench. The fourth being the lesse, and the second Britayne: compriseth Scotland. It remayneth then of necessitie, yt 
                  VVales be contayned vnder the name of Valētia, which maketh vp the fift prouince. Howbeit Ammianus, writeth, that, that prouince which by Theodosius, captayne to Valentinia
                  V
                        •
                     lentia. was taken, when he had driuen thence the Readshankes, and Scots: was then of the Emperours name called Valentia. And that the Britaynes inhabited these Prouinces: both our owne, and the Roman writers haue left in memorie. Neither was there 
                     •
                  uer any writer of name, that made mention either of Scots, or Readshankes before Vespasiās
                  
time, aboute the yere of our Lordes incarnation: threescore and twelue, at what time Meurigus, or Maus, or Aruiragus reygned in Britayne. For our Cronicles doo report of a nation, which liued by Piracie & rouyng on the Sea, cummyng foorth of Sueuia, or Norway, hauynge one Rhythercus to their captayne, and landed in Albania, wastyng all the country with robbyng, and spoylyng so farre as Caerleyl, where he was discomfited and slayne by Meurigus, & a greate many of his men also, & those which escaped: fled to their shippes, and so conueyed them selues into the Orchades, and the Iles of Scotland, where they quietly abode a greate whyle.
               They call them Phichtiaid, that is to say: Phichtiani in their mother tongue, and so are they likewise called in the Scottish, and in their owne tongue.
               Wherfore, it is not likely, yt they were so called of the Romans, for paynting of their bodies, since they were called by yt name, before yt they were euer knowne to the Latines. Neither were thei these: but the Britaynes, of whom Caesar, and

others do report, that they wer wont to paynt theyr bodies Blew with Woad, that they might appeare the more terrible to their enemies. And with vs at this day (which seemeth to argue antiquitie) Blew cou
                     •
                  er is called Glas, by
                     
                        ••
                     as. whiche name also that Herbe not altogether vnlike a Plantayne, very well knowne now to Marchants: is called. Besides all this, the Romans whiche first made mention of this people: termed them not Picti, but Pictones.
               
               These as I haue sayd before, after that they had taken hart of grasse, and were growen to some power: out of these Ilandes in theyr litle Leathern Boates, such as our Fyshermen do vse now a dayes: alonge Scotland were want to robbe and sp
                     •
                  yie Shephardes, and Husbandmen. Untill that aboute: the yere of our Lorde. 290. when the Romans, and Britaynes were bothe encombred with ciuile warres, for ye purple robe whiche Carausius woare, and after him Allectus: they entred generally into Cathanesia, and Caledonia, and driuyng thence the British sheapheardes,

and heardsmen, and callynge vnto them the Gatheli, out of Ireland, whiche are now called the Scots: were so bolde as to prouoke the Britaynes in open warre. For the Scots come of the Irish broode, as they them selues,Scots original. and others do know very well, and are termed amongst our countrymen by the same name, to wit: Gwydhyl, which, as theyr owne Hystories doo testifie: was the most auncient name of that nation. And that the same nation came forth of Cantabria, now Biscaya, & passed ouer the Sea into Ireland, and there chose them a place of abode: both ours, and their owne writers haue lefte in memorie. But by what cause, or occasion they were called Scots, truly I doo not know. For I doo quite reiect the Aegiptian Fables of Scota. And theScota. selfe same language, and the very same maners, and behauior with the Irishmen, and that they be called of the Britaynes by one name: declareth sufficiently, that they came from thence. For the Southernmen of them are not true Scots, but borne, and begotten rather

of Englishmen, whereof a greate numbre, flyinge at the cummynge of VVilliam Duke of Normandy: departed into Scotlande, and doo boaste to this day, yt they come of Englishmen, where as they, and the Englishmen, coumpte the other Scots but rude, and barbarous.
               These nations, as I say, vntill that Honorius came to the Empyre, whiche was aboute the yere of the Lorde foure hundred, and twentie: molested the North parte of Britayne wt incursions, and robberies, at whiche time, hauyng called a power out of Ireland to helpe them (as Gyldas, and Bede doo auouch) vnder conducte of Reuda: established them selues a kyngdome, in the West parte of Albania. But the Readshanks possessed the East region, whereas first they made warre agaynst the Romans, and the Britaynes, and afterwarde with the Englishmen, and Danes, sometime they were confederate, sometime they warred diuersly, vntill aboute the yere of our Lorde eight hundred and fortie:

all the Readshankes were destroyde by Kennethus kinge of Scottes, in somuch that their name, and kyngedome ceased to be any longer in Britayne. Whose country the Scottes added vnto theyr owne, whiche to this day is renowmed in Britayne.
               
               This much I had to say of the Scots and Readshankes, according to ye verity of the hystory. Howbeit I know well, how Boethius, a most vayne reporter of Fables, impudently affirmeth, that they reigned in Britayne, three hundred yeres before Christe was borne. And he feineth, that there were so many kinges, so many warres, by them most valiently waged agaynst the Romans, so many holsome lawes and statutes in Britayne by them instituted: as neither Lucian in his Fabulous narrations, neither the author of the booke of Amadis of Gaule, nor wittie ARIOSTVS in his Orlando Furioso, haue euer commended vnto vs in Fables. But to the intente that I may set foorth the most beastly man in his colours, & that the

sleight, and subtelty wherwith he endeuoureth to bleare all mens eyes, may be displayed: I will briefly touche certayne of his most vayne trifles, & suche as all men of wit, and vnderstandynge may easely perceaue to be starke lies. And here I let pas Aegiptian fables, and of the stocke and race of Scottish kynges in Britayne, before Caesars cō
                  myng. Where he affyrmeth, that Caesar, was vanquished by the Scots, and fled out of Britayne. Who afterwarde sent Ambassadours vnto the Scots, and Readshankes, to request their freindship, and that at last he conducted his Roman armie in to the Forest Caledonia. Also that Augustus sent his messengers, vnto Metellus, kynge of Scots to entreate him for peace. Moreouer he maketh Cataracus a Britaine, and sonne to kynge Cynobellinus (as Dion a most famous author reporteth) Kynge of Scotland. He sticketh not to auouche that the Brigantes, Siluri, and Ordouici, were Scots. He sheweth how dangerous the expedition was of Claudius the Emperour, and describeth greate

warres betweene him, and Canus the kynge of the Orchades. He writeth that Voadicia, the most renowmed queeneVoadicia. of Iceni, whose valient deedes agaynst the Romans: Tacitus, and also Dion haue made knowne to the world: Veusius Earle of Brigantes, Cartimandua the Queene, were all Scots. And finally, there is no one thinge, wherein the Romans, or Britaynes, behaued them selues couragiously, or wysely in Britayne: which this monstre doth not ascribe vnto his fayned Scots, and whiche at that time were vnknowen to the worlde. And he hath not only transcribed the minde: but also whole sentences, and orations of Tacitus, into his booke, alwaies changynge the names of nations, and cities, like a malicious falsefier, with out al shame, or honestie. He sayth Caesar, & Tacitus wrote these thinges of the Readshankes, and those of the Scots, & that these nations made suche, and so many Warres, when as in deede, the names of Scots, or Readshankes, are not at all to be founde in these most noble writers,

And truly, it is not like, that Caesar, beyng avery wise gentleman, when he had throughly learned the state, & maners of the Britaynes, and Irishmen: would with silence haue ouerpassed the names of the Scots, and Readshankes, specially hauynge sent Embassadours vnto their kynges. Neither is it probable, that Tacitus, a famous man, and very expert in the state of Britayne, and other countries, when he describeth the expeditions of Agricola his father in lawe in to Britayne, and as it were depeynteth foorth the Sheyres, Peoples, Portes, and Riuers of that region by their proper names, & maketh mentiō of a certeine Erle of Ireland, taken by Agricola: knew not also the names of Scots, and Readshankes, with whom Boethius 
                  
                     •
                  ayneth he waged that warre, when as in euery place he seemeth to cal ye inhabitants of Albion, Britaynes. And it had stoode much more with Agricolas honour, beyng a worthy man, whom Tacitus also by his workes endeuoreth to make more noble, to haue subdued vnknowen nations, and suche

as 
                     •
                  ead on mans 
                     •
                  leash (such as it shalbe prooued, that the Scots were, long time after) rather then the Britaynes, which were sufficiētly knowne to ye 
                  Romans. Also Dion, a man which had byn Consul, and familiar with Seuerus the Emperour, and vnto him dearly beloued, whilst he declareth his expedition into Britayne at large: not once speaketh of the Scots, or Readshankes, b
                     •
                  yng very well knowne to all men, that he conueyed all his force and power into Albania, or Scotland. For, quoth Dion, the Meati, & Caledonij, two diuerse kindes of Britaines: reuolted from the Romans, and Seuerus callyng together his souldiers: cōmaunded them to inna
                     •
                  e theyr countrie, and kill all that euer they met, and thus he charged them in these woordes.
               
                  Let none escape your hands away,
                  nor cruell blouddy broyle.
                  No tender impe, though in her wombe
                  the dame ther with do toyle:
                  Let him not scape a woful death.
               
               When Seuerus came into Caledonia: he fought neuer a battell, neither saw

he any power of his enemies in a redinesse, and so passyng throughout all his enemies land, hauyng not lost in fight, but by water, and hunger, fiftie thousand men: returned vnto his fellowes. If the Scots had bin in Britayne at that time: the reporter herof, being a freend, neither after him Herodian, who in sufficient longe discourse hath set foorth that viage: woulde haue defrauded an Emperour so ambitious, and thirsty of honour, as Seuerꝰ was, of his due praise Wherefore it is as euident as noone dayes, that at this time, whiche was about two hundred and two yeres after the incarnation of our Lorde: the Scots had no seat in Britayne. Ouer, and besides al this, neither Eutropius, neither Spartianus, neither Capitolinus, neither Lampridius, neither Vopiscus, nor Aurelius victor, who haue all written the expeditions, and warres of the Roman Emperours in Britayne: haue in any plate made mention of ye 
                  Scottish, or Readshank name.
               
               Although therefore, I suppose that these arguments are sufficient, to improoue,

and condemne the 
                     •
                  eere trifles of Boethius: notwithstandynge I will lightly touche twoo of his Hystories, which by the author are setfoorth at large enough, with woordes a foote and an halfe longe. But I pray you,
               When ye be let to looke: your laughter (freends) you would refraine.
               In the seconde booke of his fables: he writeth, how that Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, kynge of Aegypt, sent foorth his oratours vnto Reutha, kynge of Scots, that by the view taken, and report of his neare countrymen, namely such as had come lyneally from the Egiptians: he might vnderstand the situation, and forme of the countrie, together with the conditions, and maners of the people, to ye intent that he might set downe the same in his woorke of Cosmographie, whiche he had then in hand. Whiche oratours beyng right courteously intertayned: were afterward led through all the regions, and townes of Scots, and Readshankes, at last beyng largely rewarded: returned into Aegypt. O noble, and worthie

deede of a Gentleman, but moste vnthankfull Ptolomaeus, and vnmindeful of so great rewards. Who, after that he had sent his Embassadours into countries so farre distant hath left no shire, yea almost no towne in all Britayne in that woorthy woorke of his vnspoken of, (whiche was set foorth, not by the kynge, but longe time after by another Ptolomaeus Pheludensis, a Philosopher very well learned) onely his welbeloued cosins the Scots, and Readshāks: he hath lefte raked vp in their owne darkenesse, neither once vouchsaued in his booke, wherin he made a most perfect description of all Albania, to expresse so muche as their names. Nay rather Boethius, it is a sinne to beleeue, that suche a kyng, when he had sent thither his Legates, and recited all the Cities and people of Albania: to haue bin ignorant of the nations name, and in describynge the situation of the Region, so to haue varied from the trueth. For he, whiche sette foorthe that noble woorke, aboute the yere of our redemption one hundred and fortie, appeareth

in no place to speake of the Scottes, and Readshankes, which at that time were vnknowen to the worlde.
               This beyng omitted: let vs come to the second Fable, wherein (gentle reader) whether I shal mooue thee to laugh ter, or lothsomnesse: I am vncertayn. He writeth that one Gyllus vsurped byGyllus. force the kyngedome of Scotland, before the commynge of Caesar into Britayne, who after that he had committed many cruell deedes: at length by Euenus the lawfull heyre, one Cadallus beyng captayne, was in Ireland vanquished in blouddie fight, and afterwarde, slayne. Of this slaughter, by reason that the Irishmen, were afflicted, wt the force & armes of the Albion Scots: the Poete Claudianus, & other writers, haue entreated. Wherby he maketh the noble poete Claudianꝰ which liued vnder Honorius, 410. yeres after the incarnate woord: author of ye 
                  Scottish war against Gyllus, which vnto him seemeth no inconuenience, who, in other places most impudently fathereth his follies, & fables vpon Caesar ye 
                  Dictator, & Tacitus.
                  
In very deede, Claudianus hath writen of the Gyldonicum warre made in Africk by Masticelis, brother to Gyldo,
                  Gyldo. cheiftaine therin, and of the expedition, which Honorius tooke in hande against the brother that rebelled.
               But I besech you my freend Hector, tell me whether you affirme this geare in iest, or in good earnest? that thereby wee may iudge of the residue? or whether that you thought you could deceaue all men with your lies? This Gyldo was a Goth, no Scot, the warre was in Africk, not in Ireland. This visible tyranne liued in the yere of our Lorde 398. but theyr feyned & inuisible Gyllus: is deuised to haue flowrished. 400. yeres before.
               Besides these insulse, and vnsauored lies: he affirmeth that all the knowledge, and learnynge of the Druydes,
                  Druydes. came first vnto the Scots, when as it playnely appeareth vnto suche, as are excercised in the readyng of Hystories, that Phylosophy, and the liberal sciēces were knowen to the Celtae, and Britaynes longe before they were to the

                  Greekes, and Latines. But as touchyng the holsome lawes, & institutes, whiche he falsely attributeth vnto the Scots: vnto those whiche reade Solinus, and Mela, depayntyng foorth the maners, and nature of the Irishmen: the truthS. Hierom. will appeare. Likewise out of S. Hierome, whom wee may better credite then Boethius, it is euident, that at his time, that is as muche to say, as, in the yere of our Lorde. 400. the Scots were accustomed to eate mans fleash. For, (saieth he) what shall I say of other nations, when as I my selfe beyng but a yonge man, saw in Fraunce Scottes, whiche fead on mans fleash. And when as they chance to finde in the wooddes, any heards of Hogges, also any droues of catayle or beastes: they vse to cut of the buttockes of the Heards men, and keepers, and the Pappes of women, accomptyng those partes for a most delicate dish. These Scots, as though they followed Platoes cōmon wealth: haue no peculiar wiues of their owne, but as their lechery moueth them (saith he) runne lasciuiously about, after the maner

of beastes. This much S. Hierome.
               
               Since therfore, it is certainly prooued out of this true author, that they were so barbarous at his time: it is not like, that so many hundred yeres before as Boethius doth fayne, they were ruled with so many good lawes, and holsome institutes. Neither doo I, for my part, write this, to the intent I woulde detract any thinge from the Scottish glory, in so much as I know very well that this nation, after that it had departed from barbarousnesse, and embraced Christian religion, and obeyed lawes, and rightes precisely like other people: was so firmlye ioyned in league of friendship with our Britaynes: that wee reade, how in many warres, th`one nation ayded the other. I acknowledge also, yt many thinges haue bin by them doone both wisely, & valiently in Britayne, Fraunce, and Italy, and that the Englishmen, howbeit a stronge nation, seldome assayed the Scots in war, but yt they were alwaies readie with al their force, to ioyne with them in battayle, which is no signe of a cowardly, or hart

lesse people. But I write this only to this entent, yt the truth of ye history may be knowne, and yt the Scots themselues may contemne this fabler, & hold them selues contented wt this, that together with ye 
                  Saxons, Frenchmen, & Englishemen, most noble natiōs: they were first knowne to the Roman world. And now let vs see what substantiall, & approued writers, whom bothe wée, & they must credit: haue transported to memorie touchyng the Scots, and Readshankes.
               
               The first therfore, of the Romans, so far as I know: Mamertinus in his Panegyricus, called Maximinianꝰ, maketh mention of the Readshankes, by these woordes. And truly, not like as there is but one name of Britayne, 
                  so should the losse be but smale to the cōmonwealth, of a lande so plentifull of corne, so flowrishyng with numbers of pastures, so flowynge with riuers of metalles, so gaynefull for reuenewes, so welbeset with hauens, so wide in circuit. Which when Cesar, first of ye 
                     Romans, & the beginner of this your name entred into: wroate yt he had founde another world,

supposing it to be so bigge: that it seemed not to be compassed with the Oceane, but rather to compasse the Oceane about. But at that time Britayne was nothynge furnished with shippes for Warre by Sea, and the Romans, after the Punick, and Asiatick warres: had lately bin busied agaynst Pyrats, & afterward by the Mithridatick fight: was very well practised by Sea, and Lande. Besides, this nation was then but rude, and the Britaynes beyng accustomed but only to the Readshankes, and Irishmen their enemies, as yet but halfe naked: soone yelded vnto the Roman armes, and ensignes, that Caesar almost in all that expedition, coulde vaunt him self but of this owne thing, that he had sayled vpon the Oceane. He affirmeth, that the Britaynes only dwel in an Iland, and termeth them Hibernenses,
                  Hibernenses. who afterwarde were called Scots. Also another Panegyricus vnto Constantinus the Emperour, speaketh of the Readshankes, called Pictones, as followeth. For neither he (speakyng of his father Constantius) after such, and

so many notable actes, whiche he hath done, vouchsaueth to get, not only the wooddes, and Marises of the Calidones and other Pictones: but neither Ireland which lieth nigh, neither the farthest Tyle, neither yet the fortunate Ilands, if there be any suche. Thus farre the Panegiricus.
               
               This he wroate aboute the yere after Christe was borne three hundred & twentie, at what time it seemeth, that the Pictones, or Readshankes beganne first to inhabite the farther most partes of Scotland.
               
               After him Ammianus Marcellinus,
                  Lib. 20. first of the Latines: made mention of the Scots, in the yere of our saluation 364. In the tenth Consulship of Constantius, and the third of Iulianus, when as in Britayne, 
                  by excursion and breakyng foorth of the Scots, & Readshankes, beyng wilde nations, peace beyng broken: the places about nigh to the frontirs were spoyled. And afterwarde in the life of Valentinian, and Valens, he sayeth. At this time, as though alarmeLib. 26. were sounded throughout all ye 
                  Roman

                  
dominions: the most fierce, and sauage nations arose, & forcibly inuaded their neare neighbours. The Alemanni, or Almaynes spoiled ye countrie of France, and Rhetia together. Sarmatae: the Ponnoniae, and the Quadi, now Bohemans: The Readshankes, Saxons, Scots, and Attacotti: much molested the Britaynes.
                   And afterwarde. At that timeLib. 27. the Readshankes beynge deuided into two nations, Deucalidonae, and Vecturiones, also the Attacotti, a very warlike nation, and the Scots wandrynge vncerteinely about here, and there: wasted, and spoyled very much. And as for the coastes of Gallia, they were spoyled by Frenchmen, and Saxons, &c.
                   Hereby it appeareth, in what darkenesse the Scottish state is drowned. For Boethius, in no place maketh mention of the Attacotti, who appeare by this authour to haue dwelled in Albania, and to haue bin of the Scottishe race. Wherefore it is most likely, that a litle before that time, the Scottes, and Attacotti, (who afterward vanished into the name of the Scots) foorth of Ireland,
                  
and from the Hebrides, the Readshankes
                  Hebrides. out of the Orchades, whereas they lurked before, by one consent entred into Albania, and there prouoked by warre the Romans, and Britaynes, & that they departed out of the field some time conquerers, and sometimes conquered. For shortly after, Ammianus reporteth, that after that these nations were by Theodosius, a valiant captain vnder Valentinian vanquished, and driuen out of the Roman prouince: they were at quiet. And this can be no disparedgment, but rather a greate glorie to the Scottish nation, that rather at that time, then before that, forcibly agaynst the Romans will, they planted them seates in Britayne. Whiche is prooued not out of vayne, and fabulous writers, such as is Boethius, and other suche like: but out of substantiall authours, and such as doo very wel know the state of Britayne.
               
               After all these Claudianus a Poete, singularly learned, in diuers places maketh mention of these nation, as for example, of the Getick warre:
               
                  
                  A power also there came, against the
                  farthest Britaynes bent,
                  Which bridled hath the Scots so fierce,
                  and notes with iron brent
                  Then fayling: reads, whilst Readshanks
                  
                  bloud, and breath is spent.
               
               And in his Panegyricus to Honorius:
               
               
                  The nimble Moores hath he and Pictes
                  
                  so termed by name full true
                  
                     
                        •
                     ubdude, and he the Scots with blade
                  at randon did pursue.
               
               And of the fourth Consulship of Honorius.
               
               
                  Were wet with Saxons slayne.
                  The Orchades, and Island eke
                  was hot with Readshanks bayne.
                  And frosen Irland eke, dead heapes
                  of Scotshmen wept amayne.
               
               Who did euer set foorth more plainly, the natural countrie of both natiōs? For he sheweth how Readshanks cam from Thule, that is to say Ilandes ofThule. the North, and the Scots but lately out of Ireland. And in another place, in his Panegyricus: Britayne speaketh vnto Stilico.
               
               
                  
                  And me (she saith) with countries neare
                  about who was destroyd
                  Almost: defenced well hath Stilico.
                  
                  When Irlands soyle on euery syde
                  The Scots doo mooue, and seas
                  with noysom sayles doo fome about.
                  By whose helpe now it is,
                  that Scottish force I doo not doubt,
                  Ne doo I dread the Picts, &c.
                  
               
               Hereby it appeareth manifestly, that at this time, yt is to wit, the yere of our saluation. 410. the Scots possessed no certayne place in Britayne, but many times vsed to make irruptions out of Ireland, and by litle and litle subdued the North partes of the Ilande, and at length hauyng driuen thence the inhabitants: established their kingedome there, vnder Valentinian the yonger, the yere of God incarnate: 444. whē as now the Romans had lefte of the charge, and care of Britayne.
               
               This much I had breifly to say, touchynge the originall of the Scots, and Readshankes. Now I will addresse my selfe, to the description of Albania or

                  Scotland. It is seperate from EnglandAlbania. by the Riuer Twede, the hyll Cheuiot, and certayne litle Riuers runnynge downe into the chanell Soluathianus The first people whiche come to hand: are Gallouidiani, of olde time called by the Romans, NOVANTES, and not Brigantes, as wee haue shewed before. Ptolomaeus called their citie Leucopibia, whiche wee terme now Caërleil, &Caërleil. standeth in the entrance of both kyngedomes. Next vnto these were the Gadini, nigh the riuer Glota, which some doo better call Cluyda, howbeit, that name, by reason of the proprietie of the tongue: is sometime pronounced Gluyda, wherby grew that errour of calling it Glot. Upon this Riuers side: sometimeGlot. there stoode a noble Citie of the Britaynes, called Caër Alchuyd, or Archuyd, that is to say: a Citie standyng vpon Cluyda, whiche is now of ye 
                  Scots called Dounbritton, bycause it was restored agayne by the Britaynes, aboute the yere of our saluation. 800.
               Aboue these, towards the East Sea, lieth a region, which now is called Lā
                     donia,
                  
and Mercia, March,
                   but in times past Breunicia, and of the Pictes, called also Readshankes: Pictlandia.
                   The Maeatae are placed here by Dion. For (sayth he) the Maeatae dwel beyonde the wall, vnto the Caledonij. Ptolomaeus laieth the Vacomagi beyonde Tueda. This limityng wall (as Spartianus reporteth) was first builded by Adrianus the Emperour, fourescore myles in length. And Capitolinus is author, that Antoninus erected another made of Tur
                     •
                  es, between the Britaynes. And last of all, yt 
                  Seuerus, by a trenche which was cast from Sea, to Sea: deuided the Roman prouince from ye other Britains all men do generally agree. Whereby our countrymen call it Mur seuerus, that is to say: Seuerus wall, and in another place 
                     Gual seuerus, Seuerus vally, at this day. In this region standeth Edēburge,
                  Edenburge the seat of the kinges of Scotland, somtime builded by Eboracus kyng of Britaynes called also Castle Mynyd agnes, yt is to say: ye castel of S. Agnes hil, & afterward the Castel of Virgins. The water there which is now called Forthea, was

called the Picticum Sea, and afterward the Scottish Sea, and thus farre stretched the kyngedome of Northumberland. Tacitus calleth the same Bodotua, howbeit Polydorus, so termeth the Riuer Leuinus, whiche out of the lake Lomundus: floweth into Cluyda. For (saith he) Glota, and Bodotua two diuers armes of the Sea, rūnyng forth a greate length: are kept a sundre with a narrow peece of grounde. Wherfore Bodotua floweth not into Glota, neither is it any riuer, but an arme of the Sea, therefore it cannot be Leuinus by any meanes. Beyonde these armes of the Sea: dwelled the Caledonij, the most nobliest nation of Albania, where now the inlande Scots inhabite. At the East parte was Horestia, now Angusia, Fisa, and Mernia. At the VVest: were the Epidij, and more towards the North, the Creoni. And after these the Canouaci, where now Lennosia, & Argadia, and Lorna are. The Carini possessed Loguhabria, the Logi: Strathnauernia: And at the other Sea coast, the Cauti: Morauia, and Rossia. And the

                  Cornabij, which are farthest of al, inhabited Sutherlandia, and Cathanisia.
               
               And wheras Boethius writeth, that in the time of Claudius the Emperour, the Moraui came by an whole Nauie into Scotland: it is most false, as appeareth in Hystories. For the nation of the Slaui wherof the Moraui tooke theyr beginnyng: was altogether vnknowen to the worlde, vntil the time of the Emperour Mauritius, aboute the yere of our lorde. 600. The Marcomanni also, and the Quadi: inhabited those places, whiche afterward, the yere of our Lorde. 900. beyng vnder Arnulphus: began by Zuentebaldus kynge of the SLAVI, to be called the kyngdome of Morauia.
               
               Beyonde Scotlande, in the GermaneOrchades▪
                      Oceane: are the Ilandes called Orchades, wherof the biggest is called Pomonia. And on the other side of Albania, in the sea Vergiuium, which the Britaynes call Norweridh, as who should say the Irishe Sea, from whence I coniecture that the antique name Vergiuium was deriued: lie the Iles Hebrides, in nūbreHebrides.
                  
two and fortie, of others called Euboniae.
                  Euboniae. The Ile of Anglisea is none of these, as I will shew in another place. And not far hence lieth Ireland, an IlandIrland. also, whiche our countrymen call Ywerdhon, the inhabitants Verni. Wherby, in my opinion, they do farre better, which terms it Iuernia, as Mela, and Iuuenal in his seconde Satyre, or Ierna, as Claudianus, and Dionysius, rather then Hibernia, now Ireland. The Britaynes, and Scots doo call the inhabitantes by one name, Guyddhyl.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     THus hauynge▪ ended the
                  ¶ The description of Wales
                   description of Scotland, with ye Ilandes liyng thereabout: let vs now proceede to wales, the third part of Britayne. The same is deuided frō 
                  Lhoëgr, yt is England: by the Riuers Seuern, & Dee, and on euery other side is enuironed by the Vergiuiū, or Iris he Oceane. And it was called Cambria, as our Chronacles doo report of Camber, the thyrde sonne of Brutus, like as Lhoëgr of Locrinus, and Albania of Albanactus
                  Cambria. his other sonnes also. This same only,

with Cornwal, a most auncient country of Britaynes: enioyeth as yet ye olde inhabitants. The welshmen vse the British tongue, and are the very true Britaynes by birth. And although some doo write, yt 
                  VVales doth not stretch foorth on this side the Riuer Vaga, or VVye: this can be no fraud to vs. For we haue taken in hand to describe Cambria, and not VVallia, Wales, as it is now called by a new name, and vnacquaynted to the welshmen. In Northwales, the welshmen, keepe their olde boundes. But in Southwales: the Englishmen are come ouer Seuern, and haue possessed al the lande between it, and VVye. So that al Herefordshyre, & the Forest of Deane, and Glocestreshyre, & a great part of worcestershyre, & Schreupshyre on this side Seuern: are inhabited by Englishmen, at this day.
               These regions, wt certayne corners of Fluitenshyre, and Denbyghshyre, were sumtime vnder ye kings of March. And our countrymen, vnto this day, do call their neare borderers Gwyry Mers, that is to say, the men of March.
               
               
                  For OFFA, a most mightie kynge of March, the yere of the incarnate worde seuen hundred, and seuentie, to the intent that the boundes of his kyngdome towardes ye 
                  Britaynes in Wales, might the better be knowne: caused a verie deepe ditch, with an exceedynge high wall to be made, from the water Deuanus, a litle aboue the Castle called Filix, through 
                     •
                  ie hilles, and deepe valleyes, Fennes, Kockes, Cliffes, & Riuers, vnto the mouth of the Riuer wye, about an hundred myles longe. The same, reseruyng the olde name (for of our countrymen it is called Clauddh Offa, that is to say, Offas ditch) it may easely be seene of all, throughout the whole coast. And all the townes, and villages almost, whiche be on the East side therof: haue their names endynge in these terminations, ton, or ham, wherby it appeareth, that the Saxons, sometime dwelled there. Howbeit now, the VVelshmen, in all places, beyond that ditch towards Ihoëgr: haue planted them selues. The inhabitants of this region, are called in their mother

tongue, Cymbri. In whiche word, the force of the sounde of the letter B, is scarcely perceaued in pronouncing.
               And it is very likely, that this was the moste auncient name, and that Cambria a region of England, was therof so called.
               When I perceaued that the Cymbri,
                  Cymbri. whiche fought with the Romans so manie blouddy battels, were called by the same name that ours are: it came into my mynde, to enquyre, and search what good writers haue thought of the beginnyng of that nation. And hauyng read much therof: I founde also very much, wherby I am so perswaded, that I dare auouche that it was this our British nation. First the name is all one with ours, then their tongue, which is a very great argument. For Plinius in hisPlin. lib. 4. cap. 13. fourth booke, and. 13. chapter saieth, that Philemō
                   was of ye 
                  Cymbri, called Mori marussium, that is to say, Mare mortuū
                   the Dead Sea, vnto the promontory Rubeas. &c. And our countrimen call the Dead Sea, in their tongue: Mor Marw. And as for these words: neither

the Germans, neither ye 
                  Danes, neither Suenones, neither the Slaui, neither the Lithuani, nor the Lyuones, doo vnderstand them. Wherfore it is manifest, that the Cymbri were none of these nations. But our Cymbri doo speake so: wherfore it is euident, that they were of the same name, and tongue.
               Moreouer, Plutarchus in the life of Marius: affirmeth, that they departed out of a farre country, and that it was not knowne whence they came, nor whether they went, but ye like cloudes, they issued into Fraunce, and Italy, with the Almaynes. Whervpon the Romans supposed, that they had byn Germans, because they had bigge bodies, with sharpe and horrible eyes. Thus much 
                     •
                  e. Since therfore he hath left their originall vnknowne, and our Chronacles doo testifie, how that the Britaynes had alwayes greate familiaritie with the Northerne Germans: it is like enough that the Britysh Cymbri, passed ouer into Denmark, whereby it was termed Cymbrica, and so ioynyng with the Almaynes: made warre vpon the Romans
                  
and first vanquished Papirius, with his armie in Illyrica. Afterward ouercame Aurelius Scaurus with his Legions in Fraunce, him self being slayne by kinge Belus, whiche name is also familiar amongst the welshmen at this day. Besides that: Manlius, and Caepio, were discomfited nigh Rhodanus, when there were. 12000. of the Romans slayne.
               In the ende, at Athesis in Italy, they were ouerthrowen, and almost al slain. And those whiche remayned after the battayle: escaped into Germany, and were deuided into two partes. Wherof thone returnyng into Britayne: gaue name to ye countrie Cymbria, the other departyng out of Germany: rested nigh to the Sea Balteum, & afterward were called of the Germans, Aestiones,
                   whoseAestiones. tongue, as Tacitus writeth, is like the Britysh. And to confirme all this: I read of late in a most auncient fragmēt of the Britysh tongue, how that, longe since: there departed a very great army of Britaynes into Denmarck. Whiche after many valiant Warres, stoutly made in moste partes of the worlde:

neuer returned agayne.
               But wheras diuerse do affirme, that these were the indwellers of the Danish Chersonesus: hereby it appeareth false, that the Danes longe before that time, possessed that lande, as their Hystories do declare. Neither is there any Danish, or Suetish writer, that euer made mention of the Cymbri. Othersome affirme, that they descended of the inhabitantes of Cymerius Bosphorus. But neither the nations name, neither their maners, neither their kings names doo agree. Which if you respect ours: are all one. For Clodic, Lhes, Bel, Lhud, Thudfach, Berich, by whiche the kynges of the Cymbri were called, be very common names amongst the Britaynes. Their neglectyng of golde, and siluer, the shape of their bodies, theyr sheildes, armour, swordes, yea made of brasse, (wherof I saw twayne, whiche of late were founde in hollow rockes in Northwales) their reuerēce towards women, and preistes, their custome to sacrifice men vnto Mercury: declareth that they were British Cymbri. Neither

will I deny that, which many doo write, that the Sicambri, and afterwardSicambri. Franci. the Franci, were of theyr broode, vnlesse that their owne Historicians affirmed, that they were so called three hundred yeres before, of one Cambra daughterCambra▪
                   to Belinus, whiche was kynge of Britayne, and maried to Antenor theyr kynge. Wherfore I conclude, that the Cymbri, either departed foorth of Britayne about that time: or els were the remnantes of the greate army, whiche was gatherd in Britayne, and Fraunce, and setled with Brennus in ye Marches of Greece, at the same time. For it is vndoubtedly knowen, that Brennus
                  Brennus. was a perfect Britayne, and brother to kynge Belinus, and sonne to Dunwallus, which not only our Chronacles doo testifie: but also the countries name, where the ambitious man fought with Belinus his brother, and was called of him Brennich. Diuers riuers also amongst vs called by that name, and also a most auncient castle, standyng vppon the toppe of an exceedyng high hill in Gwania, called Dinas Bran, that is to

say, Brennus Courte or Palace: are a very good argument hereof. Besides this, there remayne most auncient Rimes in the prayse of Cornwenna theyr Mother, because that when Brennus came foorthe of Fraunce, with ayde agaynst his brother: wt her naked breast, and pappes she reconciled them together, which one hath thus interpreted.
               
                  O out Ahlas, what meaneth this?
                  doo you my bowels harme?
                  What wicked cause doth mooue,
                  two brothers powers to be so warme?
                  Cannot all Britayne you contayne?
                  since it is very sure,
                  That both you twayne, within this
                  wombe of mine, did once endure?
                  May not your mothers teares,
                  nor torne heares from purpose pluck?
                  Nor naked dolefull breastes,
                  in tender age, which both did suck?
               
               Who then ioyninge theyr armies: 
                     •
                  anne ouer all Fraunce, and Italy, vanquished the Romans, and tooke the citie, and departed out of Italy, as Polybius reporteth. And Belinus returned into Britayne, but Brennus with. 15000▪
                  
thousand footemen, &. 61200. thousand 
                     •
                  orsemen, as Pausanias writeth: set vpō the Greekes. And hauyng subdued the Macedonians, Thessalians, Thracians, & the Poeonians: all the other people of ye 
                  Greekes he ouerthrew at Thermopilae, in a most horrible blouddie battayle. In fine, when as he was aboute to sack the Temple of Apollo of Delphos: his army was wholy almost, miraculously slayne by ye fal of a mightie great cliffe, & a wonderfull Rayne from Heauen. Wherwith Brennus beynge strooke wt sorowe: a most coragious gentleman as he was: slew him-selfe.
               And I wot wel, how Polydorus complaineth of ye supputation of yeres, whē as in déed, the time agréeth very wel wt the British history. But where as he maketh two Brennus: that is altogether beside credit, since no writer before him euer yelded the same to memory. And as concerning the true supputation of the age of ye world, diuers authors haue diuersly written. Besides these reasons, by theyr owne tongue, whiche is the best proofe that may be, wee will

easely conuince yt they were Britaynes, and that Brennus souldiers spake the Britysh tongue, wee will likewyse soone declare
               
                  
                     Pausanias in his tenth booke writeth thus. Brennus had with him forth, 20400. thousande horsemen, whiche were all fightynge men, for the truer numbre of them in deede were aboue threescore thousand, and two hundred. For there followed euery horseman, two seruants on horsebacke. These, when their maysters were fightynge: stoode alwayes in the rearewarde, and assisted them, that if by chance they wer vnhorsed: thei shuld se
                        •
                      them on theirs, and if the man were slayne, the seruant should succede in his place, but if they were both killed by force of fight: then was the third at hand readie to supplie for them that were dead. If the first, and cheif had receaued a wounde: one of these other conueyed him out of the battayle, & the third fulfilled the room
                        •
                     h of him that was hurt. And this practise of fightynge on horsebacke, they terme in their country language, Trimarchisia,
                     
for they call an horse Marcha. Thus far Pausanias.
                  
               
               What can be spoken more playnly?Trimarchisia. Our Britaynes at this day cal Tres in the masculine gendre: Tri, and in the feminine Tair, that is, Three. And an horse they call March. Wherby Trimarch, vnto them signifieth three Horses. Hereby therfore all must needes confesse, either that the Frenchmen spake the Britysh tongue (whiche almost all Hystories doo deny:) or that these were naturall Britaynes. And afterwarde he saieth, that the Frenchmen call a Shield: Tyren, in their country speache, whiche woorde wee doo likewise vse at this present, calling a shield Taria. Moreouer Atheneus writeth, that the Reliques of the Frenchmen, vnder Bathanasius their captayne: tooke vp their dwelling about Ister, and after that were parted into twayne. Wherof the one were called Scordisci, andScordisci. Brenni. dwelled in Hungarye, the other by the name of Brenni: possessed parte of the Alpes, by the mount Brennerus in Tirolensis shier, whom Appianus, calleth

all by the name of Cymbri. Which doo all shew, that they were Britaynes. For Bathynad, in our country language signifieth a formed Iudge. For Bath is beautie or forme: Ynad, with vs, is a Iudge, in authoritie next to the kynge. For when Brennus was dead: they chose him to their captayne. Farther, Yscar, with vs is to seperate, & Yscaredic, signifieth those which be seperated. Wher of this part of Fraunce, when it departed from the residew: was termed Yscaredic, from whence Scordisci is deriued, retaynyng the name of Brennus captayne. And Brynn, in British is a Mountayne, or Hill, of whiche woorde Brynnerus was so called. Ouer, and besides this: Gatheli, or the Irishmen, when as about this time, they departed out of Cantabria, now Biscay, wandring vpon the Sea, to seeke new dwellings: called al Britaynes Brennach,
                   of Brennus their famous captayne, by which name they call our countrimen to this day. And thus much sufficeth to haue sayde of Brennus.
               
               But wheras some affirme, that the

                  Frenchmen vsed the British tongue, by certayne French wordes cited by Rhenanus, Sidonius, and Lazius, it appeareth to be most false. NotwithstandingThe boūds of Fraunce I can not sufficiently marueyle, that of the tongue of this most mighty nation, whose bowndes are comprised by the Rhyn, the Pyrenei mountes, Appeninus, and the Oceane: there is almost no shew, or token to be founde remayninge. And that it was most auncient: it appeareth out of Berosus, Annius, Giambularius, and Postellus. WherbyEtymon of Gallia. 
                  Gallia, now Fraunce, was so called of Rayne, whiche the Hebrues call GAL, and the Britaynes Glaw,
                   as who should say, berayned, or ouerslowed by the Diluge. Notwithstanding the Spayniards,
                  Spayniardes, although they were afflicted by the Romans, the Catti, the Alani, the Vandali, the Gothes, the Sueui, and Mauri, or Moores: yet in Cantabria, called now BISCAY, and ASTHVRIA▪
                   (for these are onlye the verie true Spanyardes, and Hiberi) they haue preserued their auncient spéeche. For yt, which is cōmonly called the Spanish tongue:
                  
is but a medly made out of the Latine, Gothish, and Arabick.
               
               But let vs omit all these thynges, and returne agayne vnto our Cambria, called VVales, whiche wee in our mother tongue doo terme Cymbri. This, more then foure hundred yeres since, as Gyraldus hath very well noted, the Englishmen, after the fashion, and maner of the Germans: haue called VVallia, that is VVales. For when the auncient Almaines had sometime ioynyng next vnto them of Forreyners, the Frenchmen, whom they called VValli: it came to passe, that afterwarde they called all straungers, and those whiche dwelt in other prouinces: VValli, and VVallisei. Like as at this present, as well Frenchmen, as Italians, and Burgundians
                  Walsh▪ and welsh they call VValli, & al thinges that come foorth of strange countries: Walshe. 
                  This co
                        •
                     ntry I say, whiche (that I may vse the woordes of Gyraldus) by a false name, yet most frequented at these dayes, but lesse proper, is called VVallia, Wales: conteyneth in length two hundred myles, and aboute

one hundred in breadth. For it reacheth in length, from the Hauen Gordwr in Mona, called Anglysey, vnto the hauen Eskewyn in Venta: eight dayes iorney. In breadth from Porth Mawr, that is to say: the greate hauen of Meneuia, vnto Rhyd helig, which the Britaynes cal Vadū Salicis, the Englishmen Wyllowford, aboute foure dayes iorney. A land muche aboundynge, and very well fortified with high Mountaines, low Ualleyes, great Woddes, Waters▪ & Fennes. In such sort: that from time the Saxons first vsurped this Iland, the residew of the Britaynes, which departed into those coastes, neither by the Englishmen longe agoe, neither since by the Normans, coulde be altogether subdued. As for those, which betooke them selues to the South corner, whiche of their Captaynes name was called Conauia, bycause it is not so well defensed: were not able to resist. For the thyrd part of the Britaynes, whiche doo now remayne, possessyng the Southerly sea coast of Fraunce, a singulare good country: was not trāslated thither after

the destruction, & conquest of Britayne: but longe euer that, by Maximus the Tyran. Who, after many sharpe battayles, which the British youth sustayned vnder him durynge those warres: was with this farthermoste shoare of Fraunce rewarded, by the Emperours liberalitie. Thus far Gyraldus.
                  
               
               This country, sometime was inhabited only by the Britaynes, but after ward the Englishmen began to possesse it, vnto Offas ditch, agaynst whom the welshmen made infinite warres, vntill the commynge of VVylliam the Norman. Under whose sonne Henry, the Flemminges beyng then driuen out of their country, by breaking in of the sea: tooke vpon them the possession of Rosse, a prouince of Demetia. Who, in many warres were prouoked by the Princes of VVales, but alwayes valiantly defended them selues, and theirs, and at this day, differyng from the VVelshmen in tongue, and maners: are yet in the same place recompted for Flemmynges. The kynges of Englande, especially Henry the First, the Second,
                  
and Third of that name, callynge vnto them the Scots, Irishmen, and Cantabre Gascons: did very much prouoke, and molest this nation with continuall warres. But the VVelshmen, beyng deuided vnder three kynges, whome they called Princes (whiche was the very cause of theyr destruction) defended them selues, and their owne stoutly. Howbeit certaine Regions of South wales, as Rosse, Gla Morgan, Wenta, Brechnocke, and parte of Powys, by Robert, sonne to Hammon, and certeyneNoble Erls of Glocestre. worthy Erles of Glocester, the Brussij, the Bohunes, Brian Gylford, Adam of Newmercate, but specially by Roger Mountgomery, and his sonnes, Hago whiche was slayne in Anglysey, Robert of BELISINE, and ARNVLPH, whiche builded the Castell of Penbroke, and the Fytzalanes, Lordes of Oswastrey, & Clun: were quayled, and tamed in many battayles, & came into the right, & possession of ye conquerours. And Gwynedh, although that part therof whiche lieth on this side Conway, was first weakned by the erles of Chester, &

afterwarde by the forenamed kynges, which at ye Riuer Cluda, sundrie times wasted all with fier, and sworde: nōtwithstandyng after the departure of the kynges: they draue the Englishmen thence, and raced their Castels downe to the grounde, and alwayes defended theyr boundes. Untill the yere of our Lorde a thousande two hundred fourescore & two: Edward the first of yt name,Edward the. 1. leading a mighty armie agaynst prince Lew
                        •
                     lyn, and an other arriuyng in the Ile of Angly
                        •
                     ey, and vanquishynge the same, from whence they entred into Aruon, a region exceedyngly well fortified by naturall situation, by a bridge made of boates, in the very same place, where sometime Agricola lead ouer his Souldiers. Where the two armies ioynyng together: vanquished a great multitude of the Gascons, and Biernes, with diuers other noble men, & brought them in subiection to the Englishmen. When as also at the same time, his third armie, vnder the Erle of Glocest
                        •
                     e, and Roger Martumar, sacked, and spoyled Southwales, beyng accompayned

with many Erles, and Lordes of VVales, which loued not the prince. Untill that the prince him selfe, beyng forsaken by many of his owne men: was by the men of Buelt betrayed, not far from the riuer Vaga, or wye, whether he came with a very few souldiers. And by one Adam Francton, whiche faught vnder the conduct of Helias walwin: far from the residew of his owne power, beynge accompayned with one only Page, and vnarmed, with certain other noble men of that country, which had tolde y• same before to his enemies: was there slayne most dishonorably. After whose death, the VVelshmen came in subiection to the Englishmen, and had alwayes afterwarde to their prince: the kyng of Englandes eldestPrince of Wales. sonne, or daughter, if male issue fayled.
               This kynge builded certeyne townes, and Castles there, whiche he compassed with stone walles, and left garisons in them to keepe the VVelshmen in awe. And prouided by special lawes, for that intent made, that VVelshmen should enioy no such liberties, nor freedoms,

as they, and their posteritie had graunted vnto the Englishmen. But by many Edictes, & Decrees set foorth agaynst the VVelshmen, especially by Henry the fourth (who by reason of aHenry the fourth. Owen Glender. Rebellion made by one Owen, whiche dwelt neare the Vally of Dee, was verie highly offended with al that nation) the kynges of England kept them vnder the yoke of seruitude, & abolishinge their owne proper Lawes: brought in the English Lawes, prouidyng by generall cōmaundement, yt no man should vse the welshe tongue in any Court, or Schoole. Howbeit, the honour of th
                     •
                   most auncient tongue, so much preuayled, that not only the welshmen themselues: but also the inhabitours of the English townes, through VVales, beyng now called by the name of welshmen: doo gladly frequent the same. And hath remooued the boundes into Englandwardes, ouer the Riuer Dee, cheifly since the beginnyng of the reigne of Henry the seuenth, a moste prudentHenry the seuenth. Prince: vntill this day. Who, lineally descēdyng from his grandfather. Owen

Tudyr, a welshman, borne in the Ile of Anglysey: quite deliuered all the welshmen from such lawes of bondage, as in other kynges dayes they were subiect vnto. And the most mightie Prince, kynge Henry the eight, his sonne: deliueredHenry the eight. them wholy from all seruitude, and made them in all poyncts equall to the Englishmen. Wherby it commethCommendation of welshmē. to passe, that laying aside their old manners, they, who before were wonte to liue most sparingly: are now enritched and do imitate the Englishmen in diet, & apparell, howbeit, they be somedeale impatient of labour, and ouermuch boastyng of the Nobilitie of their stocke, applying them selues rather to the seruiceTheir skil in seruice. of noble men, then geuynge them selues to the learnyng of handycraftes. So that you shall finde but few noble men in England, but that the greater parte of their retinew (wherin Englishmen exceede al other nations) are welsh men borne. For men cheifly brought vp with Milke meates, beyng 
                     •
                  ymble, and well set of bodie: are very apt to do any kynde of businesse.
               
                  Besides, beyng somwhat high minded, and in extreame pouertie, acknowledgyng the nobilitie of their famely: are more giuen to the culture, and trimmyng of their bodies (like Spayniards) then to ritches, or the belly, and beynge very apt to learne courtlike behauiour: are therfore by the English nobilitie, preferred before Englishmen. Howbeit also, of late they haue very commendably begun to inhabite Townes, to learne occupations, to exercise merchandise, to till the grounde well, and to doo all other kindes of publique, and necessary functions, as wel as Englishmen. And in this one thing surpassyngTheir studies in ler ning. them, that there is no man so poore, but for some space he setteth forth his children to Schole, and such as profitte in studie: sendeth them vnto the Uniuersities, where, for the most part, they enforce them to studie the Ciuile law.
               Wherby it chaunceth, that the greater sort of those whiche professe the Ciuile, or Canon lawes in this Realme: are VVelshmen. And you shall finde but few of the ruder sorte, whiche cannot

reade, and write their owne name, and play on the Harpe after their maner. And now also the holy Scriptures, and dayly seruice, are printed in their tongue. And like as this nation (as Tacitus reporteth) beyng very impacient of iniuries, was alwayes at variance in continuall warres, and slaughter within it self: so now, through feare of lawes whiche they doo very ciuilly obey: they striue in actions, and controuersies vnto the consumyng of all their gooddes.
               And thus much touchinge the manners, and demeanure of the VVelshmen at this day: but now heare of their olde, out of Gyraldus. Whiche writeth thus.
               
                  If is a light nation, a sharpe nation, rather then a rough, a nation wholy giuen vnto warres. For here, not only the noblemen: but all the multitude is redy so arinur. For the Trumpet no sooner soundeth alarme: but the husbandman cometh as spedely to battaile from the Plough: as doeth the courtier from the Court. For not here, as in other places.

                     The Ploughmans toyle in circle rounde doth runne:
                  
               
               
                  For in March, and Aprill only, they steere once for Otes, but they fallow not twise in Sommer, and the thyrde Winter after for wheatland. The most part of the people is fead with Rudder beastes for the payle. They fead on Otes, Cheese, Mylke, and Butter, on Fleash more abundantly, on Breade more sparyngly. They trouble them selues with no Marchandize, with no trauell by Sea, with no handycraftes, neither with any affayres els, sauynge Martial. And yet they seeke for preseruation of peace, and their liberty. They fight for their country, they labour for theyr libertie. For whiche, not only to blade it out: but also to leese their liues they compt it sweet. Wherby it cometh, that they thinke it shame to die in their Beds, and an honour to die in warre. And these beyng now the remnantes of Aeneas trayne: would runne foorthe headlongewise in Armur for their libertie. Of whom this is verie notable to be marked, that many

times, beyng naked: they dare encounter with those whiche beare weapon, vnarmed with those which are armed, and footemen with horsemē. In which cōflict, many times, only through their nimblenesse, & courage of minde: they become the conquerours. And are not vnlike vnto those in place, and nature, of whom the Poet speaketh.
               
               
                  Subiect vnto the Northen Beare,Lucan. li. 
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  Most happie folke by their mischance,
                  on whom those heapes of feare,
                  And cheefest dread of death doth
                  nothing daunt. Wherby doth rise
                  To them a redie minde to runne to fight,
                  and death dispise,
                  Accompting for to spare life, that will
                  come againe: great cowardise.
               
               And in another place. A nation slenderly armed, trustyng rather to theyr agilitie, then the force of their men. For if they be ouercome to day, and shamefully turned in to blouddie fight: notwithstandinge tomorow they prepare a new expedition, not mindefull of theyr losse, nor shame. And althoughe they preuayle not, when Warre is proclaymed

with open meetynges, yet in secret ambushments, and breakynges in by night, they wil vexe their enemy. So that beyng nothyng troubled with hunger, nor cold, neither wearied with martial affayres, neither fallynge into desperation by aduersitie, but soone redie to rise vp after a fall, and prest by and by agayne to assay the peril of war, as in battayle easie: so in continuance of warre harde to be ouercome. Wherby Claudianus, seemeth to speeke of the nature of the same nation, saying:
               
               
                  If that their harts you let a whyle,Ad Eutro. lib. 2.
                  
                  To rest: so many slaughters they,
                  deuoyd of sence doo seeme
                  To take, and of smale price the losse
                  of so much bloud to deeme.
               
               Thus much he, and more, whiche shortly god willyng, shalbe set forth. Now let vs come to the description of the lande.
               This lande, after the British destruction:The descriptiō of Wales. was deuided into six Regiōs: as I read of late in a very auncient booke, written of the lawes of the Britaynes. For (sayth that booke) after that

the Saxons had vanquished ye 
                  Britaynes, & obtayned the Scepter of the Realme, and the crowne of London: all the people of Wales, assembled together at the mouthe of the Riuer Deuey, to choose a kynge. And yno i Doethant Gwyr Gwynedh, à Gwyr Powys, à Gwyr Deheubarth, à Reynnwc, ac Esylluc, à Morganuc. That is to say, and thither came men of Gwynedh, and men of Powys, and men of Deheubarth, and of Reynnucia, and of Syllucia, and Morgania, & they chose Maylgun, whom others call Maclocunius ofMaylgun of Gwynedh▪
                   
                  Gwynedh, to be their kynge. This was aboute the yere of our Lorde. 
                     •
                  60. Howbeit, afterward, in the lamentable conflict agaynst Ethelfredus kynge of Northumberland: are recited the kings of Dynetia, whiche falsly they call Demetia, of Guenta, of Powysia, and of Northwales. And in another place, 
                     •
                  ention is made of the kinges of Stra
                     
                        〈…〉
                      Cluyde. So that hereby it is easely 
                     〈…〉
                  ered, that this country was subiect 
                     〈…〉
                  iuers petikinges or Erles, vntoRodericu
                        •
                     
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  e of Roderike the great, who ob
                  
                     〈…〉
                   the Monarchie of al VVales, the

yere of our Lorde, 843. deuidyng it into three partes, whiche he left in possession of his three sonnes. For vnto Meruinius (as Gyraldus termeth him, to whom I consent) his eldest sonne: he gaue Gwynedh, to Anaraudus (whome some make the eldest) Powys, & to Cadelhus the youngest: Deheubarth. And yt I may vse the woords of Gyldas: Southwales was alotted to Cadelhus, with the blessyng, and goodwil of all the people, which they call Deheubarth, which is as much to say: as, the right side. Which, although in quantity it be farre the biggest: notwithstandyng, by reason of noble men, which in the welsh tongue are called Vchelwyr, that is to say, high men wherwith it aboundeth, whiche were wont to rebell agaynst their Lordes, & to defie them in armur: it séemed to be the worser. This diuision (whilst their posteritie contēded among themselues, in Ciuill warre, and ech of them alone with the Englishmen in externall:) at last destroyed the kyngedome of wales.
               
               The cheefest of these kyngdomes, whiche the inhabitantes call Gwynedh, Englishmen Northwales, & the Latine
                  
writers corruptly Venodotia: had inVenodotia. auncient time these limites. On the Weast, and North sides it hath Vergiuiū, or the Irish Oceane, at the Southwest and by South: the Riuer Deuye, Wherby it is cut of from Southwales. On the South and East sides, it is seuered from Powys, and England with high Hilles, and somtime with waters vnto the force of the Riuer Dee. The same also was parted into foure Regions, which conteined fiftéene Cantredi, which signifieth an hundred villages.
               The principallest of these Regions, was the Ile of Anglysey, of whom wee haue spoken in another place, & in the same was a kynges Palace, the seate of Northwales, in Aberfraw: whereof the kinges of Gwynedh, haue the name of ye kinges of Aberfraw. For in the lawes of Howel Dha (yt is to say, good Howel) of walles both kynge and lawier, which I haue seen written both in the British and Latin tongues: it was decreed, that like as the kynge of Aberfraw, ought to pay threescore and thrée poundes for tribute vnto the kynge of London:
                  
So likewise the kinges of Dinesur, an Matrafall, were seuerally bounde to pay so much. Whereby it appeareth, yt thisIlandes nigh wales. kinge was ye cheefest prince of al wales. About Anglysey be diuers litle Ilands as Ynis Adar, that is to say: the Ile of Byrdes sometime, but now it is called Ynis Moylrhoniaid, to witte the Ile of Whales, in English Ysterisd. Also Ynis Lygod, that is, the Ile of Myse, and the Ile Seirial, in english Preêstholme.
               
               The seconde Region of Gwynedh, called Arfon, as who should say aboue Anglysey, the best fortified parte of all VVales. For it centeyneth the highest Mountaynes, and Rockes of all Britayne, which wee terme Yriri, the Englishmen Snowdowne, because they carie Snow. For height, and plentie of cattayle: scarce inferiour to the Alpes. It hath in it many Riuers, and standing Waters. Beyonde whose farthest promontory, called Lhynus, lieth an ile, whiche Ptolomaeus termeth Lymnos, our countrymen Eulhi, the Englishmē 
                  Bardesey, that is to say: the Ile of the Bardi. In Arfon, oueragaynst Anglysey:
                  
stoode an auncient Citie, called of the Romans Segontiū, of the Britaynes Caërsegont,
                   of a Riuer whiche passeth therby. But now out of the ruynes therof, there is a new Towne, and a Castle founded by Edward the first ofEdward the. 1. that name, kyng of England, called Caër Arfon, that is to say: a Towne vpon Anglysey. And not farre from thence, oueragaynst Anglysey, lieth the Byshops See of Banchor. And vpon Conway water, which there ebbeth, and sloweth: standeth Conway, of our countrie men called Aberconwy, a walled towne builded by the same kynge. Then followeth Meridnia, with vs Merionydh, and Gyraldus calleth it the land of ye sonnes of Conauius. 
                  The same (as he sayeth) is the most roughest, and sharpest of al VVales, hauynge in it moste highest Mountaynes. The people vse longe Speares, wherwith they be of greate force, as ye 
                     Southwales men with their Bowes, so that an Harnies cannot beare it of. So much he.
               
               The Sea coast there, by occasion ofHerring
                        •
                      taking. great Herryng takyng: is much frequented

by people of diuers countries. In the same standeth the Towne Harlechia, by the Sea side. And within the lande: is the great lake Tegid, through which the riuer Dee, whiche wee call Douerduwy, that is to say, the water of Dee: floweth. Where it is worthe the notyng, that there is in that Ponde a peculiar kinde of Fish, which is neuer founde in the runnynge water, neither the Salmons, wherof the Riuer is full, doo euer entre into the Lake. In this country, and in Arfon, are seene greate multitude of Deare, and Goates vpon the high Hilles. And these two countries, of all Wales: cam last into the power of ye 
                  Englishmē. Neither did ye people of this country euer frequent domestical incursiōs, but before our time, alwaies séemed to obey lawes rightfully.
               The farthest, & last part of Gwynedh, is called of our coūtrimen Berfedhwlad that is to say: the inward, and midland region, and is seuered from Arfon, by ye ryuer Conway, of whom Antoninus, & Ptolomaeus do speake, vnder the name of Nouius. In this, besides the forenamed

Riuer, standeth a most antique citie of the Britaynes, called Dyganwy in Rosse, of the Englishmen Gannock, &Gannock▪
                   famous in Tacitus by the name of Cangorum, wherof the people of that countrie were called of the Romans CANGI. And Ptolomaeus mentioneth the Promontorie of ye 
                  Iangani, which they call now, Gogarth. A place so fortified by nature: that it can scarse be taken by mās strength. This citie (as I say) was the seate, and Palace of the later kynges of Britayne, when, as now their power began to quayle, as namely of Maylgun Caduanus, Cadwalla, whom Bede, termeth a most cruell Tyranne, bicause he persecuted his enemies very fiercely, and of Cadwalladar, who was the last kynge of Britayne, of the Brittish bloud. This Citie, the yere of our redemption: eight hundred and sixteen Cananus Dyndaythuy, reygnynge in VVales, was stroken with lightnynge from Heauen, and burned in suche sort: that it could neuer be afterwarde restored: howbeit, the name remayneth to the place to this daye, out o
                     •
                  
                  
whose rubbish: Conouia was builded.Henry Lacey Erle of Lincolne.
               
               Moreouer, in this Territory, in 
                     Rhyfaniacum: Henry Lacey, Erle of Lincolne, to whom the conquer our therof, Edward the first, gaue that land: erected a very stoute Castle, not only by naturall situation, but also by a Wall of wonderfull thicknesse, made of a very harde kinde of stone, in my opinion the strongest, and best defensed thynge in England. Addyng also therto, a towne walled about, whiche by the auncient name he called Dynbech, although those which cam afterwarde, termed it Denbigh. This fine Towne, and my sweetDenbigh. country, beynge compassed welnigh aboute, with very fayre Parkes, & standyng in the entrance of an exceedynge pleasant Ualley: aboundeth plentifully with all thinges, that are necessarie to the vse of man. The Hilles yéelde Fleash, and white meates. The most fertile Ualley: very good Corne and grasse. The sweet Riuers wt the Sea, at hande: minister all sortes of Fishe, and Foule. Strange Wynes come thither foorth of Spayne, Fraūce, & Greece,
                  
abundantly. And being the cheif towne of the shyre, standyng in ye very middle of the countrie: it is a greate market Towne, famous, and much frequented with wares, and people, from al partes of Northwales. The indwellers haue the vse of both tongues. And beyng endued by kinges of England, with many Priueledges, and Liberties: are ruled by their owne lawes. The valley, nigh wherto this Towne standeth: is termed amongst vs Dyphryn Clwyd, that is to say: the Ualley of Clwyd. It is almost eighteene miles in length, and in breadth in some place foure miles, in other some sixe. On the East, west, and South sides: it is enuironed with high Hilles, on the North with the Oceane Sea. In the midst, it is cut in twayne by the Riuer Clwyd, wherof it taketh name, into whom, diuers other litle streames fallyng out of the Hilles: doo discharge them selues, by reason wherof: irriguous, and pleasant Medowes, & plentifull pastures doo lie aboute the bankes therof. In the entrance of whiche Ualley: Ruthyn an auncient

towne, and Castle of the Grayes, fromThe famelie of Graies. whence the most noble famely amōgst the Englishmen tooke beginninge: is to be seene. And not farre from the Sea: standeth Rudhlan, in Tegengyl, sometime a greate Towne, but now a litle Uyllage. In the same Prouince is a Cathedrall Churche, of our country men called LHANEL WEY, of the Englishmen, S. Assaph, buildedS. Assaph. between twoo Ryuers, CLWYD, and ELWEY.
               
               I remember, that I haue read, that there was one ELBODIVS ArchElbodius. bis
                     •
                  hoppe of Northwales, preferred vnto that honour, by the Byshoppe of Rome. Who fyrst of all, the yere of our, Saluation, seuen hundred thrée score and two: reconciled the VVelshmen to the Romishe Churche, from whiche before, they had disagreed. For the Britaynes, imitatynge the Asiaticke Churche: celebrated theyr EASTER from the foureteene day of the Moone: vnto the twentie. When the Romans, followynge the Nicene counsell: keepe theyr Easter
                  
from the fifteene, to the one and twentie. Whereby it commeth to passe, that these Nations, haue celebrated that Feast, on diuers Sundayes. But let the Byshoppes take regarde, how farre they doo erre from the Decrees of the NICENE Counsell, whyle they followe that vncertayne rule of the motion of the Sonne, and Moone, whiche they call the GoldenThe Goldē number, reproued. Number, beynge therein very fowly deceaued. Whiche thinge, in times paste, was obiected for a cryme, agaynst the Britaynes, by the ouer superstitious Mounke Augustine, and lykewyse by Bede, whiche to muche attributed vnto suche ti
                     •
                  les, in somuch that for the same cause: he durst terme them Heretiques: But now, howbeit vnder curse of the Nicene counsell, it be otherwyse commaunded: it is reiected by the Prelates them selues, and the whole Churche of Europe. But let vs returne to our purpose.
               In that place, where the See of S. Assaph is: was sometime a Colledge

of learned Agonists, yt I may vse Capgraues woordes, celebrated for multitude, vnder Centigeme a Scot, whiche was called Elguense, or Eluense, of a Riuer. This Prouince Tegenia, is called of the Latines Igenia, and after, beynge vanquished by the Englishmen: began to be termed Tegengel, that is to say: the Englishmens Tegenia. Afterward being inhabited by Britaynes, cūminge foorth of Scotland, & driuyng the Englishmen thence: with the Ualley of Clwyd, Ruthyn, and Rosse, make one kyngdome, whiche Marianus calleth Streudglead, our countrymen terme it Stradclwyd, that is to say: the soyle of Clwyd. For this woord Strat, with the name of some Riuer ioyned therto, doth vsually signifie amongst the welsh men, a veyne, or soyle of lande, nigh to a Riuer, as Strad Alyn, Strad Towyn, with many such like. Theyr last prince called Dunwallon, forsakyng his kingdome,Dunwallō. when the Danes afflicted all Britayne: departed to Rome, the yere after the incarnation, 971. where shortly after he died. In Tegenia, is a well of a

meruaylous nature, whiche beyng sixe myles from the Sea, in the parish of Kilken: ebbeth: and floweth twise in one day. Yet haue I marked this of late, when the Moone ascendeth from the East Horizon, to the South (at what time all Seas do flowe) that then the water of this Wel diminisheth and ebbeth. And not far from this place, is the famous Fountayne takynge name of the superstitious worshyppinge of theWenefrides well. Uirgin VVenefride, which boyling vp sodenly, out of a place which they call Sychnant, that is to say a drie vallye: rayseth forth of it self a greate streame, which runneth immediatly into Deuanus. This water, besides that it bredeth Mosse, of a very pleasant sauour: is also most holsome vnto mans body, bothe for washyng, and drinkynge, and of verie good tast, in so much that many beinge washed therin: were cured of diuers infirmities, wherwith they were borne. Moreouer, in Tegenia: there is a certayne auncient monument of an olde building, in a place called Pot Vary, somtime renowmed by Roman letters

and Armes. The towne whiche they call Flynt, standynge vpon the waterFlint. 
                  Deua: is knowne not only to be the head of Tegenia, but also ye whole shire.
               After the discription of Gwynedh,
                  Powisia. let vs now come to Powys, the seconde kyngedom of VVales. Which in the time of German Altisiodorensis, which preached sometime there, agaynst Pelagius Heresie: was of power▪ as is gathered out of his life. The kynge wherof, as is there read, bycause he refusedGods iudge ment▪
                   to heare that good man: by the secret, and terrible iudgement of God, with his Palace, and all his householde: was swallowed vp into the bowels of the Earth, in that place, whereas, not farre from Oswastry, is now a standyng water, of an vnknowne depth, called Lhunclys, that is to say: the deuouryng of the Palace. And there are many Churches founde in the fame Prouince, dedicated to the name of German. The Citie of Schreusbury, in olde time, was the Princes seate of this Kyngdome. But when the Englishmen had taken it: it was translated to Mathraual, a place

fiue myles from Pole, of Powys. This Region had on the Northside Gwynedh, on the East from Chestre, vnto Herford: England, on the South, & West the Riuer Wey, and very high Hylles, whereby it was disioyned from Southwales. And bycause ye lande was plain, and neare to England, and much vexed with continuall Warre by Englishmen, and afterward by the Normans: this parte of VVales did first experiment the yoke of English subiection. Which brooding stoute men, and such, whose nature coulde not abide to be at rest, but giuen to Murther, and excursions: not only procured infinite trouble vnto the kynges of England: but wrought also greate iniurie vnto theyr neighbours the VVelshmen. But afterward, beynge parted between twoo brothers, as was the custome of ye 
                  Britaynes: it began to wax weake. And ye part, which lieth on ye Northside of Tanat, Murnia, and Seuern: befel vnto Madoc, wherof it was called Powys Fadoc. The other parte came bothe in name, and possession of Gwenwynwyn.
               
               
                  The first lost the name of Powys, for beyng subdued by the Normans: it came into the power, and right of the conquerours. The first region therof Mailor, is deuided into twaine, by the Riuer Dee, namely the Saxon, and Welsh, wherof the first: appertayneth vnto Flyntshyre, and the other vnto Denbyghshyre, in the which standeth the Castle of Lion,
                  Castle of Lion. now commonly called Holt. And not farre from thence, are seene the rubbish and relliques of the moste notable, and famous Monasterie of Banchor, while the glory of the Britaynes flowrished. In the same were two thousand, & one hundred Moonkes, very well ordred, & learned, and deuided into seuen sortes, dayly seruyng God. Amongst whom, those whiche were simple, and vnlearned: by their handie labour prouided meate, and drinke, and apparell for the learned, and suche as applied their studie. And if any thyng were remainyng: they deuided it vnto the poore. That place, hath sent foorth many hundreds of excellētly wel learned men, amongst whom, it hath also vomited forth to the

worlde, the most detestable Archeheretick Pelagius. And afterward, throughPelagius. the enuie, and malice of Augustine, not the Bishop of Hippo, but the most arrogant Moonke, and the most cruell execution of his Ministre Ethelfrede: worthy men, of far more perfect ordre then he was of, were made away, andA wicked deede. the whole house, from the very foundations, together with their most noble Liberary, more precious then Golde, was raysed downe, and destroyde with fier, and sworde.
               It were ouerlonge to repeate, whatAgustine the Moonk. Latine, and British chronicles doo reporte, of the intollerable pride of this man. For when he, sittyng in his regal seat, disdayned to ryse vp vnto the British Bysshops, whiche came vnto him humbly, and meekely, as it became Christians to doo, they beholdynge the same: both iudged, and sayde, that he was not the ministre of y• most gentle, and meeke lambe Christe: but of Lucifer, as they had learned in ye holy scriptures, & so they departed home againe. For whiche contempt, and reproche,

and partly also, bycause they agréed not in some poynctes, with the Archbishop of Cantorbury, which he had appointed, & with the Church of Rome, he so stirred the hate of the Englishmen agaynst them: yt shortly after, as I sayde, by Ethelfred, through the ayde, and helpe of Ethelbert king of Kent, prouoked therto by Augustine: the Mounkes whiche desired peace, were most cruelly slaine. And afterward the Britaynes, vnder the conduct of Brochwell, kynge of Powys: were vanquished. Until that at length, being ayded with power from Belthrusius, Duke of Cornwall, Caduane
                   kyng of Northwales, Meredoc,
                   kyng of Southwales, and hartned forward by the Oration of their most learned Abbot Dunetus,
                  Dunetus. who commaunded, as our Chronacles reporte, that euery one should kisse the grounde, in remembrance ofNote this place. the cōmunion of the Body of our Lord, & should take vp water in their handes foorth of the Riuer Dee, and drinke it, in commemoration of the moste sacred Bloud of CHRIST, which was shead for them. Who, hauynge so Communicated:

they ouercame the Saxons in a famous battayle, and slew of them, as Huntyngton writeth: a thousande threescore, and sixe, and created Carduanus theyr kynge, in the Citie of Legions. Next ensue Yale, and Chyrk, hilly countries. In this last, standeth that antique Castle, which at this day, is called Brennus Palace. And these apperteyne vnto Denbighshyre. But more to the North: are Stradalin, so named of the Ryuer ALYN, and Hope, of Fluitenshire.
               
               Towardes SCHREVSBVRY, liethWhitting ton. Fitzalanes 
                  VVhittington, and Oswastrey, a noble Market, and enwalled rounde, at the charges of the FITZALANES, a moste auncient famely of Englande, whose inheritaunce it is, and these belonge vnto Schropshire. Aboue these in the West: are the Edeirnion men, ioyned now vnto the Merionydh men, vpon the Ryuer Dee. And all these, at this presente, are called Gwynedhij, or men of Gwynedh, for the name of ye mē of Powis, is perished amongst thē. The seconde Region of Powys, conteyned

the same Prouince, whiche now only enioyeth the name of Powys, and sometime stretched very wide, but now contayneth only three Cantredes, lyinge wholy on the Northside of the Riuer Seuern, whiche is the seconde riuer ofSeuern. 
                  Britayne, fallyng from the high Mountaynes of Plymnonia, and risinge foorth of the same head, with Wey, and Rhydwely, and runnyng throuhh Arwistli, and Kedewen in Powys: maketh speede to Schreusbury, and so floweth forward through Brydgenorth, VVorcestre, and Glocestre, from whiche, not farre of, it ebbeth and floweth, and between VVales, Deuonshyre, and Cornwall: beareth name of the Seuern Sea. Our countrymen terme it Hafren, and not Seuern, as the Englishmen doo. The cheif towne, and kyngs seate of Powys, called Matrafal: retayneth the aunciēt name, howbeit the buildynges be defaced, and worne. And one myle from Seuern: standeth a Towne, the only market of all that Region, of the Englishmen Pole, of the VVelshmen called Tralhung, that is to say, the towne

of the standynge water, so called of the Lake whereto it is nigh, where there stande aloft two Castels, builded sometime by the Princes of Powys. This princedome, came by inheritance vnto a woman, called Hauisia, who beynge maried vnto one Carleton, an Englishman: made him Lorde of Powis, from which house, at length it descended vnto the Grayes, in the North. Next vnto that, standeth Cadeuenna, a new towne, aboue whom, towardes the risinge of Seuern,: are Arwistle, and Lhanidlos, countries wel knowne by reason of the Townes. And more by VVest, and by North, at the head of Deuey, Mouthuy, now a portion of Merionedh, & Kefelioc, knowne by the towne Machaulhaith. On the other side of Seuern, beneathe the Region Kerey, there is a Castle by a litle Towne, which VVelshmen call Trefaldwyn, that is to say, Baldwynes towne, but the Englishmen terme it,Roger Mountgomer. 
                  Montgomery, of the builder Roger of Mont Gomer. From this Towne, all these Regions beyng ioyned together: are called Montgomershyre, a country

brooder sometime of noble horses: now it sendeth foorthe but few, and by the forenamed Roger, and his sonnes, verie valiant, and warlike gentlemen: very sorely afflicted, vntill that Robert beynge accused of high Treason: was enforced to flie his countrie. The region is hilly, and by reason of plentifulnesse of Pastures: verie good for grasinge of Cattell, aboundynge with many waters, and bryngynge foorthe tall men, very well fauoured, much addicted vnto Idlenesse, and vnprofitable games. Whereby it cometh to passe, that you shall finde many ritche Englishe Farmers amongste them, when as the Landelordes themselues, which will take no paynes: do become very poore. These six shyres, namely Anglysey, Aruon, Merionydh, Denbyghshyre, Fluitense, and Montgomershyre: Englishmen comprise vnder the name of Northwales.
               
               There remayneth yet that parte of Powis, which stretched sometime vnto Wey, whose first Region taketh name of the Riuer Colunwy, and of the Castle,

and possession of the Fitzalanes.
               
               Next to Melienyth, and Gurttrenion, hilly countries, and at the South, RADENOR, called of the VVelshmen: Maisifod,
                   head of the shyre. Ioynyng vnto these, are the Eluil, with the Castle of Payne, by Wey, which our country men cal Gwy. Beyonde al these, are Prestene, whiche wee call S. Androwes
                  Prestenia. Churche, and Kynton, with the Castle of Huntington. And vpon Themis, of vs called Tefedioc▪
                   standeth the fayre towne, & Castle of Ludlaw in Schreupshyre,
                  Ludlaw. in olde time called DINAV, the worke of Roger Mōtgomer. And aboue yt: the castle of Wigmore, ye patrimony ofWigmore Ca
                        ••
                     le. the Mortumars. And at Seuern: Bridgenorth, & Beaudely, in old time very wel knowne, by the castle Tyrhil▪
                   And on ye 
                  Southwest side, vpon Logus, which wee call Lhygwy, on a passyng fertile playn: standeth Lhanlhieni, of the Englishmen Lemstre. And not farre thence, is the auncient Citie Henfford, that is to say
                     •
                  : an olde way, of Englishmē, in old time called Ferleg, now Hereford, standinge vpon Wey, or more truly vpon Gwy.
               
               
                  Towards Seuern: are Maluern hilles, and in the very corner between Seuern and VVey, not farre from the towne of Rosse: is that renowmed Woodde: whiche of the Danes, is called the Forest of Deane. These Regions, with al Herefordshyre, beyonde Wey, before they were possessed by the Englishmen: in olde time, were termed in British, Euryeynnwc, and the inhabitants Eurnwyr, of whiche name there remayneth yet some signification apparant, in one place of Herefordshire. For that, which the Englishmen called Vrchenfeld: the VVelshmen called Ergnig, and afterward Ergengel. And no meruayle, since the least portion therof, retayneth now (as I haue sayd) the name of Powis.
               
               There remayneth the thyrd kyngkingedomedehubarth of VVales, of the English called Southwales, of our countrymen which inhabite the lande: Deheubarth, that is to say: the right, or South part, for so wee vse to terme the South. The same is wholy compassed with the Irish Sea, the streame of Seuern, and the riuers Wey, and Dyuei. And although

the country be very fertile, & the lande ritche, and far more bigger then Gwynedh: notwithstandynge, as Gyraldus sayth, it was compted ye worser. And yt not only, because Vchelwyr, yt is to say: the nobliest, & cheefest men, refused to obey their kynges: but also by reason yt the sea coastes therof, were continually molested by the Englishmen, Normans, & Flemmynges. Whereby the Prince, was compelled to forsake Caer mardthyn his seate, and to apoyncte the principall place of his regalitie, at Dinefur in Cantremawr. And, although these princes, were of greate authoritie in VVales: yet after yt 
                  Rhesus, the sonneRhesus. of Theodore, the greate, was slayne, through the treason of his owne men: they were no longer termed Dukes, nor Princes, but Arglwydhi, that is to say, Lordes. Untill at length, through Ciuile Warres, by deuidyng of their landes amongst many, and also by externall (whyle the Englishmen endeuored to possesse all by force, and crafte:) they were so weakened, that after the death of Rhesus, the sonne of Griffith, a

very noble, and valiant Gentleman: they lost bothe the authority, and name of Princes, and Lordes.
               Now let vs descend vnto the description of the Prouince, wherof the first Region, which commeth to hande: is yt, whiche Gyraldus calleth Ceretica, our countrymen Ceredigion, the Englishmen Cardigan. Where it is to be noted,Cardigan. as in all other, yt 
                  C, and G, haue the force of Cappa, & Gamma. This region on the North, hath the Irish Sea, on the East, the riuer Dyuei, wherby it is deuiued from Gwynedh, & towardes Powis, very high Hilles, on ye 
                  South, Caermyrthyn,
                   and on the West, Dyfetia.
                  
               
               Their tōgue (as Gyraldus affirmeth)The welsh tongue. is esteemed ye finest, of al the other people of wales. And Gwynedh: the purer, wt out permixtion, cōmyng nearest vnto thauncient British. But the Southerne most rudest, & coursest, bycause it hath greatest affinitie with strange tōgues.
               The sea coast of this parte: RychardRichard Clarens. Clarens, a very noble man, comminge in with a nauie, and buildyng Castles at the mouth of Teifi, and Vstwyth: possessed

it for his owne, and leauing garisons there: returned into England. But when he vnderstoode that his men were besieged by the VVelshmen, beyng boldned by his great power: he entended by an ouer rash enterprise, to go ayde them by lande. But, at Coed Gronus, not farre from Abergeueni, he was slayne with all his armie, by Ierwerthus of Caërlheon. And so those Fortes returned agayne vnto theyr olde lords.
               I suppose that the mouthe of Ystwyth, is of Ptolomaeus called Rotossa, and Tibium: Abertius, but yt, through necligence of the transcribers: they were confounded into one. Not farre from this place, standeth Lhanpaternfawr, that is the Church of Paternus ye greate, which in olde time was had in great veneration. For welshmen, aboue all other nations, were accustomed to reuerence Churches, & attribute much honour vnto ecclesiastical persons. For (as Gyraldus reporteth) they vsed not once to touche the most deadlyest foes they had, and such as were accused of Treason, if they escaped vnto ye church.

Yea, not so much as their enemies cattell, if they fedde in any Pastures, or Leazes, whiche appertayned vnto the Churche. Moreouer, when they be armed, and goynge vnto battell, if they fortune to meete with a Priest on the way: they will cast downe their weapons, and require benediction with a stoupyng head. In the same Region, is a place, in whiche (they say) vnder Deuus feete, whom in Lantine they callDAVID, 
                  Dauid, whyle he inueyhed agaynst the Pelagians: the earth bellowed, and rose vp in an hill, whiche they terme Lhandewybreuy. In the other part of ye Regiō is the principall Towne of the Shyre, vpon the riuer Teify, which wee terme Aberteifi, to say, the mouth of Teifus, the Englishmen call it Cardigan. This Riuer only of al Britayne, as Gyraldus reporteth, aboūdeth wt 
                  Otters, but now our countrimē know not what they ar. The bare name which is Auanc: they take for a Monstre of the water.
               Passyng foorth alonge, by the same Sea coaste: there commeth vnto our view, a Region of auncient time, termed

of our countrymen Dyfed, of Ptolomaeus, Demetia, for Dynetia, in English, VVestwales, and now Penbrokeshyre. The same reacheth from Sea, to Sea, the farther Promontorie wherof: Ptolomaeus calleth Octopitarum, a litle declinyng from ye worde Pebidion. By the Northern Ocean, a longe lie: Trefdraeth, & Aberguain, & Cilgaren, within the mayne lande, & in the west Angle, is the Bishops See of Meneue, sometime famous with an Archbishops see. For Deui, who is called Dauid, translated the Archbishopprick from the Citie of Legions, where it was of antiquitie: into Meneue. Afterwhome, there sate there, fiue & twētie Archbishops, whose names are founde in Gyraldus. TheSampson. last wherof, called Samson, in the time of a greuous Plague of Pestilence then reignyng: fled into Armorica, or the lesse Britayne, with his palle, where beyng chosen Bishop of Dole: he lefte there his Palle, whiche his successours haue enioyed vnto this daye, before whom the Archbyshop of Turo hath preuayled. But ours, by occasion of the

                  Saxon warre, and their owne pouertie: lost their auncient dignitie, notwithstā
                  dyng al Bishops of VVales, were consecrated by the Bishop of Meneue, and he of them, as his Suffraganes, vntill the dayes of Henry the first, when as Bernhard, was consecrated by the Archbyshop of Cantorbury, and vsed him selfe longe time after as Archbyshop, vntill in the ende: his action fell at Rome. This much Gyraldus.
               
               Neither was there any Bishop of Meneue before Morgenew: whiche was the. xxxiii. from Dauid: that tasted any fleash. And he, the very same night, when he first tasted fleash: was slayne by Pyrates. This Church hath been very often spoyled, and destroyd by English, and Danish Pyrates. Here, in the valley Rosea, was borne the greate Patricke, who endued Ireland with thePatrick. Christian faith. Hauerfordia, whiche they call now West Hereford, is distāt from this See: xxi. myles, in olde time called of the Britaynes, Aberdaugleddaw
                   that is to say: the mouth of two swords. For so the cheifest Ryuers of all Britayne,
                  
which make any hauen: are termed. Englishmen call the same Milford, and some Alaunicum, by the Latin name. The VVelshmen call this Towne now Hulphordh, and the Hauen reserueth his antique name. Upon the same crooke, or bosome: standeth Benbrock, head of the shyre, the worke of Arnulph Montgomer, whiche Girarde of VVyndelesour valiantly defended agaynst Rhesus, sonne to Theodore. And after that peace was established (as Gyraldus reporteth) he tooke to wife Nessa, the daughter of Thesus, on whom he begat worthy issue, bothe Male, and Female, by whom, both the Sea coast of VVales, remayned vnto the Englishmen: and the force of Ireland was afterward vanquished. At ye 
                  South Sea lieth Tenbigh, as Englishmen terme it, but welshmen, Dinbegh Ypyscot,
                   that is to wit, fisshyng Denbygh, soDenbygh. called, for difference twixt it, and the other, which is in Gwynedh. This same part of Demetia, or Dynetia, is at this day possessed, and inhabited by Flemmynges, sent thither by Henry the first▪
                  
The people beyng stout, and rough: defended them selues, and theirs: valiently agaynst the VVelshmen▪
                   And although many times, especially by Cadwalader, Conanus, and Howell, sonnes of Owaen Prince of Gwynedh, and Rhesus, sonne to Gryffeth of Northwales, and lastly by Leweline the greate, as Parisiensis termeth him, who had in his armie thirtie thousande men: they were almost destroyed, and sleyne: yet haue they alwayes recouered their strength agayne, and vnto this day are knowen from VVelshmen by diuersitie of their manners, and tongue.
               The thyrde Prouince of Southwales, Maridinia:
                   taketh name of Maridunum, a very auncient Citie, whereof both Latin, and Greeke writers make mention. By which name, it was so called and knowne, longe before the birth of that very well learned man, whom the Englishmen corruptly call Merlin, but our countrymen Merdhin.
                  Merlin. Neither did the Citie take name of him: but he of that, whereas he was borne. Wee call the same Caer fryd
                        •
                     in
                  
by reason of proprietie of the tongue, whereby wee change M, into V, the consonant (for whom our countrymen do vse F) in the Castle, & Citie of Merdhyn. That same Ambrose, who was borne of a noble Uirgin (whose fathers name is of purpose suppressed) for his passyng skill in the Mathematicals, and wonderful knowledge in al other kinde of learnyng: was by the rude common people reputed to be the sonne of an incubus, or a Male Diuell, whiche in similitude and likenesse of men, do vse carnally to companie with women.
               This Towne, as Gyraldus, writeth, was in olde time compassed rounde with a fayre brickewall. And vpon the riuer Clarus, whiche Ptolomaeus, termeth Tobius, wee Towi: is sayde that the kynges seat and Palace of Southwales was builded, vntill that it was taken by the Englishmen. After what time it was remooued vnto Dynefur vpon the same Riuer, a place very well fortefied with woodes, and hilles. In this Region, by reason of the stronge situation of places: ye princes of Southwales,
                  
made welnigh their continuall abode. Which was deuided from Ceretica, by the Riuer Tifey, by whose side:Emlyn Castle. standeth the noble Castle of Emlyn. On the other sides, it is enuironed wt very high hilles, and with the Sea.
               Towards the Sea: is Catguilia, now Cydweili, a country sometime possessed by Mauritius of London. Next whom lieth Gwhir, which ioyneth vnto Morgania, with a Towne at the mouthe of Tawai, of vs Abertawai, of Englishmē called Swansei. Morgania, of Englishmen Glamorgā, of vs called Morganwc, and Gwladforgan, that is to say: the country of Morgan, of one Morgan,
                  Morgan. which was there slayne by his Auntes sonne Cuneda, who was king of Lhoëgr more then twoo thousand yeres since: so called. It lieth on the Seuern Sea, and was alwaies wont to be rebellious agaynst his Prince. Wherfore, when it refused to obey his true, and lawfull Prince: by the iust iudgement of God,Treason and Rebellion alwaies punished. which alwayes reuengeth Rebellion, and Treason: it was enforced to come in seruitude vnto straungers. For aboute

the yere of our Lorde, one thousand, fourescore, and ten, when Iestinus, sonne to Gurgantus, Erle of Morgania, refused to obey Rhesus, sonne to Theodore, Prince of Southwales, and sent Aeneas sonne to Cediuorus, sometime Lorde of Demetia, into England, to take muster of Souldiers, and there receaued a great army vnder the conduct of one Robert, sonne to Hamo, and ioynynge with other Rebelles out of WENTA, and BRECHINIA: mette with RHESVS in Black hill, and there slew him. And so payinge the Englishmen theyr Wages: discharged them. But they, takynge regarde vnto the goodnesse of the soyle, and the greate variance whiche was then amongst the VVelshmen: as inforetime the Saxons had done: they turned theyr force of Armes agaynst those, whiche entertayned them, and soone displaced them wholy of all the champion, and the best of the countrie. Whiche HAMO deuided amongstHam
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   twelue knights, which he brought with him, reseruing ye better part to himself.

Who, buildynge there certein Castels and ioynyng their power together: defended their Farmes, and Lordeships which they had possessed, and taken. Whose heyres peacebly enioy ye same, vnto this day. But Iestinus, scarsly reserued to him selfe, and his: the hillye countrie. The twelue knightes names were these, London, Stradlyng, SanctThe▪ xii. knightes names. Iohn, Turberuille, Granuille, Humfreyuille, Sanctquintin, Sorus, Sullius, Berkerolus, Syward, and Fleminge. In this prouince are, NETH vpon a Riuer of the same name, Pontfayn, that is to say, Stone brydge, Englishmen falsly call it Cowbridge, Lantwyd, Wenny, Dynwyd,
                   Townes and Castels, besides Caër Phili, a most auncient Castle, and Fortresse. Whiche, as reporte goeth, was erected by the Romans, and Caerdid, the principall towne of the shyre, standyng vpon the ryuer Taf, English men terme it Cardyd. And not far from thence is Landaf, to say: a Churche standynge on Tauus, ennobled with aLandaf. Byshops See. Next vnto this region lieth Wenta, vnder Momuthshyre.
               
               
                  This, in olde time was called Siluria, which may easely be proued, contrarie vnto the ridiculous authoritie of Boethius, and Polydorus.
               
               And first to beginne with Tacitus, who affirmeth, that the Siluri lye ouer agaynst Spayne. But these are farre more neare Spayne, then any parte of Scotland: wherefore it is more like, that they dwelt here, rather then in Scotland. Moreouer, whereas, in a fayre discourse, he describeth the expedition of Agricola, agaynst the Albani, or Scots, and there reciteth all the people, and nations of Albania: he neuer maketh mention of the Siluri, whiche was the most Warlike nation of them all. And vndoubtedly, if they had bin in Scotland: he would neuer haue passed them ouer with silence. Considering also, how he telleth that ther were exceedyng greate Forestes in Siluria, the tokens whereof remayne as yet in VVenta.
               
               
                  Ptolomaeus also, and after him Marius Niger, layeth the Siluri, next vnto the Demeti, and Maridunum, but somdeale

more Casterly. Besides these authorities, the moste auncient booke of the British lawes, mentioneth Syllwc, a prouince of VVales, whose inhabitantes wee must needes call in the British tongue: Syllwr, wherby they were of the Romans termed Silures. And one parte of VVenta, is at this day called Gwent lhwc, leauyng out one silable, as though it were, Went silluc. Also Chepstow, a fine market Towne inChepstow. 
                  VVenta, before a few yeres since passed: was called by the name of Strigulia, whiche seemeth to come somwhat neare to Siluria. Moreouer Antoninus, a very graue author, maketh mention, how Venta of the Siluri, was not farre from this, towardes the ferrie, or place of passedge ouer the Seuern. Wherfore it were but a iest, hence foorth, to seeke for the Siluri in Scotland. And although that Plinius writeth, that out of the Region of the Siluri, ouer into Ireland, was but a very shorte cut: wee must thus take it, that at his time, Britayne was not sufficiently knowne, nor the people of Albania longe after that, subdued.

Wherby, when certeyne of the Romanes, as Englishmen vse now a dayes, had passed ouer into Ireland, out of Southwales: others, whiche neuer saw Britayne: supposed it to be a very short cut. In this Region is situate the most auncient, & noble citie of Legions
                  Citie of Legions. which our countrymen call Caerlheon ar Wisk, that is to say: the citie of Legions vpon Vsk, for difference sake, between it, and the other, which is builded in Northwales, vpon the Riuer Dee. Of whom Gyraldus writeth thus: The same was an auncient, and noble Towne, the tokens whereof remayne as yet, an huge Palace, a Giantlike Tower, goodly Bathes, and Hotte houses, Reliques of Churches, and places like Theatres, compassed with beautifull Walles, partlye yet standynge. Also buildynges vnder the grounde, conductes, secreat passages, and vautes vnder the earth, Stewes framed by wonderfull workemanship. There lie two martyrs Iulius, & Aron, which had churches dedicated vnto thē. There was also a Cathedral Church of

an Archbishop, vnder Dubricius, which fell to Dauid. This much he.
               Also on the otherside of Vsk, in the way which leadeth to Strigulia, ar seen auncient Ditches, and the remnants of towne Walles of the Siluri of Venta, which now also they call Caerwent, to wit: the Citie Venta, wherof ye name grew to the whole countrie. At the mouth of Wey, whiche wee call Gwy: is a famous Market Towne, in olde time Strigulia, but now called the CastleCastle of Gwent. of Gwent. The Erles Martials, & their heirs of this place, did very much weaken the state of VVales. Not farre hence is Monmuth, of vs Monwy, so called by the meeting of Mona, & Wey together, the head of the whole shyre. Aboue, at Osca: are the Castle of Osca called Brynbuga, & in the vpper Venta, at the meetyng of Vsk, and Geuenna: is Abergeuenny, the Lorde whereof, Brienne Guilford: wrought mucheBrienne Guilford. mischeif agaynst the VVenti. But afterwarde, VVillus Brustius, Lorde of Brecknoc, vnder pretence of loue, and freendship: called the nobles of Wenta
                  
into this Castle to Feastyng, and Banquettynge. Who commynge thither, with Sesylius, sonne to Dunwallan, cheifA cruel deede. man of all that Region, and his sonne Gryf fith, suspectyng no deceate, and vnarmed: were euerychone most cruelly slayne, by Brustius gward, which were put readie in armour for that purpose. And afterward sodenly breakynge into Sesylius house: the vnmercifull Butchers, murdred the yonge Infant, Cadwaladar his sonne despiteously, before the Mothers face. Whose sonnes notwithstandyng, takyng the Castle, and hauyng sleyne Ranulphe Poerius, with many other noble men: at Lhandyuegad manfully reuēged their fathers death. But BRVSTIVS, beyng reserued vnto greater mischeif: was famished toA iust reuenge. death, with his Mother in the Castle of VVindelesour.
               
               And here, I thought good to note, that the name of Sesylius, beynge common among the Britaynes and welshmen: ought to be written not with C. (which alwayes expresseth the nature of the English K,) but with S. For els

it should be read amongst the VVelshmen: Kyllius. There remayneth yet the last Inland Region of Southwales, which maketh the shyre of Brechnock, the head wherof Brechnock, or as the VVelshmen terme it Aberhodni: standeth in vsk, vpon the fall of HODNI. Bernhard of Newmarcat, first of allBernhard of Newmercate. 
                  Englishmen, by force of armes subdued the same. Aboue this Region, lieth Bogwelth, which they terme Buellt, a rough, and hilly countrie, reachynge from VVey to Tobius. Beneath, is Ewias, woonne by the power of Paganus, the sonne of Iohn. Which afterward was parted in twayne, Herold, and Lacey. And not farre thence: is Haya, well knowne by Roman monumentes, called TREGELLI, that is to wit: the Towne of Hasels.
               
               These seauen Shyres: 
                     Credigion, DWETIA, called also Demetia, and Penbrokes hyre, Caer marthyn, Morganic
                           •
                        ,
                   now Glamorgan, Gwenta
                   called also Mon mouth, Brechenoc, and Radenor: are by Englyshmen ascribed vnto Southwales.
               
               
                  Thus much when I had written of the true, antique, and now accustomed names of the Regions, and cities of Britayne: I determined here to haue ended, least by this my vnpolished, and barbarous writyng: I should become tedious to the impatient Reader. But when I called to my remembrance, how Polydorus Virgilius, whose workes be in all mens handes, doth in all places nippe, & gyrde at the Britaynes, endeuorynge in woordes, to extenuate the glory of the British name, and to obscure them with a perpetuall blot, in his history often termynge them a cowardly, and false generation: I thought it worth the trauell, to brynge foorth a few authorities, out of the bookes of famous writers, and approued Hystori
                     •
                  
                  graphers. Wherby the indifferent Reader, may easely iudge, what credite is to be giuen to the said Polydorꝰ. And that such as are of the learnedst writers, of the state of Britayne: either he read them not, or els (yt is more like) beyng incensed with enuie, and hate of the British name: passed them ouer with silence.
               
                  
                  Caesar him selfe, who first all the Romans,
                  Caesar. made mention of Britayne, how be it, no man is accompted an vpright Iudge in his owne cause: confesseth, yt at the first encountre, the Britaynes fought valiantly agaynst the Romans, and that they troubled them very much and afterward, that the Legion whiche was sent for prouision of Corne, and Uitayle, was so pressed by their enemies: that they coulde scarse endure it. And that at his commyng, for feare (as he sayeth) they retyred. And that I may vse his owne woordes: 
                     Caesar supposinge it to be an vnfit time, to prouoke the enemie, and to giue him battell: kept him selfe in his owne place, and after short time, brought backe his Legions into their Tentes. This retreat some termed a flight, whiche may also be proued, bycause that shortly after, when it was paste midnight: he tooke shyppyng priuely, and departed out of Britayne. Neither was this the power of all Britayne, but a band of Kentyshmen, sodenly gathered, as appearethKentishmen. in his hystory.
               
                  After this, in his first booke, he sheweth, yt the British wagonners fought stoutly vpon the way, and in another place that they entred forcibly into his Campe. And that the Roman Cohortes or bandes, being 
                     •
                  feard, when Laberius the Tribune was slaine: salfly returned backe agayne. Which, what other can it signifie, then that they escaped by flight? He confesseth also, how Casiuelanus, by the fallyng from him of Mandrubatius, and certein his Cities: was especially mooued, not by battell wearied, to sende Embassadours vnto him, to intreate of Peace. All these thynges spightfully Polydorus, dissembleth.
               Also Diodorus Siculus, who wroteDiodorus Siculus. in the time of Augustus, sayeth: It is reported, that the inhabitantes of Britayne, are Aborigines, that is to say, first borne in the Countrie, leadynge their liues after the maner of men, in olde times. In fight they vse Chariots, such as is sayde, the auncient worthies of Greece, vsed in the battell of Troye. In behauiour, they are simple, and vpright, farre distant from the craft

and wilinesse of men of our age, Their fare is nothyng excessiue, nor costly, far from the deintie delicates of ritchmen. Thus much he.
               
                  Tacitus also, a worthy writer, dothTacitus. wonderfully commende the puissant deedes of Cataracus, agaynst the people of Rome, and confesseth, that after the takyng of him: they were oftentimes 
                     •
                  oyled, and discomfited by one only citie of the Siluri. And, as for Venusius, whom he writeth to haue ben fierce, and hatefull agaynst the Romans: he reporteth, that he vanquished, not only the Romans: but such Britaynes also as ayded them. His woordes be these.
               The kyngdome to Venusius, and vnto vs remayned Warre. And after it followeth, that he cannot denie, but when queene Boadicia (whom Dion termeth Bundwica) was deseruedly exasperated:Boadicia. she caused. lx. and ten thousande Romans to be slayne. Whose courage more then manlike, and noble deedes worthy to be extolled with prayse vnto Heauen, and equiualent to the actes of renowmed Emperours, and Captaynes

                  Tacitus, & also Dion, 
                  mē of great name haue celebrated in fayre, and large discourse. And in the life of Agricola.
                  
               
               
                  In wishyng for dangers, there is like boldnesse in Britaynes, and Frenchemen. And when they come vnto the pynche, in refusinge of them: like dasterdnes. Howbeit, the Britaynes resemblynge more hardinesse, as beynge suche, whome longe rest, and peace had not yet made soft, or effeminate.
               
               
                  For wee haue hearde also, that the Frenchmen haue flowrished in warres. But shortly after, cowardise crepte in through Idlenesse, whereby they loste both manhoode, and libertie, whiche likewise befell to the vanquished Britaynes, the residew whereof remayne yet, such as the Frenchemen were.
               
               
                  They are stronge on foote, certeyne of them doo fight in Chariottes, the driuers wherof are coumpted the worthier. Whose clientes, and seruantes do fight and defende them. Infore time they were prepared for kyngs, but now through fauour, and faction: euery prince hath gotten them.
               
               
                  Neyther were there any thynge more profitable for our vse, agaynst strange, and valiant nations: sauinge that they doo not generally sauegard, and defend all. It is seldome, that twoo, or three Cities do ioyne, to withstande their cō
                     mon daunger, so that whylst they fight seuerally: they are ouercome vniuersally. Also in another place.
               
                  The Britaynes do muster, pay tribute, and fulfil other commaundments of the Empyre, without stay, or grutchynge, so that there be no iniurie offered, which they can hardly abyde. And now they be subdued to obey, but not yet to be slaues. And a litle afterward.
               
               
                  But now they beginne to enstruct the children of Princes, in liberal sciences, sayeth Agricola. And to preferre the wittes of the Britaynes in studie, before the Frenchmens. That they, whiche of late detested the Roman tongue: doo now desier to be eloquent therein. Afterward, the maiestie of our attyre, and our Gowne was commonly worne, & by litle, and litle, they came to the imitation of our vices, and superfluities,

as to haue Galleries, Bathes, and to vse our nysenesse in feastyng.Whiche amongst the vnskilfull was termed, humanitie, when as in deede, it is part of seruilitie.
               
               
                  Dion Cassius, a man that had bin Consul, among other thynges hath left this in writyng vnto posteritie, of Caesars expedition into Britayne. The Britaynes durst not set openly vpon the Romans, bycause they kepte diligent watche, and warde, but they tooke certeyne whiche were sent, as it were, vnto their freendes, and confederates Region, to prouide victayle, whom they slew all, exceptyng a few, which Caesar commyng with speede: rescued. Then began they to assault the Campe, wherin they preuayled not, but were repulsed, not without slaughter on their side. Howbeit, they neuer tooke peace, before that they had byn many times put to the worst. Caesar, contrary to that he had purposed: ended the warre, requiryng yet moe pleadges, of whom notwithstandyng, he receaued but few. So Caesar returned in to the continent, & such

thynges as were vnquiet durynge his absence: he appeased, gayning nothyng to him selfe, nor to the Citie of Rome out of Britayne, but only the glorie of the expedition taken in hande.
               
               
                  Which both he himselfe did very much set foorth in woordes: and the Romans extolled wonderfully at Rome. In so muche, that in consideration of these deedes, so happely atcheeued: they decreed a supplication, or thankes gyuyng of twentie dayes. And in another place.
               
               
                  The Britaynes callyng foorth their fellowes, and communicatynge the effect of their entent vnto Suella, who amongst all the Petiroyes, or Erles of that Ilande, was of greatest power: they marched vnto the Roman shyppes where they rode at anker. With whom the Romans meetynge: at the first encounter, were troubled with the Wagons, but anon making a lane amongst them, and auoyding the Wagons: they cast their Dartes agaynst the enemie, which cam runnyng in sidelonge vpon them, and so restored the battell.
               
               
                  After this battell, bothe partes stoode still in the same place: and in another conflict, when the barbarous people had ouercome the Roman footemen: yet being discomfited by the horsemen: retyred backe to the Riuer Thames.
                  
               
               Moreouer Herodian, in the life of Seuerus, writeth thus of the Britaynes. 
                  For diuers places of Britayne, (sayeth he) by common wasshyng in of the Oceane, doo become Marish. In these Marishes therefore, the Earbarous people doo swymme, and wade vp to the belly, not regardyng the mierynge, and durteynge of their naked bodies. For they know not ye vse of garments, but they arme their bellies & their neckes, supposing yt to be an ornament, & a token of ritches, like as other barbarous people doo Golde. They paynte also their bodies with diuers pictures, and shapes of al manners of beastes, & liuyng thynges. Wherfore they weare on nothinge, least thereby they should hide the payntyng of their body. It is a very warlike Nation, and greedie of slaughter, contented only with a narow

Sheild, and a Speare, and a Sworde hangyng downe by their naked side. They are altogether ignorant of the vse of the breastplate, and headpeece, taking them to be a let vnto them, in passing ouer the Fennes, and Marishes.
               
               
                  Besides these: Eutropius of ye 
                     French warre, writeth thus: Caesar passeth ouer into Britayne, hauynge thereto prepared. lxxx. shippes, partly for burthen, and partly to fight, and maketh warre vpon the Britaynes. Where, beyng first wearied, with a sharpe battayle, and afterward fallyng into a cruell tempest: returned into Fraunce, and so foorth. And afterward. Agayne, at the beginnynge of the sprynge: he sayled into Britayne, where at the first encounter of the Horsemen, he was vanquished, and there was Labienus the Tribune slayne, and at the seconde battayle, with greate perill of his owne men: he ouercame the Britaynes, and constrayned them to flie.
               
               
                  Suetonius Tranquillus, affirmeth, that Vespasianus ouercame in battell, two mightie, and valiant nations of

                  Britayne, and yt he faught thirtie times with the enemy, which is a token of no cowardly, but of a most stoute, and warlike nation. 
                     Eutropius also in the. ix. booke of his hystory writeth thus. When notwithstandyng Warre was in vayne made agaynst Carausius the Britayne, a man very expert in martial assayres: in the ende peace was concluded. And Sextus Ruffus, recityngBandes of Britaynes. the Roman Legions, amonge the Legions of the mayster of the footemen: reckneth vp Britannicians, and British, and amonge the Legions Comitalensis the seconde British Legion. And again among the Legions of the mayster of the horsemen: the French Britons, and agayne, Britons. And afterward, with the worthy, & approued erle of Spayne: the inuincible yonger Britons. And in an other place, he numbreth the yonger British carriars, with the Earle of Britayne.
               
               But what shall it be needfull, to tu
                     •
                  n ouer the woorkes of so many learned men, that the glory of Britayne may appeare? When as so many puissant

kynges, so many inuincible captaynes so many noble Roman Emperours, spronge forth of the British bloud, haue made manifest vnto the world, by their noble actes, wel worthy immortality: what maner men this Iland bringeth foorth. For, what shall I speake of Brennus, the tamer of the Romans, andBrennus. 
                  Grekes, and almost of all the nations in the worlde? What of Caswallan, toCaswaliā. whom, as Lucane reporteth: Iulius Caesar did turne his fearfull backe? WhatCataracus of Cataracus, who molested the people of Rome with warre, the space of. ix. yeres? What of Bunduica, that valiantBunduica. manlike dame? Who, to beginne with all, and for han
                     ••
                  ll sake, slew. lxx. thousand Romans. Of whom such feare inuaded Rome, and Italy: (as Virunnius writeth) as neuer the like before, neither at commynge of Brennus, nor of Hannibal. What of Aruiragus, theAruiragus inuincible kynge of Britayne? Who, in despite of the Romans, whiche were Lordes of all the worlde, preserued his libertie? What of those noble Captaynes, which faught thirtie times wt
                  
                  Vespasian? Who also with sorow, and angwise of minde, killed Seuerus, the moste valiant Emperour, bycause he coulde not ouercome them? What (as I say) shal I speake of these? when as Britayne, hath yelded foorth, & communicated to the rest of ye world, ConstantinusConstantinus Magnus. Magnus, not only a most valiant, and fortunate Captaine: but yt more is, a perfect goodman, and the first Emperour of the Christians, instructed by Helene his Mother, a Britayne also. How much Fraunce, and Italy for their deliuerie from Tyrannes are indebted vnto Britayne for this man, which was brought foorth out of the midst of the bowels therof: all men do well know, only Polydorus excepted, and William Petit the Monke, his scholemayster, of late brought to light (vnworthy euer to haue seene light) by the slaunderers, & detra
                     •
                  tours of the British glory. And, for as much as, a certeine Frēchman of late daies, and also an auncient Greeke author, of the name of Maior, affirme yt he was borne at Dyrachiū, called now Durazo: I meane to brynge foorthe

the most auncient wordes of the Panegyricus, whiche was pronounced before Constantinus, himselfe. O (sayth he) most fortunate, and now aboue all landes, most blessed Britayne, whiche diddest first beholde Constantinus the Emperour. Nature hath worthely endued thee, with all benefites of ayer, and soyle, in whom is neither ouermuch colde of Wynter, nor heate of Summer. Where there is also suche plentie of Corne: that it suffiseth for the vse of Ceres, and Liber, that is to say: for Bread, and Drinke. Where are also Wooddes without wilde, and cruell beastes, the Earth without hurtfull Serpentes. Contrarywise of tame Cattell: an innumerable multitude, stroutyng with Milke, and laden with Flieses, with all other thynges necessarie and commodious for our life, verie longe dayes, and no nightes without some light, whylst that vttermoste playnes of the Sea shoare rayseth no shadowe, and the shew, and aspect of the Starres of Heauen, deo exceede the boundes of night, that ye Sunne, which

to vs seemeth to goe downe: appeareth there but to passe by. Good lorde, what a thyng is this, yt alwayes from some furthermost ende of the worlde, there come downe new powers from God, to be worshipped of all the earth? Thus farre he.
               What of Bonosus, out of the captaynes of the boundes of Rheticus, aBonosus. more couragious, then fortunate Emperour? What of Carausius Augustus,
                  Carausius. who, the space of seuen yeres together, ware his princely Robes, contrary to the will of Iouius, and Herculius?
               
               What of Allectus Caesar, for subdueyngeAllectus. whom: Mamertinus seemeth to prefer Maximianus before Caesar Iulius whose woordes I will not sticke to alledge. And truly (sayth he) & so foorth.
               After him sprange the EmperourMaximus. 
                  Maximus, a Britayne, and nephew to Helene, a man both stoute, and vertuous, and worthy of Augustus, but that in his youth, leadyng an army agaynst Gratianus, whom he vanquished: he had sacked his countrie. Who by Helene his wife, daughter to Euda: lefte

his sonne Victor Emperour. And as Paulus Diaconus writeth, Bitayne also acknowledgeth Marcus, and Gratianus, the Emperours. Moreouer Constantinus, with his Sonne Constans, when Gratianus their countriman was slayne: were created Emperours in Britayne, in name like to the aboue sayde, but not in happinesse, agaynste whom Gerontius theyr Captayne (of whose death there are extant very auncient British Rhymes) made another Maximus then ye first was, Augustus. And after all these: Ambrosius Aurelius, is by Panuinius, accompted ye last Emperour of the British bloud.
               Besides these. xij. Emperous: Britayne hath also brought foorth to the worlde the moste puissant, and inuincibleKinge Arthure. kynge, Arthur, whose euerlastynge renowme, and moste noble deedes: our freende Mayster Leland, hath set foorthe, and made more apparant by infinite testimonies, and moste weightie argumentes agaynst the gnarrynge, and doggysh mouthe, and hatred more then euer was Vatinians,
                  
of Polydorus Vrbine, and of the gresie Monke Rhicuallensis, more conuersant in the Kitchin, then in the hystories of olde writers.
               And not only our countrymen: but also Spayniardes, Italians, Frenchmen, and the Sueones, beyonde the Sea Baltheum, (as Gothus reporteth out of their Hystories) doo celebrate, and aduance vnto this day, in theyr bookes the worthy actes of this puissant kyng. Caduanne also, who from prince of Gwynedh, became Kynge of the Britaynes, and his sonne Cadwalla (whom BEDE calleth a Tyranne, because he persecuted the Saxons with cruell Warre) whil
                     •
                  st the BRITISH Empyre was in decayinge: were valient Kynges. And after the Brityshe destruction, there rose vp noble gentelmen in VVales, not to be debarred of theyr due prayse: as Rodericke the greate, and his Nephue by hisRodericke the greate. Sonne Howell, surnamed GOOD, both famous as wel in warre: as peace. Also Gryffith, the Sonne of Lhewelin, the Sonne of SESYL
                        •
                     IVS▪
                   who most

stoutly defended VVales, his natiue country. And after him Owayn, prince of Gwynedh, who moste hardely withstoode at COL: Henry the seconde, theHenry the seconde. most mightiest kynge of all that euer reygned in England, thrise entrynge into Wales with greate armies, whose sonne also he slow in Anglysey, and the greater part of his armie, as Gyraldus reporteth. And his nephew likewise, borne of his sonne, Lewellyn the great whose innumerable triumphes (that I may vse the woordes of Parisiensis, the Englishman) doo require speciall treatises.
               And not these only: but also the Cornishmen,
                  Cornishmen. beynge the remnantes of the olde Britaynes, as they are the stoutest of all the British nations: so are they coumpted to this day, the most valiant in warlike affayres. Neither yet theBritōsnigh Fraunce. 
                  Britons, which dwell nigh Fraunce, a nation of the same broode, doo any whit degenerate from their forefathers When as they▪ did not only many hū
                  dred yeres prosperously defend, amōgst the thickest of stoute, & sturdie nations,

those seates whiche they had purchased with their manhood, and prowes: but also haue vanquished the Gothes, and Frenchmen in great battels, and stoutly withstoode the most mightie prince Charles the Mayne, put to flight the armie of his sonne Lewes the Emperour, whiche was sent agaynst them, vnder conduct of Murmanus, ouercame Charles Caluus then Emperour, and kynge of Fraunce in open fight, twise vanquishynge his armie, Numenius beynge kynge, the Emperour priuely flyinge thence, leauynge there his Pauilions, and Tentes, and all other his kinglike prouision, as Regino writeth. But Herispous, sonne to Numenius, compelled the same Charles, to make shamful, and dishonorable truce with him. Whom Salomon also, sonne to Herispous, a valiant, and warlike gentleman, enforced to retyre backe, when he was cōmynge agaynst him with a mightie armie.
               But when Salomon was deade: theDeuisions are daungerous. 
                  Britons, through desier to reigne, and contention who should next be kynge: fell vnto Ciuile warres amonge them

selues, as Sigisbertus sayth, and so they were constreyned to leaue of ye destruction, and ouer runnynge of Fraunce, which they had determined.
               What shall I speake of the noble deedes of Vrfandus, an inuincible captayne,Hastinge. agaynst Hastynge the Norman, and Pastquitanus the Briton? Of Iudicaël also, and Alane, who manfully draue the Normans out of their coastes, which pitifully wasted, and spoyled all Fraunce? What shall I neede to touche such Warres, as they made longe after, vpon the kynges of Fraunce, beyng therein ayded by th
                     •
                  impregnable power of the Englishmen, since it is well knowne to all men, that it was alwayes, a most potent nation?
               And, that I may at length stop Polydorus
                  Gyldas. mouth, together with his Gyldas: thus much I say, that if he sticke in any poynte vnto him: he was no Hystoriographer, but a Preist, and a Preacher. Whose custome is very sharpely to inueigh agaynst the faultes of their hearers. Wherfore, if wee seeke authorities out of Sermons, as Polydorus

Vrbine hath done: What Parish, what Towne, what nation, or kyngedome, may escape infamie? What hath Bernhard written of the Romans? Thus surely, terming them impious, vnfaith full, seditious, dishonest, traytrous, great speakers, but litle doers. These thynges are by Deuines spoken in the Pulpit, according vnto their manner, yt the like faultes might be amended, and the life reformed, not that the Romans, or Britaynes were such in deede. Neither is there any man, vnlesse he be a shameles Sycophant, that lieth in wait for al occasions to dispraise, and accuse, which will go aboute by wrestynge of sentences foorth of the sermons of preachers: sclaundrously to tax, & infamously to note, any whole couent, shire, citie, or people. Wherfore, let such idle, & ill disposed sclaunderers, leaue of, and suffer the true renowme of Britayne appeare to the worlde, neither iudge me, good Reader, of two sharpe a tongue. Seyng (so god helpe me) neither enuie of any forreine name, neither thyrst of vayn glory, neither hatred of any natiō
                  
but alonly ye loue of my country, which is euill spoken of vndeseruedly, and desier to set forth the truth: haue prouoked me to write thus much.
               And touchyng this rude, and disordred litle treatise: truly I woulde not haue suffred it to haue come to light, had I not well hoped, that all learned men, would accept this my endeuour in good parte, and also take occasion by this, whiche I haue rashly enterprised first: to handle the same matter more at large, in fayre discourse, and finer stile. And if they shall thinke any thing herein, spoken ouer sharply, or not wel aduisedly: I submit my self to ye iudgement of those, that be better learned, and if I be admonished of my faultes: I promise to amende them, when occasion shalbe giuen. Thus fare you well.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Certayne Welsh, or rather true British woordes, conuerted into Latin by the Authour, & now translated into English.
            
               
                  
                     Ac
                  
               
               with.
               Aber,
               force, or rage of water.
               Armorica,
               vpon the Sea.
               Arglwydhi.
               Lordes.
               Auanc,
               an Otter.
               Auon,
               a Riuer.
               Bara,
               Bread.
               Bath,
               beuty, fo
                     ••
                  , or cūlines
               Britunn,
               a Britayne.
               Brynn,
               a Mountayne or Hill.
               Caër,
               a Citie.
               Cain,
               White.
               Cariad,
               Loue.
               Clauddh,
               a Ditch.
               Dha,
               Good.
               Dinas,
               a Court, or Palace.
               Deheubarth.
               the right side.
               Duw.
               God.
               
                  Duuer, Dewr, and Dwr,
               
               Water.
               Dyphryn,
               a Ually.
               
               Dynfynnaint.
               deepe, & narow vallies
               Fa,
               a Place.
               Fy,
               Myne.
               Flynt.
               a Flint stone.
               Celli,
               Hasell trees.
               Glás,
               blew coulour or woad.
               Glaw,
               Rayne.
               Grwc.
               an heape.
               Gwr.
               a Man.
               Gwadh,
               a Countrie.
               Gual,
               a Ually.
               Guent,
               Whyte.
               Gwydh,
               Perspicuous.
               Helig,
               Wyllow trees.
               I,
               His.
               Lhan,
               a Churche.
               Lhradron,
               Theeues.
               Lhydaw.
               the Shoare.
               Lhyfyr.
               a Booke.
               Mam,
               a Mother.
               March,
               An horse.
               Maur,
               Great.
               Mur,
               a Wall.
               Mynyd.
               an Hyll.
               O,
               foorth of.
               Pen
               an Head.
               Phrainc.
               Fraunce.
               
               Phrydain,
               Britayne.
               Porth,
               an Hauen.
               Pryd,
               beauty, or cumlinesse.
               Rhyd.
               a Foord.
               Rhufain,
               Rome.
               Saison,
               an Englishman.
               Saissonaëg.
               English.
               Strat.
               a soyle.
               Sychnant,
               a dry Ually.
               Tair,
               Three, fem. gendre.
               
               Tan,
               Fier.
               Taria,
               a Sheild.
               Tre,
               a Towne.
               Tri,
               Three, masc. gendre,
               
               Ynis,
               an Iland.
               Ynad.
               a Iudge, next ye Kynge
               Yscar,
               to seperate.
               Yscaradic.
               Seperated.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London, by Richard Iohnes: and are to be solde at his shop, ioynyng to the Southwest doore of Paules Church.
         
      
   