
      
         
            
            
               
A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSSE, THE 25. OF NOVEMBER. 1621. Upon occasion of that false and scandalous Report (lately Printed) touching the supposed Apostasie of the right Reuerend Father in God, IOHN KING, late Lord Bishop of London.
            By HENRY KING, his eldest Sonne.
            Whereunto is annexed the Examination, and Answere of Thomas Preston, P. taken before my Lords Grace of Canterbury, touching this Scandall.
            Published by Authority.
            
               AT LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for William Barret. 1621.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND ILLVSTRIOVS PRINCE, CHARLES, PRINCE of Wales.
            
               YOur Highnesse may please to remember how great an interest your Princely Mother, our late Gracious Queene, vouchsafed to challenge in my deceased Father: accounting Him as one of Hers, as most truly (next the professed band of dutie to his dread Soueraigne, whose first-sworne Chaplaine he was, after his Maiesties happie arriuall in

these parts) by all the tyes a Royall Mistris might engage a Seruant, he was. Since that Starre was taken from our sight, I know not whether else ought Shee could call Hers might so immediately refer as to your selfe. I am sure it was His study, while he liued, to consecrate his best endeauours to the Branches of that Royall stocke, and by that line of duty, drawn from Her merits, to measure out His bounden seruices to Her Line, chiefly to your Highnesse; Who, I haue cause to thinke, doe yet beleeue you had a faithfull Orator and Seruant of Him. Since then by double right he was deuoted to your Highnesse, by his owne acknowledgement, and by the purchase of your especiall fauours towards Him; I durst not entitle any

other Patrone to the remainder of what he was, his Memory, without leaue from your Highnesse. But as it was my filiall duety to vindicate a wronged Father, so I held it the tribute of my ciuill duty to tender it first to your Hands, that it might take sanctuary vnder your Princely wing. Thus borne vp, the Truth I write shall boldly flie into the bosome of those climes where it was first discoloured; and, if their foreheads be not meretriciously steeled with impudence, or growne flint, fetcht backe it's owne proper hiew, or their shame.
            It is not a forward presumption in me, but the cause which makes your Highnesse patronage my chiefe scope; vpon which tearmes it will not be inglorious for you to vndertake it.

For whilest you shall protect abused Innocence, your Goodnesse will stand pitched at the iust height your Greatnesse now doth, one degree from a Defender of the Faith. Long may you flourish, to make all Good men happy in your protection; and may that heart want the prayers of good men to relieue it, which doth not as faithfully sue to Almighty God for all addition to your Happinesse, as he who is
            
               Your Highnesse most humbly deuoted Seruant, HENRY KING.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               IOHN 15. vers. 20.
               
                  Remember the word that I said vnto you, The seruant is not greater then the Lord: If they haue persecuted me, they will also persecute you.
               
            
            
               I Will not striue to attire my Text in any other fashion; the plaine naturall dresse it now weares, will best sute it, and my intendment.
            The parts shall be, as the Propositions, Diuision. Three;
            I. Is monitory, and as it were an 1 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Introduction, or Preface to the rest, Remember the word I said vnto you.
            
            II. Is a Principle, a ground of infallible 2 truth, both in Ethick and Oeconomick

rules, in Humanitie and Diuinitie; The seruant is not greater then the Lord.
            
            III. Is an Inference vpon an Hypothesis; If they haue persecuted me, they will 
               3 
               also persecute you.
            
            I begin in order.
            
               Remember.] I know not what better First Part. {Remember.}
                
               exordium a Preacher can make, or from what foundation the frame of his speech can more happily arise then from this, which is the first stone in this pile, Remember. It is the best charge the Priest can giue, and the first lesson the People should learne; else, like children, that read only by rote, they shall spend much time and vnderstand nothing. It is a taske can neuer be vrged too often, Manda remanda: nor can it euer be learned too perfectly; Nunquam satis dici, quia nunquam satis disci potest. An age is not enough for this precept, but when seuen yeeres are run out, they may begin againe, and finish an apprentiship long as life, yet misse that freedome and perfection they seeke; Ars longa vitabreuis.
            
            
               
Since therefore much is to be learned, and either we want time, or capacity, or memory to comprehend it, the right way to profit an Auditory, & not cloy, is to let them digest what they haue bin taught, and not heare new lessons before the old are remembred. For as eating much meate, and not keeping it, argues a better appetite then concoction; so hearing much, and retaining none, shewes a quicke eare, but a dull deuotion.
            There are many now adaies who neuer thinke they haue preaching enough: but as exquisite gluttons lay all markets for fare, so doe they lay all Churches where there is any suspicion of a Sermon, and all is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , to glut their Gregor. Nazian. Epitaph. Caesar. eares; nay, the same Father speaks them more fully, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                they goe Ibid. not so much to feed, as delight their eares, and to satisfie that wanton itch of hearing, which like a Tetter, the more it is rubbed, the more it spreads. I wish there were more practising, on conditiō
               
there were lesse preaching. A man may heare so much that hee may ston the sense, and bee like the Catadupes, whom the continuall fall of Nile makes deafe. Cisternes that haue more powred into them then they can hold, must needs run to wast; and men that affect to learne more then they haue braine to comprehend, waste their Pastors labour, and their owne patience. It is good counsell for one to eate no more then his stomacke can beare, for too full feeding engenders nothing but surfets; and I thinke as good counsell will it be, to heare no more then hee can carry away. For were the retention good, the nourishment would be more solid, and Christianitie acquire that full growth, for want of which wee are but Impes and Zanies, in respect of those that liued in the Primitiue Church.
            No wonder then, if Preaching may breed surfets, that so many Crudities lie in the stomacke of this Citty; that so many Fumes and giddy vapours flie vp into the head, to the no small disturbance

of the Churches quiet; that so many hot spirits, like Canons ouercharged, recoyle against all Discipline, breake into diuers factions, and with the splints of those crackt opinions doe more mischiefe then deliberation or Iustice can suddenly salue. I speake no new vnheard language. This communitie of Preaching hath brought it into such cheape contempt, with many, that, as if the gift of tongues were prostitute to Idiots and Trades, you shall haue a sort of Lay Mechanicke Presbiters of both sexes (Praedicatores, and Praedicantissae) presume so far vpon their acquaintance with the Pulpit, that they will venter vpon an Exposition, or vndertake to manage a long vnweildy prayer conceiued on the sudden, though not so suddenly vttered; nay, they are so desperate, they will torment a Text, and in their resty Conuenticles teach as boldly, as if they were as well able to become Iourneymen to the Pulpit, as to their owne Trades. I cannot but thinke of the story

of the poore Asse that carryed the goddesse Isis so long to and from the Temple, that at last hee began to take state vpon him, and would needs play the goddesse. So these creatures haue so long trauelled betwixt the Temple, Portantes mysteria, and conuersed with the sacred mysteries of Religion, that they begin to flatter themselues in an opinion of worth, which none would suspect; and forgetting their former condition, will needs turne Teachers. If this be the fruit of so much preaching, it is high time that command bee now reuersed, Son of man, Lift vp thy voyce like a Trumpet: 
               Isa. 58. 1. rather, Son of man, sound a retreit, and be dumb, in admiration, to see Coblers & Artizans vsurpe that holy Office.
            
               Frange leues calamos, & scinde Thalia Martial. libellos,
               Si dare sutori calceus ista potest.
            
            Let none thinke my meaning is to finde fault with the multitude of Preachers, who (without enuie) were neuer more, nor better: neither to taxe the deuotion

of such who frequent those exercises; far be it from me. I onely strike at the abuse. I pitty that Pastor, who is put to plough the rocks, when the eare is too hard for his aduice to enter; and is tasked, like Belus his daughters, to fill 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Siues and Pitchers without bottome; for such are our hollow Formalists. And I blame that people, who like thirsty lands still gape for raine, yet no signe of softening; or, as men sicke of an Atrophy, eat much, but thriue not. When Manna shall grow stale and common, and stinke in their nostrils, it is time to diet such mis-gouerned feeders, and stint them to their measure, as Israel was to an Omer. I wish they would heare no more then their memory could master. A little lesse preaching, and some more praying would doe well: For so they might gaine more time, and obtain a better faculty for the remembring of what they learne.
            The roome is now prepared, wants onely the Ghest to fill it, who followes

in the next place, [The word that I said vnto you.] 
               {The word that I said.}
            
            Wisedome is its own Herald, and the words of worthy persons need no waymakers to prepare attention, saue themselues. But when both these concurre, and the name of the Authour presents it selfe in the front, to credit the errand, it must needs take strong hold in the hearer.
            In both these respects doth Christ plead for regard. First, in respect of his own person, [J said.] That Ego sum, vttered 1 by him in the Garden, strucke such {I said.} awe & terror into his enemies, that they Iohn 18. 6. did homage to the sound of his voyce, by falling flat to the ground. It is to bee hoped then, that when his discourse knockt at the eares of his Disciples, like the Spouse in the Canticles, Open vnto 
               Cant. 5. 
               me, it is I, his owne would both know, and obey his voice: especially since that now like one preparing to leaue the world, he begā to giue his latest charge, and to bequeath such lessons to them, as

might both warne them of what should befal, and comfort them in their sufferings.
            The words of dying men are precious euen to strangers; but when the voyce of one we loue, cals to vs from the death-bed, O what a conflict doe his words raise! how strongly doth griefe and affection striue to inclose them! knowing that in a short space that tongue, the organs whereof yet speake, was to be eternally tyed vp in silence; nor should the sound of his words salute our eares any more. Secondly, in 2 respect of the words themselues.
            
               Remember [the word that I told you.] If {The word, &c.} rarenesse and opinion make Iewels precious, what value shall we put vpon our Sauiours words, who spake as neuer man spake? within whose lips the mines of knowledge were included: The words of the Lord are pure as siluer seuen times tryed, 
               Psal. 12. 6. Prou. 8. 11. Psal. 119. 127. 
               better then Rubies; nay, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , more precious then gold or Iewels. Now if they be of such high esteeme, where should Iewels

bee put but in a Cabinet; or where should gold be disposed but in a Treasurie? Both these is Memory. First, it is a Cabinet, placed in the closet and bedchamber of the soule, the Braine; the safest Keepe in mans Cittadell: one Key it hath, Reminiscentia, which opens it, and without that, it still remaines locked. Secondly, it is Aerarium animae, the soules Exchequer, like that 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the Treasurie in the Temple, into which the mites of knowledge and learning are cast: vnto this doe all the Arts and Sciences, humane and diuine offer; the precepts of the Law, the golden rules of the Gospell are in this coffered vp. And as the Temple in Ierusalem was maintained in repaire by the Treasurie; so are the decayes of the temple of mans body repaired at the cost of the Memory. When tentation hath shaken the building, when sorrowes and despaires, like tempestuous drifts of raine, haue beaten thorow vs; lo from this Store-house do we fetch props to vpbeare our declining

faith, by calling to minde the gracious promises of Christ. Here finde we comforts collected from the Gospell, to cast off the stormes which beate vpon vs.
            If then such riches lie here in banke, no maruell if our Sauiour wish his Disciples to locke it vp sure, [Remember the word I told you:] knowing that the place is not built of brasse, but fraile and brittle; and that there is a thiefe still lurking about the doore, euen that great Thiefe who at first robbed man of his Innocency, and vpon the least aduantage would spoyle vs of those comforts, and carry the words away, as in the Parable. Besides, Matth. 13. 19. it hath many Pick-lockes which oft times wrench it open. First, wine, whose subtile fumes vnriuet each ioynt of it, and loosen the cement which held it fast; for you shall note, that deepe drinkers haue but shallow memories. Secondly, women: I seeke no further instance then Samson, into whose besotted affection Iudg. 16. 
               Dalila crept so farre, she made him forget

his safety; weake though shee was, she forced a secret from him, which all the Philistims could not wring out: which lost, he lost himselfe, eyes, liberty, life and all. Thirdly, ingratitude: this is a witch indeed, a sorceresse, whose drowzie inchantments make vs euen forget God. If thē we be apt to forget him; how shall wee bee able to retaine his words? or how remember what he hath said, when we cannot remember the good hee hath done for vs? It is a crime none can acquite vs of; what is become of all his wonders? whither is the memory of his great deliuerances fled? May I not aske of them as of things worne out, or as he did of the Kings of the Nations? VVhere 
               2 King. 19. 13. 
               is the King of Emath, and the King of Arphad? surely they are gone, all lye extinct and lost. And as the graue of Pompey had not so much as an inscription, to distinguish the dust that couered his victorious body from ignoble slaues and cowards, or to shew, Here lyes Pompey: No more haue those once glorious dayes,

now any difference in our memory or esteeme. They lie promiscuously raked vp in the dust of time, without any monument set ouer them, to tell they once were: no Rubrick, or capitall letter inserted, to distinguish them from the common heape of dayes piled vp in the Almanacke.
            I know your City-feasts keepe their annuall circuit; the inauguration of Officers, and choice of Wardens to each Company want no ceremonious forme to set them forth: for the better solemnizing wherof, Samson is brought vnto the feast, and the first dish must be a Sermon. An Italian Atheist scoffingly said, he was wont to goe to Church, that hee might returne with better deuotion to his dinner: be the thought of my applying it to you far from me, as I know the intent is from you. The piety of many graue and good men in those societies, fully resolues me that it is deuotion, not forme, which makes them desirous of that act: Yet none can deny, but some

there be, and those not a few, who suppose Sermons at such times are rather for conuenience then otherwise: that as Moses siluer Trumpets serued to call the people together, so they to assemble the ghests; as if there were no difference betwixt a Sermon, and a Wake; or preaching were become as necessary a complement to a Feast, as wine or musicke. But those times, whose memory should be precious, passe by without Sermon, or so much as the courtesie of the day; no Annals or yeerely feasts to keepe them vp, but in stead of a mention, there is a blanke, and solemne silence, in stead of an Anniuerse.
            Pardon my plaine language. I professe ingeniously, I speake not against the practise, but comparatiuely. Let their Elections and meetings want no grace the Pulpit can aflord them: let them (in the name of God) performe those lesser rites, but so, that they omit not greater duties: for to bee diligent in things indifferent or needlesse, and neglect necessary

seruices, is at best but a precise kinde of Poperie; to value Tradition aboue Scripture, and set more by mans institution then Gods. When we shall see shallow customes out-face Religion, and the shadow haue more honour then the substance, blame none for speaking;
            
               —Nam quis iniquae Iuuenal. sat. 
                        •
                     .
               
               Tàm patiens vrbis, tàm ferreus vt teneat se?
            
            When the two Sunnes appeared in the firmament, before the great famine and Holinshed vita Rub. 1. in fine. plague in the time of Richard the first, that apparition eternized the day to all posteritie; nor is the fame of it yet dead. Our times haue seene as great a wonder, yet so short-liu'd, that it hath not worne out the age of a man, before it selfe is almost worne out; as if the Chronicle thereof had been writ in the same element the deliuerance was wrought on, Water, where no tracke of the storie, nor character of the hand that wrote it could abide. That time I meane, when two Moones appeared in our Hemisphaere at once, the one in the skie, the other in the

Sea: a fatall prodigious Crescent, the hornes whereof, like the Hornes of the 
               Dan. 8. 3, 4. 
               Ram, which stood before the riuer, were high, pushing VVestward, and Northward, and Southward, so that none might stand before him. Yet by the furie of the Goate that encountered 
               Uers. 7. 
               him vpon the floods, were those Hornes broken, and that threatning Crescent, like a Meteor, wain'd, and went out; A Meteor indeed, for it had iust the fate of a Meteor, the matter of which it was compacted being blowne asunder, and by the windes scattered vpon each adioyning shore. Heere was enough to giue life to a story so long as the world should last; but we are drowned in Lethargie, whom neither mercies can allure, nor prodigies awake.
            I will not seeke an instance beyond this, though I could many: and I would to God our vnthankfulnesse were bounded here, that though we are vnmindfull of deliuerances, which are without vs, and concerne our bodies peace, yet we might be more apprehensiue of such as

by neerer relation concerne our soules good. But not the greatest blessings that euer befell mankinde, are free from this canker of obliuion, the Death and Passion of our Sauiour, and the Redemption which by that act was purchased. For how is it possible, if wee remember that Christ already dyed for vs, we should still crucifie him afresh, and by our sinnes (each whereof is a new crosse and burthen to him) adde afflictions to his former sorrowes? that wee should wound him daily with our blasphemies; and with serpentine tongues, sharpened with othes and swearings, fetch new streames of blood from him? Or can it be beleeued we retaine the memory of our Redemption, and the deare ransome Christ paid for our soules, when we set so low a rate on life, as to lay it to stake for each brawle begot of wine and choler? apt to hazard our owne, and others soules for reuenge of the lye giuen, and (Facili redimunt qui sanguine famam) to spend our too cheap Martial. Epigr.
               
blood in fetching back that thing which wise men neuer lost, Reputation? O yee sonnes of men, when will ye be wise? or when desist from being authors of your owne wretchednesse? You haue bin long put in mind of these faults, it is now time you should remember to amend them. Be but you willing, and you need not to despaire of remedy: the cure is easie, and the balme familiar, if applyed, Tantùm recordare, onely [Remember.] Remember what Christ hath said, and you will the better remember what he hath done for you. This is the right method, the probation which Christ requires from his; If ye loue me, keepe my sayings; and if you Ioh. 4. 13. will perfectly remember me, first remember what I told you.
            
            But is this all that Christ requires, only to remember his Word? No, there is a farther scope, Ne sufficere tibi putes mandata 
               Hieron. epist. 
               Dei memoriâ tenere, & operibus obliuisci: thinke not the duty of a Christian is discharged by hearing onely, vnlesse thou doe what thou art taught. For to

keepe the Commandements in memory, and to breake them in thy course of life; to remember Christ in thy words, and forget him in thy deeds, is to mocke God, and foole away thy saluation.
            Briefly thus: Let the people know it is no speculatiue, but a practick memory Christ lookes for; and to remember his words is to practise them. What shall it auaile if thou haue memory beyond Cyrus, who could call euery souldier in his armie by name? What good, though the euidence of Time were recorded in thy braine? though thou keepe a Chronicle of all occurences since Adam, and couldest remember more history then Baronius wrote? surely if thou retaine all, yet practise none, if it be for theory and not vse, thou art but like a Granary locked vp in the time of dearth, or a sword sleeping in the scabbard when it should bee drawne. Such knowledge doth but Animam praegrauare, comber the soule, as Sauls armour did Dauid; and is only like the Persians glittering munition,

which Alexander said was for Spoile, not Fight. So this knowledge doth spoyle the owners, and make their condemnation the greater, when they shall know the right way, yet hold the wrong; heare so much, yet doe so little. Let no man thinke it enough to spend the day in hearing, or by frequenting a multitude of Sermons to aduantage himselfe; for though he count his Lectures as the Papists their Pater-nosters, by the beads, yet if he be An hearer of the Law, and not 
               Iam. 1. 22. 
               a doer of it, hee prosecutes against his owne soule: each Pulpit is to him a Tribunall, and euery Preacher a Iudge to pronounce sentence against him. Such as these are lyable to the woe, which Christ denounced, Woe vnto you Scribes and Pharises hypocrites, that impose such heauie loads vpon your Preachers, but touch them not with the least of your actions. Nay they are guilty of the blood of their Preachers, as Jerusalem of her Prophets; O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, that 
               Mat. 23. 37. 
               slayest the Prophets which were sent vnto

thee! For, with tasking them to too much paines, they weare them out, and make Martyrs of them when there is no time of persecution.
            Againe, let the Preachers know here is a Memento for them too, they must not onely tell the people what they should doe, but by their examples shew them the way, Oues ipsum sequuntur, the sheepe Iohn 10. 4. follow him; therefore it is presumed the Shepheards must goe before. Quis 
               Chrysost. Hom. in Mat. 
               audiet illum docentem, qui seipsum non audit? Who shall heare him, who heares not himselfe? Or, Domine quis credet auditui? 
               Esa. 53. 1. Who shall beleeue his report, who by a life vnsutable to his words discredits his owne errand? It is Isidore Pelusiota 
               Isidor. Pelus. lib. 4. epist. 21. his counsell, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; that life and doctrine may consent: for he preaches best, Qui dicit non linguâ sed vitâ, 
               Aug. Ser. 18. de Uerb. Dom. who liues as well as he speakes. Therefore Ne simus strepentes vocibus, & muti 
               Id. ib. 
               moribus: Let not their hearts & tongues iarre, but let their actions bee interpreters and comments to their words, and

their liues the counterparts of their doctrine. For if their faces stand to Jerusalem, and their hearts to Ashdod; teach others well, but follow not their owne lessons, they doe but (as Nazianzen speakes) build vp with one hand, and plucke downe with the other. What shall I say of them? They are as Guardians that haue other mens soules in wardship, but neglect their owne: or like whetstones they set an edge on others deuotion, yet themselues are dull and cut not at all; Funguntur vice cotis, 
               Horat. de arte poet. 
               acutum Reddere quae ferrum valet, exors ipsa secundi: or lastly, they are like Conueyances of land, instruments to seate others in the Kingdome of heauen, yet themselues haue no part in the state they conuey. They stand in the Pulpit like Moses on the Mount Abarim, and onely Num. 27. 12. shew the people a Land of promise, which themselues must neuer set foot in.
            I haue bin long in the passage to my Text, the copious matter would not dismisse me sooner. One note and I passe it.
            
               
Of all faculties in man, Memory is the weakest, first waxeth olde, and decayes sooner then Strength or Beautie. Of all powers in man it is least at commaund, the will not so little. A man may be master of his inuention and of his tongue, but who could euer boast himselfe the master of his memorie, or promise to himselfe that would not fayle? Which makes God and his Prophets, Christ and his Apostles strengthen it with so many admonitions, Remember and forget not. 
               Deut. 9 7. 
               Remember thy Creator in the dayes of thy 
               Eccles. 12. 1. 
               youth; and many the like both in the old and new Testament. Now as generally in all things we are forgetfull, so in nothing more then in things belonging to our woes: Either we dare not, or cannot remember miseries which must befall vs. The Mariner loues not to heare of stormes; nor states rockt in securitie, of warres; nor can wanton youth endure the tidings of sicknesse, or age that must surprize it. Naturally all hate reproofe, nor haue we patience to heare of iudgements

that must follow: for all these God shall bring thee to iudgement. To such remembrances Eccles. 11. 9. wee are deafe and auerse, Monitoribus asperi: and their preachings Iuuenal. wee banish from our eares, as Amaziah 
               Amos 7. 12. did the words of Amos, when hee foretold Jeroboams death, and Israels captiuit
                  •
               e; Gradere, fuge in terrā Judah: O thou Seer, goe flie away into the land of Judah, and prophecy there, but prophecy no more at Bethel. They that will please these times must steepe their words in oyle, footh and flatter, Qui dicunt videntibus, Nolite 
               Esa. 30. 10. 
               videre; though they see they must say nothing, or if they doe, Loquimini nobis placentia, they must speake plausibly. Ibid. We loue to heare of faire dayes, which no misfortune clouds, and crie with Hezekiah, that Nothing but peace may sound in our eares: for sorrowes and persecutions wee abhorre to thinke on; and, like those in the Prophet, Put farre away the euill day. Hunc voluit nescire diem: such blacke crosse dayes as these we curse out Lucan. of the Ephemerides, and excommunicate

them from all societie with the yere, as Job did his birth-day: Let the day perish 
               Job 3. 3, 5. 
               to all memory, let darkenesse, and the shadow of death staine it, and let forgetfulnesse like a cloud dwell vpon it.
            
            Iust cause then had our Sauiour, being to warne his Disciples of calamities and persecutions that should ensue, to stirre them vp to Remember: that, as the wise man aduised, their end might be in their sight: [Remember the word I said vnto you, The seruant is not greater then his Lord.]
            
            THere is nothing so much sets out 
                  Second part. {The seruant is not greater then his Lord.} the Vniuerse as Order, to see how subordinate causes depend of their Superiours, and this sublunary Globe of the Celestiall. Were not this method, what could hinder a second Chaos? For in the Worlds beginning all lay in one common wombe of darkenes, it was onely order and that Method Gods fiat brought a long, which gaue distinction and visibility to things. A

heauen aboue the earth, and light to separate day from night. Man as Lord to rule the Creatures, and God himselfe Lord ouer all. Should all haue been equall, what had man beene better then the beasts, saue only his shape? Or what the Serpent worse then other Creatures, saue onely for his malice? What actiue predominance should Fire haue had aboue the other Elements? Or what priuiledge could that Sire of generation, Heate, challenge aboue vnactiue Drought, or Moysture? Grant equall force to the Elements, that the qualities of the one should not bee more operatiue then another, like a Mare mortuum, stupid to all motion would the World be, and Nature so be calm'd that the seasons of the yeere would bee lost. Heate should not name the Summer, nor Cold the Winter: instead of VVinter and Summer a blended mixture of the qualities, a lazy luke-warme season would last all the yeere. Vnisons yeeld no Musicke, for Harmony consists of variety in

stops higher and lower, and equality amongst men would breed nought but confusion: Siquidem aqualia non habent per se ordinem. Looke vp to heauen and reade ouer that bright booke, you shall see an inequality of light in those celestiall bodies 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               One starre 
               1. Cor. 15. 41. 
               differeth from another in glory: so was it allowed by God, who at the reuiew of his worke found all to be valde bona, very good. And one man differeth from another in glory, in honour, in riches, in abilities of the minde; which Disparit as perfectionis magis ornat vniuersum, disparity in worth makes the world more beautifull. All were not borne to be rich, nor all to be wise, nor all to teach, nor all to rule, but some for Disciples, some for Masters, some for the Throne, some for the Mill, some for Seruants, some for Lords. Which distinction we owe vnto these two Relata disquiparantiae (as Logicians terme them) Dominus and Seruus. These were the two differences which in the Heraldry of Nature were

first put to blazon the coates of all mortality, and make a distinction betwixt the elder and younger house, the Inferiour and Superiour: for (saith Saint Augustine) 
               Aug. 
               Domini & serui diuersa sunt nomina, sed Homines & homines paria sunt nomina. As men, all are alike: but these respects of Lord and Seruant make a difference amongst them.
            To make it more plaine, looke once more backe and see the host of heauen gouerned by these rules of subiection and superiority; fecit Deus duo luminaria 
               Gen. 1. 
               magna, God made two great lights, vnto which the lesser are seruants and tributaries, borrowing their lustre from them. And as in heauen so in earth hath he ordained Luminaria magna, greater lights, and higher powers to goe before his people. Though I am not of opinion with that insolent Spaniard Juan Puente, that Gods meaning or the Text is to be restrained to those two Catholique Lights set vp by him, in the front of his Tomo primero de la conueniencia de las dos Monarquias Catolicas la de la Iglesia Romana y la del Imperio Espanol, &c. Author el Mro fr. Iuan de la Puente, de la orden de Praedicadores, Chronista de la Magd Catolica, &c. En Madrid en la Imprenta Real. 161 n. Lor mandado del Roy. booke, in which hee hath taken vpon him to

adde new deuices and Mottoes to the Shields and Scutchions of them both vnder one, the word Luminare maius vt praesit vrbi, & dominetur Orbi: vnder the other, Luminare minus, vt subdatur vrbi, & dominetur Orbi. But let him passe for a profound Sycophant. I hope the Kings of the earth shall neuer come to that nonage, to make them Guardians of their Crownes. Those lights are well where they are, and best shine in their owne Orbes. I feare they will bee too dim to giue light to al the nations of the world; I am sure too hot and scorching for our Climate. Thankes be to God wee need no addition, wee haue one Luminaria magna of Religion and State, shining like Lampes in the great assembly of Parliament; and a Julium sydus, an imperiall Starre, whose peacefull influence hath many yeeres blest our Land. May it bee long ere this Sunne goe downe, or by his set, leaue vs in darknesse and mourning! Nor may there want a succeeding Ray, a Beame of that light to shine

in the circle of this Throne, so long as those Duo luminaria magna in Heauen, the Sunne and the Moone shall runne their course!
            Since then it is established per leges vniuersitatis, by the law of God and Nations that the Lord must rule, and the seruant obey, it were preposterous, nay monstrous, that the [seruant should bee greater then his Lord.] Let no man whom Fortune hath subiected and made a seruant, be grieued at his lot, or thinke too meanely of that vocation. To serue is no base office, nor is slauery the badge of seruants, but obedience, Seruants obey 
               1. Pet. 2. 18. 
               your Masters: It is no neglected title of drudgery that alters man from his creation, but a title of dependance that still referres to a superiour, and as man should doe, lookes vpwards. Men and seruants are names neere a kin. There was but one Authour that made Man, and the same made Seruants, euen God himselfe, whose decree was, That euery 
               Rom. 13. 1. 2. 
               soule should bee subiect to the higher power.
               
He then that is stubborn resists notmans but Gods ordinance.
            
            
               Serui are not slaues, but humiles amici, 
               Sen. ep. 47. inferiour friends. Ye are my friends saith Ioh. 15. 14. Christ to his Disciples; they are Fellowes, Immo conserut, si cogitauerts tantundem in 
               Sen. ibid. 
               vtrosque licere fortunae; nay they are Brethren, Non dedignetur fratrem habere seruum 
               Aug. Hom. 42. in orat. Dominic. 
               suum Dominus eius, quem fratrem voluit habere Dominus Christus.
            
            There are no slaues but such as serue either their owne or other mens crimes. Serui nomen culpa meruit, sinne brought Aug. in the first thraldome; but since the glad tidings of liberty & release was brought by Christ, who cancelled the Chirographum lethale, the deadly Indenture, that none may thinke it an abiect duty to serue, he the Lord hath dignified the calling by taking vpon himselfe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , the forme of a Seruant. 
               Phil. 2. 7.
            
            Againe, let not the Lords of the earth, whom soueraignty hath lifted aboue the common ranke of men thinke so highly of themselues that they contemne

all below them, since that Lord or Master are not onely stiles of preeminence but of care. For this cause a Master is called the Father of his family, and the King is Pater Patriae, the father of his Countrey. In the Prophet you shall finde Dominus and Pater ioyned. Mal. 1. 6. 
               If I be a father where is my honour, if a Master where is my feare? Let them remember that as they haue many below them, so they haue one that is farre aboue them, a Master and Lord Paramount, euen Dominus 
               Colos. 4. 1. 
               dominantium: that though they be gods on earth (dixi quod diiestis) yet still Psal. 82. 6. but men, and breathe one common aire: that though fashioned ex meliore luto, of better clay, yet lutum, still but clay: and are eiusdem farinae, of the selfe same grane, though sifted by birth and fortune from the branne of vulgar men: For when all the sheafes in the field did homage to Josephs sheafe, all were but sheafes linkt in Gen. 37. 7. one band of brotherhood from earth and from the wombe.
            But whither doe I presse this poynt?

My Text is no plea of Iurisdiction, no Charter to proue only the Masters prerogatiue aboue the seruant: which though it naturally arise from hence, yet is not this all. That is a granted Maxime: our Sauiours meaning is larger and implies that his Disciples being but seruants must not expect better measure at the hands of men then their Lord had found. Non potest placere seruus cui 
               Gloss. 
               displicet Dominus, so the Glosse; and therefore as they might not scorne or thinke much to runne those courses of hazard and reproch which hee himselfe had past, so neither take vpon them out of pride to do more then he. Thus doth he expresse himselfe, If I your Lord and Master haue washed your feet, ye ought to 
               Ioh. 13. 16. 
               wash one anothers feet: there hee giues them an example of Humility; heere of Patience, [If they haue persecuted me, they will also persecute you.] To strengthen which perswasion he argues from this Axiome; [The seruant is not greater then the Lord.]
            
            
               
A iust truth and not to bee contradicted; but Rome denies it, and that great Heteroclite in Religion, the Pope, thinkes it too scant for him to be circumscribed by presidents, either of the Apostles, though he calls himselfe Peters successor, or of Christ himselfe whose Uicar hee is proclaimed.
            Hee will ducke and complement as low as may be, stile himselfe Minimus Apostolorum, and seruus; yea lower yet, seruus seruorum, a seruant of seruants. Yea, and yet the Fox wants attributes deepe enough to earth his pride in. You know what in another case Saint Augustine 
               Aug. Ser. 10. de Verb. Dom. sayes, Fabrica ante celsitudinem humiliatur, & fastigium post humiliationem erigitur: it is true in this, those that will build high, lay deepest foundations. Nor euer was insolence so high flowne, but before it tooke wing, it raised it selfe from the ground. Brutus will kisse the earth, though his thoughts aime at the gouernment of Rome; so will the Pope lessen himselfe, and contract his greatnesse

into short titles, (as the Snake hides her length by folding her selfe vp into many gyres, and doubles) kisse the ground, euen Obad. 1. 4. when he meanes to build his nest in the Starres; when he aimes not at Romes alone, but the worlds supremacy.
            
            Thus like a Falcon he stoopes lowest, when he meanes to soare highest, and his ambition like a bullet spit from the mouth of a Cannon, first grazes and then mounts. For behold, from these low foundations, from this flat and bottome of dissembled humility, he hath built a Tower loftier then Babel, on the highest pinnacle whereof, as on a Pharos, the Banner and Flag of his Supremacy is hung out; hath cast vp a Mount equall to Olympus, on the top whereof himselfe stands like the Tempter vpon Mat. 4. 8. that 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               exceeding high hill, from whence he shewed Christ all the Kingdomes of the earth. Loe, from hence doth he ouerlooke the world, and the Kingdomes of it, and to maintaine the Idoll of his supremacie, with an Omnia

dabo, sets them all to sale, proclaiming vnto the Kings of the Nations, All these 
               Vers 9. 
               will I giue, if ye will fall downe and worship me. But amongst them if there bee any that refuse to adore this Golden Calfe, or question his vsurped supremacie, Res fisei 
               Iuuenal. 
               est, straight hee seazeth their Crownes, and, as due to him by forfeit, bestowes them most bountifully vpon any who by force of Armes can get them.
            It is not long since he gaue away our Land vpon the same quarrell (that I may name no Germane examples, not of yesterday but to day) yet (thankes bee to God) the Title proued so difficult, and the possession so hard to get, that he who thought it already his, was faine to disclaime the suit, and with losse of fame and costs returne home. Thus doth hee sit in Templo Dei, opposing himselfe against, 2. Thes. 2. and exalting himselfe aboue all that is called God, that is, all Kings of the earth (who are stiled Gods (Dixi quod Dii, and Christi Dei, Christs, the Lords Anoynted) Psal. 82. 6. which will not acknowledge

him their Head, as being impatient to heare of any Deity equall or greater then himselfe. Nor against these onely doth he aduance himselfe, but he doth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                fight against the God of heauen, and his Christ. Take a short suruey of his practice, and you will finde no greater opposition betwixt the sides of the Diameter, nor larger distance betwixt the two poynts of heauen, North and South, nor more enmity betwixt the words Christ and Antichrist thē their persons. Our Sauiour Math. 21. 5. 
               Christ, when he entred Ierusalem, came riding meekly vpon an Asse, no attendants but his Disciples, and a few poore Villagers; but Kings haue walkt afoote Frederick. 1. waited on Pope Adrians stirrop. whilest the Pope hath rode, and Emperors, like Querries, waited on the stirrop. Christ washed his Disciples feet and wiped 
               Ioh. 13. 16. 
               them: but the Pope hath caused Emperours to kisse his feet. Christ taught vs to giue vnto Caesar, Reddite Caesari: The Math. 22. 21. 
               Pope bids take from Caesar the things which are Caesars; not the Tribute, but Crowne, and life too. Christ refused to

be called good, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                as holding it a Math. 19. 17. stile fit for God alone; but the Pope is patient of a stile so farre aboue it, as superlatiues can stretch him, Optimus Maximus; and Dominus Deus noster Papa, 
               Bzouius Annal. Tom. 13. Extra. Verbo Significasti. Tit. 14. cap. 4. 
               our Lord God the Pope.
            
            
               Christ instituted a 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Imposition of hands; but the Pope hath practised 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , an imposition of feet: For Caelestine the fourth, crowned the Emperour Henrie the Sixth with his foot, and spurned it off againe with his foot, dismissing him with a curse of Excommunication: So as Christ laid his hands vpon them and blessed them; the Pope laid his feet vpon the Emperour and cursed him. Now iudge their contrariety, and see if this seruus seruorum, seruant of seruants, the Pope, take not more vpon him then euer Christ the Lord of Lords did. Finally the Popes (that I may omit the impiety of their owne persons, some whereof haue been Arians as Liberius; some Nestorians, as Anastasius II. some Heretickes, as Syricius, Caelestinus, 
               Platina. 
               &c. some Sorcerers, as Alexander VI,

               Sergius IIII. and 17. besides: some Atheists, as Leo X. who called the Gospell Fabulam de Christo, a fable of Christ) The Popes (I say) for these many Centuries of yeeres haue beene such profest enemies to Christ, that there haue beene no persecutions, Massacres, Invasions, Powder-plots, but they haue come out in a sort, cum Priuilegio, with their allowance, their encouragement, their priuity. At their feet haue the garments of all those Jesuiticall Assassinates beene layd down, as Stephens executioners layd theirs at Sauls. Nor doe we yet finde better measure Act. 7. 58. (looke but to the other side of the sea, and then iudge:) Nor can we hope better, but the voyce of the Ancient Churches by them persecuted, cries vnto vs in the words of my Text, as Christ to his Apostles, [If they haue persecuted me, they will also persecute you.]
            
            
               
I Am arriued at my last point, which 
                  Third part. {If they haue persecuted me, they will also persecute you.} Calui. Harmon. Matth. 10. 24. needs no long discourse. Haec meditatione potius quam expositione indigent. It is a matter fit rather for meditation then proofe: and is a story acted, and no supposition: so that our Sauiours [Si persecuti, If they haue persecuted me] is now turned to an assertion, They haue persecuted me. Since the quarrell in the garden betwixt the VVoman and the Serpent, the deuill Gen. 3. neuer wanted Seconds to take vp his weapons against the promised Seed. God told her, Ponam inimicitias, I wil put enmitie betwixt you; And did hee not keepe Verse 15. tutch? Marke the whole passage of our Sauiours life, & tell me what day was not to him a Persecution. So soone as he saluted the light, to auoyd Herods bloody Inquisition, which pursued him, hee Matth. 2. 13. was constrained to flie the land, and like a banished soiourner make Egypt his abiding place. When Herod deceased, and he vocatus ex Egypto, reuok't, was he yet secure? No, but in the house of his friends (as Zacharias) so vsed, that Barbarians Zach. 13. 6.
               
would haue dealt more mercifully. Amongst his own countreymen the Iewes vnacknowledged and vnregarded, scorned, reuiled, belyed. Hee hath a Deuill, He is mad, He blasphemes; sometimes conspiracy to throw him headlong from a Cliffe, sometimes to stone him. Thus was hee shuffled vp and downe from coast to coast, from the City to the field, from the Gaderenes to Samaria, from dry land to sea, yet no sayles able to make speed from his Persecutions. but Mare nos repellit ad Barbaros, each shore hee tutch't at, was an enemie, nor found his wearines the benefit of a resting place, whereon to lay his head. As a Partridge from the fowlers, so fled he from the cruell 1. Sam. 26. 20. 
               Priests and Scribes, who were [They] in my Text, the Actors in this persecution: and like a Roe in the wildernesse was Cant. 2. 17. he pursued. Many darts throwne after him. Many toyles pitched for him, for they sought 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , how to take him in the snare: all which though hee long auoyded, yet neuer did they giue ouer

the furious chase, till faint and wearie on the top of Caluary their cruelty ouertooke him, where with nailes, and speare they goard his harmelesse body, and bereaued that Just one of the life they long had hunted after.
            When the Principall is slaine, partakers must looke to bleed: nor can the Armie hope for mercy when the Generall is put to the sword. One life sacrificed cannot appease an incensed enemy, nor could the life of Christ, though the best among the sonnes of men, quench the bloody thirst of the Jewes, but being flesht vpon the Leader, they are eager after the Heard, and hauing rent this Lambe from the fold, they seeke to worry the whole Flocke. For the diuels commission was not like the command of the King of Syria, Fight neither with small 
               1. King. 22. 31. 
               nor great, saue onely against the King of Israel: but as that in Zachary, Arise O 
               Zach. 13. 7. 
               sword and smite the shepheard, and not him alone, but let the sheepe be scattered: spare none, neither Lord nor Seruant, Master
               
or Disciple, but extirpate all, downe with the glorious Temple of Christs body: Downe with it euen to the ground, and Psal. 136. 7. let not one stone of that building, one Disciple suruiue to reedifie the demolished Church. You see the sad Patrimony of the Apostles, and that (as Hugo Cardinalis 
               Hugo Card. hath it) Uenit bellum tanquam ad haeredes & imitatores eius; the warre descended to them by inheritance, and persecution was their lot and portion. For so was the will of the Testator; [Jf they haue persecuted me, they will also persecute you.]
            
            Sinne is a fruitfull parent, and neuer yet wanted issue, but as poyson runnes successiuely thorow the veines, so haue her agents drained thorow al successions of time. The tyrannies of Gods enemies towards his Church neuer ended where they began, and though the persons changed, the malice did not. As in a Campe the word goes from Centinell to Centinell: so in this, Abyssus abyssum vocat, one misery called vp another: Psal. 42. 7. and as the Carthaginians hate to

               Rome was by the Fathers assigned ouer and intailed to the sonnes; so was the cruell tradition of shedding the blood of Saints deliuered ouer by predecessors to their following generations, Finis vnius 
               Sen. Trag. 
               mali gradus futuri: one persecution hath trod vpon the heele of another, and where the old went off, new Scenes of mischiefe haue taken their Cues. The Monarchies of the world haue not shifted oftener their se
                  ••
               s, then the Empires of death and Persecution. The first persecution began in Egypt in the time of Pharaoh; from thence it was deriued to the Iewes; when they failed, the Arians and Easterne Heretickes went forward with the Chase; & Vbi desinit philosophus, incipit medicus, where these wrangling Sophisters of the diuell left, the Jesuites began. Those onely the great Paracelsians of the world, whose practice is Phlebotomy, to let States blood Uenâ basilicá. in the Heart-veine, and deale altogether in metals and minerals, Steele and Gunpowder: Creatures so prodigiously

dexterous in their art, that they are now become the onely Inuentories of mischiefe. All the shallow elementary examples of trechery formerly practised, seruing to them, but as a garden of simples, from whose composition they haue extracted Quintessence of such speeding operation, that it is able to make an Earthquake greater then Nature euer durst owne; and in a moment purge a whole Kingdome into nothing. Thus hath the diuell his Infantry belonging to his Campe, and where the old Garrisons were worne out, new supplies to make good their places, [They shall also persecute you.]
            
            
               Persecution heere is no single appellation of misery, but a compound of all cruelty; I cannot giue a fitter Embleme to expresse it then that possest man, Mark. 5. who dwelt among the Tombes, bound with fetters and chaines: so mad Mark. 5. and raging doth it runne about the world, keeps its court amidst the graues, and her pauillion hung about with the

trophees of death, fetters, and whips, rackes and strappadoes, halters and swords, stakes, and fire. Besides, this hath a name as numerous as his, My name is 
               Vers. 9. 
               Legion (saith the possest) for we are many: so is Persecution Nomen multitudinis, a collectiue name of Multitude, in it many Legions of ills, the Burse of Tyranny, and (which speakes all) a full Inquisition is included: Persecution of the body, and affliction of the mind, persecution at home, persecution abroad, and not only Persecutio manus, violence offered to the body, but to the Good Name by slanders and calumnies; For Non martyrium 
               Augustin. 
               sola effusio sanguinis consummat, nec sola dat palmam exustio illa flammarum: it is not the sword alone, nor the fire which makes a Martyr. There is Martyrium famae, Martyrdome of fame, as well as vitae, of life. A man may bee a Martyr without blood-shed; and siccâ morte, by a dry death attaine the Crown of a Confessor; euen by suffering persecution in his fame and honour, which is

(as Anselme calls it) Persecutio oris, the persecution of the mouth. Neither is this lesse grieuous then the former, it rather exceeds it, as farre as the price of fame is aboue life. Feare not those which kill the body (saith Christ,) this is more Math. 10. 28. exquisite, and kils, if not the soule, that which is next in value, the Good name.
            
            One of these two mischiefes, Os gladii, or gladius oris, either the materiall sword of the executioner, or (if not so) the sword of a two-edged lying tongue hath runne thorow all the ancient Apostles, and most of those Haereditarios Discipulos, 
               Tertullian. 
               & Apostolici seminis frutices, later Apostles, who in their seuerall ages haue succeeded in the Church. Christ himselfe was not free from it; was not hee branded with the name of an Impostour 
               Math. 27. 63. after his death? and the Disciples were Heb. 10. 33. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , made Theaters of misery in their liues, of scorne and infamy in their deathes.
            Thus did the Arrians scandalize the great Athanasius.
            
            
               
And, as executors vnto them, the Romish Priests & Iesuits with their frontlesse imputations, haue striued to darken the glorious truth of our Church and Religion, by traducing the Professors, and on their ruined credits sought to build vp their owne rotten cause.
            
               Luther was defamed for lewd life, and 
               Bozius de signis Ecclesiae l. 23. c. 3. 
               conuersing with the diuell, and that he had hanged himselfe. Bucer, for denying Christ Lindan Dialog. at his death. Oecolampadius, for dying Cochleus. suddenly, when hee was sixteene dayes sicke in his bed. Caluin, for dying distracted Hieron. Bolseic. in eius vitâ. and desperate; an aspersion which my Author saith, Bolsecke himselfe recanted in the Synod with teares.
            
               Beza giuen out for a Conuert, and a reuolter from the Protestant Church to theirs. All which so grosse and false, that some with their owne pens confuted the calumniations cast vpon them, and amongst the rest, Beza, after the report of his death and conuersion, published his owne defence, and their periurious falshood, in a tract called Beza

rediuiuus, Beza reuiued.
            
            I haue yet one instance of the selfesame quality, as false as that, though not so well confuted. One indeed too many by that, and so deare, that I could haue wished He had not so soone been added to this catalogue of wronged Worthies: But that wish is vaine, and like Him, lost: and by that losse am I furnished with what most willingly I would haue wanted, a sad example. Your conceit already lookes thorow me, and my meaning is articulated in your apprehensions, before vttered in words.
            One he was, knowne to all enough, to me more neerly, as being tyed to him in double bonds of Canon and of Nature; Sometimes the Bishop of this See, or to vse the phrase of Saint John, the Angell 
               Apoc. 2. 
               of this Church, though now taken vp into a better Hierarchy, the society of Angels in heauen. I had cause to thinke hee now was out of the reach of detraction, and too high fixed to be traduced, but I see flouds of reproche throwne after
               
him by the Papists, as after the woman in the Wildernesse.
            
            For my owne part, I thought once not to haue meddled at all in this subiect, knowing that Rerum irrecuperabilium foelieissima est obliuio, vnhappy losses are happily forgot; much lesse with the slander raised after him, supposing it too light vpon the Ballance, to poyze or sway any wise mans beliefe.
            Againe, I could not iudge it but as very ridiculous, or malicious: if ridiculous, I hoped, like a fume it would haue vanished; For mendacia diù non fallunt; 
               Cyprian. and, hauing arriued at nine dayes, the age of a wonder died in laughter. If malicious, I held best not to take notice of it. For iniury is no iniury, if not apprehended. Omnis iniuria in sensu patientis (saith one:) to own a scandall, crownes the reuenge of the Authour, whereas, neglected, it quickly findes its owne graue.
            But I see, this spurious Brat hath found too many Nurses, since it was exposed,

and like a Snow-ball by rolling is growne greater: Longa aetate non infringitur, 
               Minut. Felix. 
               sed augetur, and as it hath acquired more age, so also with those that wish it so, more credit. Therefore because impudent auouchings make wise men somtimes doubt, and the ignorant stumble; and for that I would not with a guilty silence seeme to betray a Truth, or confirme their errour, who take all for granted which is not contradicted; I haue at last aduentured to speake: Not that I hold my selfe fit or able for this taske at any time, much lesse now; but onely for that I hoped what I should say might win more beliefe, as hauing been an eare witnesse, and which is more, Oculatus testis, an eye-witnes of all his last passages, and could beare record against his Accusers falshood, as Saint John did of the truth, Quod vidimus, quod audiuimus, 
               1. Ioh. 1. 
               &c? Yet alas what can I say! what proportion will words hold against peremptory assertions? I haue nothing to conuince them but a plaine vnglost deniall,

               Petilianus dicit, Ego nego; They say Aug. it is so, I know it is not, and in a iust case it is Rhetoricke enough. Let bad causes shrowd themselues in suspected apologies, Trueth needs no clothing, but as a principle scornes proofe or demonstration. Besides it were difficult to prooue a Negatiue, much harder to refute an vntruth by the tracke: you may as well descrie the Eagles path, or define that which is a twinne of the same litter, non ens. Neither finde I any such President from that Incarnate Truth, Christ Jesus, who being accused by clouds of false witnesses, answered either nothing at all, or very little, according to his owne prescript, Let your communication bee yea, and nay. And yet if I would seeke euidence Math. 5. 37. to cast them, I would looke no further then their owne Iurors, but ex ore ipsorum, from themselues fetch circumstance to confute them. For I neuer yet knew any Lye so close built, but there was some loope-light for the Truth to discouer it. This is mendacium

fenestratum, hath many wide windowes for you to behold it.
            First (you know) Hee, whose conuersion they now vrge, had been long an eye-sore to them, railed on by many of their Pamphleters, Parsons especially, and that other vnchristened Jesuite, (for he hath no name, or else shames to put it to his booke) who thought it would be credit to his worke, if he could bring in the name of Doctor King, thogh but in the Rere and Post-script. Iudge then how can this Report cohere? to detest him liuing, to defame him sicke, yet claime him dead? Were it true, there is little policy to trust a reconciled enemy: But being so false, it is most impious and diabolicall to belie the dead. For insidiari 
               Gen. 3. 15. 
               calcaneo, which Gregory expounds to be Finem vitae, is the diuels proper passion.
            Secondly, for the Authour of his conuersion they alleage such a one, who sure vttered words which no man euer heard, and acted feats which none could

see. For had he been a Substantiue visible, or to be vnderstood, and no Iugler, nor dreame, nor aire, nor meere metaphysicall noiton, we, who were scarce euer absent, should at one time or other haue descryed him. But peraduenture it was a night-piece, and not fit to bee perused by euery light. Well then, apply their owne Ignis fatuus to it, and grant them as much as they can suppose, and marke if it appeare not farre worse.
            You must presume first Mutes onely for the Actors in this Scene, thoughts or wishes to haue been Embassadours in this parley; for what Mercury flew on this errand? what seruant or friend imployed to disclose the purpose of his Conuersion to the Confessor? did he by inspiration know his minde, or venter to him vnsent for? that were strange, vnlesse some walking Frier or Fairy from Saint Omers, or Doway gaue him intelligence; or else some whirle-wind rapt him and bare him to the house, as the Angell tooke vp Habakkuk by the haire of the head,

and set him in Babylon.
            
            Next, a prison doore opened at all houres of the night, either by corruptiō of the keeper, or by miracle, as it opened to Saint Peter: Free passage thorow Act. 12. each ward, accesse without impediment into the house, nay bed-chamber of this sicke Patient; attendants either none, (which were vnlikely) or sleeping; Belike such as garded the Sepulcher, whilest our Sauiours body was stolne away by his Disciples. Whether the seruants slept or no, I will not dispute: sure I am, the Tares are sowne by Seeds-men, enuious and dangerous, Seminaries and Priests.
            
            Thus you see, like Mathematicians, they draw a great many idle lines, haue many concessions to bring their conclusion about, and when all comes to issue, their maine Agent proues Corpus Mathematicum, a meere imagination next to, yea iust nothing.
            
               Nothing indeed, for bearing any part in this designe: a man first (by their confession) so vnfit to reconcile any to

their Church, that hee is by them disauowed for a Sonne, or Member of the Catholike Church; Thomae Preston Appellatio. p. 8. 
               Neque authorem illius disputationis aut Ecclesiae filium aestimare. Besides, they make him no lesse then a Persecutor, worse then Luther or Caluin, or then a Reprobate. And secondly, such a one, who for his owne particular had professed to many, and often, that He had neuer set foot within the gates: yea and disclaimed it vtterly with a Non noui hominem, he did not know the face of his suggested Conuert. The foulest mouth of them al cannot disproue this Personatus ille Schulkenius extra omnis modestiae, & charitatis Christianae limites, tam horrenda crimina VViddringtono imponit, illum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tam inuerecundè calumniatur, vt eum, quantumuis Ecclesiae Catholicae Roma nae se filium esse syncerè prositeatur, ipso tamen Luthero, Calui no, aut alio quouis perditissimo, & in reprobum sensum dato homuncione deteriorem faciat, illumque praeter manifestae haereseos crime, quod illi falsissimè obijcit etiā impijs. simis Christi Domini Apostolorum, omnium
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Christi Martyrum persequutoribus, & Ecclesiae Romanae sedisque Apostolicae hostibus iuratis aequiparare non perhorrescat. Id. pag. 6.. But they thinke belike all gaine-sayings are fruitlesse, since it is already entertained at Doway for Orthodox, and by them licensed to the Presse. So that what before was onely Fama volans a flying report, is now liber volans a flying booke. I confesse it, and withall know the disaduantage, that there now stands a whole Impression against mee: yet let them know a Truth, though but breathed into the aire, carries more power then a

printed Lye. If euer any, this is one, and of the grossest edition. I now perceiue, their intelligence is as false as their quotations, and both as equiuocall as themselues. The best is, this is not the first Libell which hath flowne from their presse, witnesse the three Conuersions, the life of Saint Francis, the story of Garnets strawe, and of our Lady of Loretto, Caluino-Turcismus, and that which outstrides the largest fable in Ouid, the Golden Legend.
            
            Yet I would be glad to do the Author al right; one thing I must cōmend him for, that, in setting down the Conuersion of this our Bishop, he is so briefe, following that rule of the Poet,—Breue sit quod 
               Juuenal. 
               turpiter audes; short stiles best suite opprobrious and vniustifiable subiects. For, like the Dogge at Nile, he laps but fearefully, & straight flies off. Neither do I so much blame him, he did but there, as in all other parts of his booke besides, shew his skill in Poetrie, and that he was a Graduate in that eighth science which they beyond Seas haue added to the seuen

others, Arte calumniandi, the art of slander; that hee had studied Saunders, Parsons, Cochlaeus, and Bolseca, better perhaps then Saint Augustine, or the Scriptures.
            
            Besides, being now inuested a Priest, (and I know not whether Arch-priest) it is not vnlikely but as Philosophers are bound to study Aristotle, so he to reade ouer and study Caiphas the high Priest, and by custome to let loose some Barrabas, some pestilent Pamphlet to humour the Synagogue of Rome, and aduantage their cause: all which considerations doe somewhat extenuate his fault. But for the Surueyour of his booke, Matthew Kellison, that would faine haue the world take him for a politicke wise man, and a solid Criticke, as hauing measured out Religion by the Acre, and taken a Geometricall Suruey of it, I know not how to excuse him: certainly if hee had been halfe so carefull to search the truth, as he was busie to suruey Religions, he would neuer haue suffered himselfe

to be so grosly guld with euery fabulous Gazette, and idle Corante that posts betwixt England and Doway.
            
            I desire not to bee mistaken; I come not hither to pleade against them, nor to pleade for Him, whom they haue so palpably iniured. Let obscure names hire a Panegyricke to varnish them ouer: faire and perspicuous Texts need no dictionary or glosse to construe them; such I take Him to be. That He suffers vnder their mis-report, hurts not him; it rather giues foyle and lustre to him. It was the honour of dead Patroclus, that two Homer. Iliad. armies fought for his Corps: and it was the glory of Moses, that an Arch-angell 
               Iude Ep. vers. 9. stroue with the diuell for his body: and if two Religions striue for him, as the Councell did for Paul, or that Vrbs septicollis, 
               Act. 23. 9. seuen-headed City contends for the new birth of his faith, as the seuen Cities did for Homers birth, can it lesse be then an honour, and such a one which Christ vouchsafes not to all? Many haue died, but Frustra peritura cadauera, as subiects

not worth a contending for, past in silence. Therefore the Apostles, when they were conuented and imprisoned, Ibant gaudentes, they went in triumph, Act. 5. 41. greatly reioycing that they were held worthy to suffer reproch for the name of Christ, and for his Gospell. So that it is not his hurt; the hurt is, as Rome meant it, yours, if you beleeue it; for by beleeuing it, you make your selues Authors of it. Qui ista credis, potes & facere. 
               Tertullian. If any should labour to perswade that Snow were black, his foule report could not fully it; and though you might thinke him shamelesse that would auerre it, you would take him to bee mad that should beleeue it. Thus is his case more miserable that is rashly credulous to deprauations of other men, then hee that first forged them The deuiser of them knowes they are false, nor can he by telling make them true; but hee who beleeues them, alters the property, and dogmatizes them for truth. And as the Artizan, who casts or carues the Image,

is not the Idolater, but he that worships it when it is made,—Qui colit ille facit; so neither is hee so much the lyer that Martial. tells the lye, as he that beleeues it being told. It is Saint Hieroms aduice, Ne obtrectatoribus 
               Hieron. epist. ad Celantiam. 
               authoritatem de consensu tribuas, ne eorum vicium nutrias annuendo: Doe not thou authorize slanders, by giuing credit to them, lest thou make the crime thine. It shall bee my aduice to all that heare me, and to such as heare mee not, for Opprobrium non accipere aduersus proximos suos, not to receiue or credit Psal. 14. opprobrious calumniations cast out against our brethren, is one of the degrees of innocence and happinesse recited by the Psalmist. Do but remember, that if God hath denounced a wo against Psal. 14. those that speake euill of Good, Et iustitiam iusti auferunt ab eo, and rob the righteous of their good names, he hath also a woe for them, Qui furem vident & consentiunt, who consent vnto the theft.
            But my perswasion is misplaced: you are not such before whom I need to

cleare him of this defamation. I hope with modesty I may vse Saint Hieroms 
               Hieron. Ep. ad Celant. words, Aduersus obtrectatorum libidinem pugnat meriti magnitudo; he had deserued better ranke in your estimations then so. For did he so long runne his course thorow this Churches Zodiack, and as a true Diocesan visit each Pulpit within your City (some of them oftner) & not onely taught within it, but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Luk. 4. 14. in all the adioyning villages where hee liued; neuer allowing his numerous affaires so much as a Sabbath or Sundayes rest, whilest he was able? So; by his vnwearied industry, telling the world, that they which for gaine, or ease, or for ambition aimed at Bishopricks, mistooke that waighty calling, since that (as Theophylact 
               Theophylact. in Ioh. 26. speakes) Ministerium affert, non facit Dominum; when Christ made his Apostles Bishops and Superintendents of his Church, he appoynted thē not so much to Lord the flocke, as to feed it. Did he all this, and with that zealous care, that as a Torch hee consumed himselfe

to light others? and, when Himselfe should faile, prouided, so farre as in him lay, for a succession in his Blood, to set hand to the same plough; hauing dedicated (in his desire) all his Sonnes (in act Two) to the Ministery of this Church, and by no meanes willing to heare of any other course (though otherwise inuited by Gracious offers for some of them in particular) to be vndertaken by them, saue that function alone? And can it be conceiued he should, after all this, turne a shifter of his Religion? Let me aske with better right then did Zedekia, 
               1. King. 22. 24. 
               When went that Spirit of God, which had accompanied him thorow all the passages of life, from him? Great buildings, before they fall, giue warning of their ruine, by inclining some way or other; what argument did hee euer giue of his Reuolt? or that like Ephraim, hauing bin so long harnessed, so long militant in Gods battels, so long a Captaine in the Armie, he should in the last day of battell turne backe, when hee had now but

one enemie to incounter, Death? that he should forsake his Colours, or like a 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and Renegado, recant that faith which with much contention, and with losse of Spirits he so long had maintained? Had his resolution wauered this way, how could he haue disguized so apparant a relapse from those reuerend B. of Couentry and Lichfield. B. of Bath and VVelles. B. of Ely. 
               Bishops who were his familiar and frequent visitants; and especially his most honoured friend the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, who was with him on the Wednesday before his decease? 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , is the old rule; the end of life euer answeres the beginning. If so, who can imagine that One, who began in opposition to the Church of Rome, should end in Apostasie and reconcilement to it? Nay, that good Father is confident, Mors mala putanda non est, 
               August. Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 11. 
               quam bona vita praecesserit: It is incredible he that liued so well, should make so inglorious an end.
            Nor was this confidence in him any way abused; neither his end disproportionate

to his beginning. Hee that had so long taught others how to liue, was by his owne infirmities tutord in the art of dying. It is not strange he should bee perfit in this lesson, since for a long time (to vse the Apostles words) He dyed daily; 
               1. Cor. 16. 31. his sharpe agonies hauing made his life but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                no better then a liuing death: vnto this wholly doth hee addresse his thoughts, and admonished by his increasing paines, as from the tongue of the Prophet, sent from God to summon Ezekiah, he sets his house in order. Where first he resolues himself into his principia naturalia, bequeathing his Soule to God that gaue it, his Body to the dust from whence it was taken: and not onely so, but In principia fortunae, hee resolues his fortunes into their beginnings; acknowledging with all thankfull duty, that vnder God, our gracious Soueraigne had been the maker of them. I will not conceale his owne words dictated in his last Testament. First, I bequeath my soule into the hands of Almighty God, beseeching him

for Christ Jesus sake, my most blessed Sauiour, that as it hath pleased him, euen from my mothers wombe, to take mee into his speciall fauour and protection, and to continue the same vnto me thorowout all the passages of my life, especially vnder my most gracious Ma
                     •
                  ter and Soueraigne, the Instrument of his goodnesse and bounty to me and mine, for these eighteene y'eres; and hath vouchsafed me, though the vnworthiest of many, to bee a Minister of his holy Word and Sacraments: so it would please him in this my time of sicknesse and grieuous infirmity, to hold mee vp by his right hand, and to vouchsafe mee the comfort of his holy Spirit, that I may patiently indure this crosse and affliction which he hath laid vpon me. A Petition as soone granted as desired: nay I may say as it is in the Prophet, Antequā clament, ego exaudiam. 
               Esa. 65. 24. God heard his prayer long before it was framed in this place. For from the first beginning of his sicknesse, hee was indued with such a spartana patientia, well knit patience, that some of his Reuerend brethren comming purposely to comfort

him, professed they found more comfort from him, then they could bring: and though hee might truly say with Dauid, I am weary of my groning, and Psalm. 6. 
               Euery night wash I my bed with teares; Yet neuer did any impatient murmure (it was a religious boast in the Lord, vttred by himselfe) breake from his lips against that high hand which had so long humbled him: neither did that Petra, rockestony disease grow so fast within him, but his Christian resolution hardened as fast, and his faith built as firmely on the true Rocke of his Saluation Christ Jesus; with the Inuocation of which Name hee began and ended the day, vsing most frequently those words of Saint Paul, Cupio 
               Phil. 1. 23. 
               dissolui, & esse cum Christo, I desire to bee dissolued.
            But before he loosed from this shore, considering hee was bound for a long voyage, he was not vnmindfull, first to take in Uiaticum animae, the holy sacrament; which hee professed in the presence of some Sir Henry Martin his Chancelor. M. Matthias Cal licot. M. Philip King his Brother, Iohn King his second Sonne, and myself, &c. especiall friends, his

wife, children, and family appoynted by his owne inuitation to accompany him to that feast, as Christ to his Disciples, Luk. 22. 15. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; his soule had greatly longed to eate that last supper, and to performe that supreme Christian duty before he left them. Yea, hee so hungred and thirsted after that Bread of life, and that Cup of saluation, that though all solid sustenance was become odious to his palate, now quite disabled from taking it downe, yet he professed, duty and Religion should preuaile aboue his weaknesse, and he would force himselfe to eate that sacred Bread, which as it was the first he had in many dayes before tasted, so was it the last. His Chaplaine Doctor Cluet, Archdeacon of Middlesex. ministred to him, who (let me not omit) hauing read the Confession, for that purpose, was by him commanded to reade it ouer againe. Hauing happily accomplished this seruice in all our hearings, he gaue thankes to God, that hee had liued to finish that blessed worke, (it was his owne speech) and after a short prayer,

conceiued by himselfe, hee dismissed the company.
            Such was his deuout preparation, and so long did he obserue the tedious Vigils before the festiuall of his dismission; his day of Rest was now come, which, as if reserued by Gods fauour, was that very day his Sauiour dyde on, Good Friday: & that time of the day when our whole Church was exercised in prayer, according to the custome of that Day (neere eleuen of the clocke in the fore-noone) as if he had stayed to take the helpe and aduantage of good mens deuotion to set him forward: a day, which might incite Prophets and Patriarkes to desire to end on, being truly Dies meus (as Christ said) My Day: a good and blessed day, Iohn 8. 56. and of all others most proper to crown and dignifie the end of good men. Drawing now fast to his end, and ready to hoyse saile for another World, he requests the valediction of our prayers at the parting. Our obedience forthwith actuated his wil; straight was his bed incompassed

with mournefull Clients, ready to offer vp a religious Uiolence to heauen for his sake. First, he expresly causeth his Chaplaine, now his ghostly Father, to reade the Confession and Absolution, according to the ordinary for me of Common prayer in our Liturgie. Which ended, and our prayers hauing taken a short truce, as awaiting somewhat now from him, he bids the curtains to be quite throwne open, and whilest we kneeled, not vnmindfull of his Episcopall office, to shew hee was not so exhausted, but hee had yet One Blessing in store, hee distributes a benediction round about, to euery one of vs there present; so that his Bed was now like the Mount Garrizim, from each corner Deut. 11. 29. whereof a Blessing resounded.
            His speech here felt a stop; but neither our Prayers, nor His vnderstanding; for testimony whereof, desired by his Chaplaine to make some signe, his heart went along with vs, and tooke the same course our Prayers poynted out,

with a most speedy hasted eleuation of Hands he expressed that his Heart, like Elias before the Charriot, yet kept pace with vs, though his tongue could not: and though he wanted Organs to eiaculate his Prayers, the eiaculation of his eyes darted vp to Heauen now supplied that want. There they yet fixt, as if eyther he had with Stephen beheld the Heauens 
               Acts 7. 
               opening for his admittance, or meant to marke that place whither his Soule now bended, or else that his Body was emulous to haue gone along with it: For we might perceiue, that like the two Disciples that ranne to the Sepulcher, they Joh. 20. 4. both ranne to seeke Christ, but that Other Disciple outranne Peter; Anima antecessit corporis moram, the Soule too swift for the Bodie, left it behinde. And yet that followed Ioh. 19. 40. with the best speed it could make, and ligatum linteis, wound vp in a bare winding sheete (as far from superstitious Pompe, after it wanted breath, as himselfe euer was whilest he had breath to reprooue it in others, or to He commanded in his VVill, his body to be buried in the Cathedrall Church of S. Paul, without any Pompe or solemnities, onely with a Tombestone with this Inscription, Resurgam.
                forbid it in

himselfe) Introiuit monumentum, came vnto it's Sepulchre, his corps being borne thither by men of eminent degree 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Act. 8. 2. and worth in our Church, like those who carried Stephen to his graue, Act. 8. 2. the very euen before that blessed morning wherein those two Disciples came to Christs: This difference betwixt their Epitaphs; on Christs Graue, Resurrexit, hee is risen; on this Seruant of Christs, Resurgam, I shall rise, and in the meane, rest in assured hope to bee partaker of the Resurrection of the iust. There now committed to the Earth by that Reuerend and most Orthodox Prelate, in Religion and learning equally absolute, my Lord Bishop of Couentrie and Lichfield, 
               VVhere also was present the Lord Bishop of Ely. (who concluded the last Act of the intire affection mutually borne betwixt them liuing, by honouring his dead Corpes with rites of Buriall) doth it peaceably rest: and let me heere rest. For in my owne particular it must euer be a part of my Prayer (and it is a wish I would not be so vnthriftie to venter but

vpon good assurance, nor settle it elsewhere) Sic mihi contingat viuere, sicque mori: May my course of life be such, and may my end be like his. Or, if it be too much ambition for me to craue Eliah's 
               2. King. 2. 
               spirit, that is, to liue like Him, an humbler Boone shall content me, to possesse his Mantle; that is, to Dye in the profession of that Protestant Faith in which he did.
            I haue touched vpon a sad string; a subiect to which affection and sense is quicke; I could not lesse in pietie then 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as Telemachus to his Father; 
               Homer. Odyss. or as the Latines haue it, Parent alia perficere, performe my last Parentall Dutie, and act these Justa, Rites; though not Exequias, Funeralls to His memorie, which will longer suruiue in the brests of good men. Nor could I more, then in this sort Parentare iniuriis (out of so iust a prouocation as wrong done to a Father) take that temperate Reuenge of a Slanderer, as to disprooue him. My Speech heere findes a Deliquium, and Cupit dissolui, labours in the period: Suffer

it to gaspe a few minutes, and it suddainely expires.
            Let no man doubt, or wauer, or think the worse of Religion, for that so noted a Professor is traduced. These are stale tricks with our Aduersaries, since it hath been long their practice, like the Lunaticke in Athenaeus, euer wont to stand vp on the Key of the Cittie, if any fayre Shippe of rich burthen (any noted 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , vessell fraught with knowledge Acts 9. 15. and true profession of the Gospell) had made to the Hauen, to crie, It is theirs, it is theirs. Againe, let no man be confirmed, that this Scandall is true, because they so peremptorily beleeue it. Such is their impious Credulitie, that it is grown a Maxime among them to beleeue any thing, were it neuer so false, were it Contradiction, so it made any way for them: For those very tongues, which out of malice gaue out in time of his sicknesse, That through impatience he had offred violence to himselfe; those very same, after his death, out of the abundance of

their Romish charitie, would perswade the world, he died Reconciled vnto their Synagogue: for I may not call it Church, vnlesse it be Ecclesia malignantium, Ecclesia maledicentium. Nor let this Lye prooue more authenticke because Printed; that rather discredits and weakens it, and you haue now more cause to suspect it then before. It is a ground in their Religion, that Vnwritten traditions haue 
               Ad confutandos haereticos mator vis in traditione quàm in Scriptura. Canus Loc. lib. 3. cap. 3. 
               more authority then written Scriptures. And if so, why should not we take them at their word, and make as slight and scornefull reckoning of their writings, as they of Gods?
            Lastly, that none may wonder, or be perplexed, or through a nice misprision suspect there could not but bee some ground for this farre-blowne Calumnie, let him but [Remember the word that Christ sayd,] and what He Suffered, and then all wonder will end in satisfaction. For who can thinke it strange that Christs Seruants are slandered, when Hee their Lord and Master could not auoyd the poysoned

breath of Slander? If His Innocence had no protection, but that He on no ground at all was belyed by malicious tongues, surely on as little ground will they belie any Disciple of His; [For the Seruant is not greater then his Lord:] And (saith Christ) If they haue persecuted me, they will also persecute you.]
            
            Why then, Sufficit Discipulo vt sit sicut Magister eius: Let it satisfie all the world Matth. 10. 25. and his owne fame, that this (now dead) Disciple hath had but the same fate and vsage his Master had.
            It is the glory of Imitation to counterfeit the life; and Art is most proper, when it most resembles Nature. The Apostles were but Copies drawne from Christ; their perfection therefore must needs be greatest, who come neerest to the Originall: And that Disciple is a true Disciple, who learnes not the Lesson, but the Master, not only suffers for Him, but in degree and qualitie as like as may be to Him. This is truly Discere Christum, to learne Christ; this is Induere Dominum

Jesum, to put on the Lord Iesus; this is to Partake the sufferings of Christ. They who durst partake his sorrowes, shall share with Him in ioyes: they that are sicut in terra, shall be also sicut in coelis: For so hath the Spirit assured vs. It was the Motto of his Episcopall Scale. 
               Si compatimur, conregnabimus; If wee suffer with him in earth, we shall raigne with him in Heauen. Behold, a voyce hath bid me write, Blessed 
               Matth. 5. 11, 12 
               are ye, when men reuile and persecute you, and say all manner of euill for my Names sake falsely; Reioyce and be glad, great is your reward in Heauen.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               
                  HOw little I affect to be in Print, needs no Apologie to any, who either know already it was the desire of some my most Honourable friends, whose intreaties were commands to me, or but consider the subiect which first set me a worke, a Slandered and traduced Father: vnto whom duty and necessity vrged me to doe this right. And I cleerely professe, if a true relation of his end may doe him right, I haue faithfully performed it, and haue giuen the world so iust an account of Him, tanquàm Ephemeridem Deo traditurus, as if I should haue made my conscience last shrift to God. Whether I haue vprightly stewarded his honour, and my owne faith, I leaue to the strict iudgement of any, who are able to distinguish colours, and discerne Truth from Imposture: being confident, as innocence can make a man, that none are able to disallow the reckoning. Si veredicam, Deus testis; si mentiar, Deus Vindex. As therefore the acquitting of His integrity was the prime motiue which entred me into this Quarrell, so now the clearing of my owne fidelity was a secondary motiue for the publication of it. First, that they might not thinke by false alarms and the confused outcries of Report, to beare downe a good cause, or so easily to triumph in their supposed victory, as if none durst affront them; I thought good, in the meane time, thus on the sudden to checke the rumour, till haply some more deliberate pen (which they shall not long, or vainely expect) may quite race it out. And though this byrth of mine were more hastily formed, I hope it will not be vntimely, for Truth neuer knew abortion; but, like a starre newly risen to discouery, hath its being of old, though the obseruation was but late and moderne. Secondly, to let

those calumnious tongues, who gaue out my Reuolt also as well as my Fathers (both true alike) know, I haue not yet so doted on their part, or dis-affected my owne, as to leaue my Countrey, or Religion; nor, I thinke, euer shall, except my vnderstanding, wits, and aboue all, the Grace of God leaue me: or their perswasions haue the same power ouer me, as Mercuries had ouer Sosias, that they can make me beleeue Ego non sum Ego, I am not the Son of such a Father. And what in this case, on my owne behalfe, I write, is likewise auowed on behalfe of my second brother, IOHN KING, entred into the same orders as my selfe; who also had his share in this lewd imputation, as well as my selfe: for we are not more brothers in nature, then (by Gods mercy) in this resolution. Thirdly, to take the liberty of adding and explicating some remarkeable circumstances, which better become a Margin then a speech. Lastly, that though the slander hath hitherto got the start, the Detection might, at last be set in a course to ouertake it. Which taske, Sermo transiens, a Sermon pronounced, could not so thorowly effect, except it were also Sermo in scriptis, written. A course no way improper, for scriptor praedicare dici potest; Gerson de laude script consider. 1 
               A Writer is in some sort a Preacher; Certè si lingua silet, manus praedicat, & fructuosiùs aliquandò, quantò Scriptura venit ad plures vberior quàm transiens sermo; though his tongue be silent, his Pen preaches: and a Sermon preached from the Presse, sometimes edifies so much the more then from the Pulpit, by how much the Report is carried further. So that the audience which before was but Parochiall, or at most Prouinciall, may by this meanes grow more Generall and (as it were) Oecumenicall.
            
               And now hauing committed it to the view of all men, I will not preiudicate, or doubtfully forestall the beliefe of any. I make no question but all will rest satisfied, except those wayward dispositions, who are resolued afore-hand not to be satisfied at all: Non persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris; hauing banished all reason from them without

hope of repeale. Such, though vnwillingly, I must leaue to their owne hardened obstinacy,—Stultos iubeo esse libentèr, and suffer fooles gladly that will be so against my consent. If they can yet flatter themselues with any aduantage, this fiction may affoord them, I shall not enuie them that Paradise, into which their fond imagination hath put them. I rather pitty the poore shifts they are driuen to, for the keeping of their weather-beaten Cause a-float. All the harme I wish them is, that they would leaue off this thredbare trade of Calumny, especially towards the Dead, grow better acquainted with speaking and writing the Truth, and not conuersing with her at such a distance, as now they doe. Or if they will needs be Architecti mendaciorum, still hammering vntruths; I would aduize them to lay probable foundations, and chuse such Materials as are more malleable, and (in the worlds esteeme) not so impossible for them to worke vpon as He they haue heere selected. For euery wood will not make a Mercury; nor is euery good man a fit mould to cast Them a Conuert in. Farewell.
            
               H. K.
            
         
         
            
            THE EXAMINATION OF THOMAS PRESTON, taken before the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, at Lambeth, Decemb. 20. 1621.
            
               BEing asked, Whether he hath not heard by report and bruite abroad, that it hath been said of him, that hee was with Doctor King, late Lo. Bishop of London, a little before his death, and that he reconciled the said Bishop to the Church of Rome, and therein performed vnto him the office and function of a Priest.
            And being further asked, Whether he hath not heard of a Book not long since published, which is intituled, Protestants

Plea, and Petition for Priests and Papists, and that in the same Booke it is said, that the fore-named Bishop did humbly at the feet of a Priest confesse his sinnes, receiue Sacramentall absolution at his hands, and was reconciled to the Catholike Roman Church; And being hereupon charged vpon his conscience, and his Priesthood, to speake the truth, whether hee were the person spoken of by report, or designed by the said booke to performe such an office.
            Hee answereth, That it is true, that hee hath often heard, that such a Report was spredde abroad concerning him, and many both Protestants and Catholikes haue come vnto him to inquire, whether that report and bruit were true or no.
            And that hee hath heard, that in the booke before named, some such thing is deliuered, and vpon the day of this his examination hee was shewed the booke by the Lord Archbishop of

Canterbury, wherein hee found those things afore mentioned to bee contained.
            For the declaring of truth in all which, he protesteth before God, and vpon his conscience, as he shall answere at the dreadfull Day of Iudgement, that the said Bishop of London did neuer confesse himselfe vnto this Examinate, nor euer receiued Sacramentall absolution at his hands, nor was euer by him reconciled vnto the Church of Rome, neither did renounce before him the Religion professed and established in the Church of England, nor did performe any other circumstance tending that way, as is in the said booke of the Protestants Plea deliuered.
            Yea he addeth further, that as he hath hope to be saued by Christ Jesus, he this Examinate, to his knowledge, was neuer in company where the said Doctor King late Lord Bishop of London was, neither did he euer receiue letter from him, nor did write letter vnto him; neither

did he euer (to his knowledge) see the said Bishop in any place whatsoeuer, nor could haue knowne him from another man, and therefore affirmeth, that this bruit and report is raised concerning this Examinate, and the said late Bishop, without any true ground and foundation.
            Being asked what hee should thinke to bee the cause wherefore any person should raise this fame or report, hee saith, that from the beginning hee did conceiue it to be nothing else, but that some, who did maligne him, were willing to disgrace him, or vndoe him, by bringing him in obloquy with the King or State, where he remaines a prisoner.
            Being demanded, whether euer hee hath probably or credibly heard that any other Priest did repaire to the said late Bishop, did take his Confession, gaue him absolution, or reconciled him to the Roman Church, hee protesteth, that he did neuer credibly or probably heare of any such thing.
            
               
Being asked whether he hath heard, that Masse hath been said for the said Bishop, in any part beyond the seas: hee answereth, that he hath heard such a report, but doth not know any thing of certainty concerning the same.
            Examinatur coram G. Cant.
            
            
               Ego Thomas Prestonus qui supra, testor haec omnia esse vera.

            
            
               
                  Recognit. coram nobis 28. Decemb. 1621.
               
                  
                     
                        T. Edmondes.
                        Geo. Caluert.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  In praesentia mei
               
               
                  Gulielmi Bakeri Notarij Publici.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            Faults escaped in some Copies.
            Page 3. lin. 20. reade 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . pag. 9. lin. 16. pag. 11. lin. 8. and pag. 18. lin. 18. reade [The word that I said vnto you.] p. 28. lin. vlt. in marg. reade, Rey. p. 29 l. 16. reade, our Luminaria. p. 43. l. penult. reade, Abyssum inuocat. p. 44. l. 11. reade, States. p. 45. l. 2. r. Inuentories. Ibid. l. 7. Extracted a Quintessence. p. 54. l. 4. reade, Notion
            
            
               In the Epistle to the Reader.
            
            Pag. 1. lin. 17. reade, Sivera dicam.
            
            
         
      
   