
      
         
            
            THE LOW COVNTRY COMMON WEALth Contayninge An exact deſcription of the Eight vnited Prouinces, Now Made free Tranſlated out of french
            ED. GRIMESTON
            Printed by G. Eld. 1609
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE WORTHIE Knight Sir Peter Manwood.
            
            
               Sir.
            
            
               AFter the Edition of the Netherland Hiſtorie, I was intreated to peruſe and tranſlate this diſcourſe, being a deſcription of the vnited Prouinces, written by Iohn Francis Petit, one of the cheefe Authors of that Hiſtorie; who (as he himſelfe doth auerre) hath made a particular ſuruay of all the Prouinces, townes and forts, which are now vnder the gouernment of the Confederate Eſtates. And finding it likely to giue ſome contentment to the Reader, and neceſſarie, as well for his better vnderſtanding of the Hiſtorie, as for his knowledge of the ſtrength and ſtate of thoſe Prouinces, which haue maintained ſo long and difficult a warre, againſt ſo potent a Monarke: I haue ſpent

ſuch houres, as I could well ſpare, from my more neceſſarie imployments (ſince my comming into France) in the traduction thereof, that it might bee printed as an Appendix to the Hiſtory. The which I cannot recommend to any Gentleman better deſeruing of mee then your ſelſe, vnto whom I am much bound for many kind fauors and reſpects. Accept it good Sir, though not worthy of your view, yet as a teſtymonie of his loue and thankefullneſſe, who will alwaies remaine
            
               Yours, deuoted to doe
you ſeruice.
Edward Grimeſton.
               
               Orleans Aprill 10.
                     
ſtilo nouo. 1609.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            A table contayning all the names of Citties, Townes, Caſtles, Burgs and Villages in theſe eight vnited Prouinces, with the Townes and Forts out of the ſaid Prouinces and yet included in their vnion: and firſt of Geldres.
            
            
               The Dutchy of Geldres in particular. fol. 1
               
               ARnham. folio. 6
               Nymeghen. 9
               Ruremond. 13
               Venloo. 14
               Gelders. 15
               Stralen. 16
               Wachtendonck. 17
               Erchelens. ibid.
               
               Echt. 18
               Montfort. ibid.
               
               Harderwick. ibid.
               
               Elburg. 19
               Hattem. ibid.
               
               Wageningen. 20
               Tyell. ibid.
               
               Bommel. 21
               Saint Andrewes Fort. 23
               Culembourge. 25
               Battenbourg. ibid.
               
               Buren. 26
            
            
               The Earldomes of Holland and Weſtfreeſland. fol. 36
               
               DOrdrecht. 46
               Harlem. 52
               Delf. 60
               Leyden. folio▪ 67
               Amſterdam. 73
               Goude. 78
               Enchuyſen. 87
               Horne. 89
               Alckmar. 94
               Medenblick. 100
               Edam. 101
               Munikendamme. 103
               Purmerende. ibid.
               
               Muden. 105
               Naerden. 106
               Gorrichom. 107
               Worchom. 109
               Heuſdin. 111
               Leerdam. ibid.
               
               Henclom. ibid.
               
               Aſpren. 112
               Oudewater. ibid.
               
               Rotterdam. 113
               Schiedam. 115
               Bryell. 117
               Schoonhouen. 118
               Iſelſtein. 119
               Woerden. ibid.
               
               Viane. 120
               Gh
                     •
                  ertruydenberg. 121
               
                  
Hage. 122
               Vlaerdinghe. 128
               Seuenberghe. ibid.
               
               Goere. 129
               Beuerwick. ibid.
               
               Nieuport. 131
               Scage. ibid.
               
               Nobility of Holland from 136. to 157
               Diſcription of the Brittiſh Fort called L' Huis te Brittaine. 157
            
            
               Zealand with the Iſlands, Townes & Burroughs. 159
               
               VVAlachry, or Walchren. 161
               Middlebourgh. ibid.
               
               Vere or Camp-vere. 165
               Fl
                     •
                  ſinghe. 168
               Arnemuyden. 171
               Dombourgh. 174
               Weſt-cappelle. ibid.
               
               Soetlandt. 175
               Rammeken. ibid.
               
               Schowen. 176
               Ziriczee. 177
               Browerſhauen. 178
               Zuit-beuelandt. 179
               Rommerſwall. 180
               Goes. 181
               Tolen the Iſland and towne. 182
               Saint Martins Dike. 183
               Noort-beuelandt. ibid.
               
               Wolferſ-dicke▪ 184
            
            
               The County of Zutphen in particular. 189
               
               DOeſ-burgh. 192
               Doetecum. 193
               Bronckhorſt. ibid.
               
               Lochem. 194
               Groll. ibid.
               
               Sherenbergh. 196
               Bredefort. ibid.
               
               Keppel. 197
               Bourg. ibid.
               
            
            
               The Prouince and Signiory of Vtrecht in particular. 198
               
               VTrecht. 199
               Wickter-duyrſteede. 206
               Amerſfort. 208
               Rhenen. 209
               Montfort. 210
               The ſtate of Vtrecht in general. 211
            
            
               Freeſland in generall. 219
               
               LEwarden. 236
               Dockum. 242
               Franiker. 244
               Bolſewaert. 245
               Staueren. 247
               Harlinghen. 250
               Sneck. ibid.
               
               
                  
Sloten. ibid.
               
               Ilſt. ibid.
               
               Worcum. 252
               Hindelopen. ibid.
               
               The ſeauen Foreſts. 253
            
            
               Oueryſſell in generall. 254
               
               DEuenter. 259
               Campen. 260
               Swoll. 263
               Steenwick. 265
               Haſſel. ibid.
               
               Oldenzeel. 266
               Otmarſe. ibid.
               
               Enſchcede. 267
               Vollenhouen. ibid.
               
               Geelmuyden. 268
               Meppell. ibid.
               
               Hardenbergh. 269
               Coevoorden. ibid.
               
               Riſſen. 270
               Diepenhem. ibid.
               
               Ghoer. 271
               Delden. ibid.
               
               Almeloo. ibid.
               
               Wilſen. ibid.
               
               Graff-horſt. 272
            
            
               Gronninghen and the Ommelandts in generall. 273
               
               DAm. 287
               Delfziell. ibid.
               
               Townes and Forts out of the vnited Prouinces and yet compriſed in their vnion. 289
               
            
            
               In the Dutchy of Brabant.
               BErghen vpon Soom. 289
               Breda. 290
               Steenberghen. 293
               William-Stadt. ibid.
               
               Cluyndert. 294
               Lilloo. ibid.
               
               Ter-Heyden. 295
            
            
               Townes and Fortreſſes that the States hold in Flanders. 296
               
               SLuce. ibid.
               
               Ardenbourgh. 298
               Yſendike. ibid.
               
               Lyefkenſ-hoeck. 299
               Ter-neuſe. 300
               Axell. ibid.
               
            
            
               Fortreſſes held by the States beyond the Rhine. 301
               
               BOrentang
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 
                  ibid.
               
               Bellinger-wolder-ziell. 302
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Belgick Common-weale, Or A particular deſcription of the eight vnited Prouinces of the Netherlands.
            
            
               The Duchie of Gelders.
               
                  THere is great contradiction of opinions betwixt both ancient and moderne writers touching the firſt beginning of the Geldrois, the which they can hardly reconcile, neither will I vnder-take the charge. Marlian ſaith, that in Iulius Caeſars time, the contrie which is now called Gelders, was inhabited by the Menapiens. Others hold that it was the aboad of the Sicambrians, where-vnto I will yeeld, and that vnder that name the Cleuois were comprehended: through whoſe country, as well as through Gelders the riuer of Rhine doth runne: the which doth caſt one of his branches betwixt the Duchies of Gelders and Cleues, being called Wahal, at the diuiſion of the Iland of Sgrauen-Weerdt, where that mighty fort was firſt built by Collonell Martin Schenck, and at this day in great eſteeme. For which Iland there hath bin long debate betwixt the Dukes of Gelders and Cleues, the

which is not yet decided, & was begun betwixt the Emperor Charles the fift, and William duke of Cleues, father to this laſt Duke. The Battauians or Hollanders did alſo hold a part of that which is now called Gelders. There is no doubt but in Caeſars time, the Sicambrians did inhabit on eitherſide of the Rhine, in the countries of Cleues and Geldres: as Wezel on the one ſide, with Burich, Cleef and others of the other ſide are of the Duchy of Cleues: And of Geldres, Nymegen lies of the one ſide and Arnham on the other, ſo as we may rightly ſay that the riuers of Rhine and Wahal do run through theſe two Prouinces: for the Sicambrians hauing often bin defeated by the Romains, Auguſtus (who ſucceeded Caeſar as Strabo, Suctonius & others do write) to be the better aſſured of them, and to keepe them in awe, tranſported a good number of them with other people on this ſide the Rhine, and there planted them. I will not deny that the Menapians did not firſt inhabit all that country which lies along the riuer of Rhine, to whom the Sicambrians did afterwards ſucceed, who enioyed a great continent of ground, on the one ſide as far as the Vbiens, and on the other vnto the ocean ſea. The which Marlian confirmes by theſe words. The Sicambrians planted wheras the two great riuers of Rhine and Meuſe do meet and ioyne, extend themſelues vnto the ocean ſea▪ And in another place he ſaith. The Sicambrians are people wholy Germains▪
                   inhabiting

beyond the riuer of Rhine nere vnto the Vbiens and Eburones, which are the people of Cologne & Liege. So as wee cannot ſay that thoſe which at this day are called Geldrois had the name of Sicambrians onely, but that vnder that name were alſo comprehended, they of Cleues, Monts, Marck & Iulliers▪
                   all neighbors to the Rhine, and on the other ſide a part of the riuer of Meuſe which paſſing by the country of the Eburones and the moderne Geldrois, comes & ioynes with the riuer of Wahal (which is a branche of the Rhine) nere vnto Loueſtein, and then retayning the ſole name of Meuſe, waſhing the townes of Dordrecht, Rotterdam, Schiedam, Vlaerdingen and the Brill, it falls into the Britiſh ſea, and ſo into the great Ocean. The which Sydonius Appolinaris, an excelent Poet in his time doth witneſſe by theſe verſes.
               
                  Sic Ripa duplicis tumore fracta,
                  
                     Detonſus Vahalim bibat Sycamber.
               
               
                  So when the double ſwelling breakes the brinke▪
                  
                  
                     Wahal ſhalbe the ſhorne Sicambrians drinke.
               
               But no man can directly ſay when or how theſe Menapians & Sicambrians were diuided in theſe Prouinces thus diſtinguiſhed, by which diſtinction they haue loſt their ancient name. This Prouince is at this day called Geldres, and the others Cleues, Iuilliers, Monts, Marck, Lieg, yea & Weſtphalia: the Etimology of which name of Geldres ſeems

ridiculous vnto me, as it is ſet downe in the chronicle of Holland: I would rather hold with them which maintaine that the whole countrie hath taken his name of Gelduba, a towne in old time ſeated vpon the Rhine, wherof Tacitus makes honorable mention, but at this day there remaines no memory thereof: Munſter holds it for moſt certaine, that the firſt Lords of this country (who long after carried no higher title then of Aduocates, then of Earles, and in the end of Dukes) were two brethrē, iſſued from the French Wyncard and L
                        ••
                     old du Pont, who built a Caſtell called Pont-Gelder, which caſtle hath long retained that name of Pont, and is now ioyned to the towne of Geldre, which hath giuen the name to the whole Prouince, hauing at this day towards the North the countrie of Friſland, to the Norweſt the Zuyderzee: vpon the South the riuer of Meuſe ioynes vpon it, and diuides it from the Duchie of Brabant: to the South-eaſt is the Duchie of Iuilllers. Towards the Eaſt is a part of the riuer of Rhine, and the duchie of Cleues, the which diuides it into two very vnequall parts: & to the Weſt is Holland and the ſiegneurie of Vtrecht.
               
               This Prouince is plaine and of a goodly ſcituation, hauing few mountaines, but maine heaths, & great ſtore of woods, which are both pleaſant and profitable: among the which is that of Echterwald. All their ſoile or ground for tillage is very fertile in corne: and the paſture fat for cattle,

eſpecially that which lies vpon the bankes of the riuer of Rhine, Wahal, Iſſel and Meuſe. Lewis Guichardin and other writers of our time, confound the Earldome of Zutphen with the Duchie of Geldres, as we will ſhew in the particular deſcription, and not confound it with that of Gelders.
               
               The Duchie of Gelders and the Countie of Zutphen, containe the townes of Arnhem, Zutphen, Nymegen, and Ruremond, which are the foure chiefe of the whole country, making the foure quarters of theſe two Prouinces, & are ſcituated (as we will ſhew) vpon foure diuerſe riuers, and are ſubiect to foure ſeuerall Biſhops. Then are the townes of Venlo vpon the Meuſe: Geldres: Stralen: Wachkendonck and Erkelens in the champian country. Then there is Hatten vpon the Iſſell, Elbruch, and Harderwyck vpon the Zuyderzee, Wageningen vpon the Rhine, Tyel and Bomel vpon the Wahal. There are many townes which in ancient time were walled in, but through diuerſe accidents and diſaſters they are now wholy or in part ſpoiled, & in the
                     •
                  e laſt warres ſome haue bin vtterly ruined: yet as touching that little which remaines they doe ſtill enioy their ancient priuiledges of townes, as Keppel, Burch, Ghendt, Batenburch, Montfort & Eche with others, whereof we will make mention comming to their quarter, with the which there are aboue three hundred villages, hauing ſteeples & the rights of pariſhes. The Eſtates of this Duchie conſiſts vpon three

chiefe members of the Barons, whom they call Vry Heren; of the Nobles whom they call Redderſchap, and of the foure foreſaid chiefe townes▪ which Eſtates ſo farre as they are fallen from the Princes of Auſtria, hold their Colledge in the towne of Arnham, whereas in like manner the Chancerie and the Chamber of accoumpts remaines, as well for the Duchie as the county of Zutphen. Wherefore although it may diſpleaſe Nymegen, as the laſt member added to the Duchy of Gelders, wee will begin with Arnham as the chiefe towne, and deſcribe all the other townes in particular, according to their dignities.
            
            
               Arnham.
               THis towne was in old time called Arnacum, it is a good towne and ſomewhat ſpacious, ſeated vpon the right banke of the riuer of Rhine: halfe a league from the which is Foſſa Druſiana, which is now called Iſſel Dort: whereas Druſus (to keepe his ſoldiers from idleneſſe) cauſed them to begin to dig a channell, which drawing the water out of the Rhine, it fell into a little riuer called Iſſell neere vnto Dousbourg in the countie of Zutphen, the which hee did build, and called it by his owne name, that he might haue a ſhorter paſſage by water to go and make warre againſt the Friſons: which channell or little riuer did ſo increaſe in a ſhort time, as at this day it is growne very great, & is called Iſſel, paſſing before the townes

of Dousbourg, Bronchorſt, Zutphen, Deuenter and Campen, where it falls into the Zuyder ſea. This towne of Arnham is the chiefe of the Eſtate and ſiegneury of the Veluwe, which is one of the foure quarters of the Duchie of Gelders: vnder which towne are the townes of Hattem, Harderwyck, Elbruch & Wageningen, all walled; with many villages▪ burrowes and caſtels, with their iuriſdictions and particular officers, ſubiect to the iuſtice of the Droſſart or Lieutenant generall of that quarter, compaſſed in by the Zuyderzee, the Rhine, and the riuer of Iſſel, for which cauſe fiſh abounds there, and is very good cheape: beſides there is great ſtore of woods, vnder-woods and buſhes, full of game for the pleaſure of hunting. Neere vnto the ſaid towne of Arnham, is an other member of the duchy, called Velwe Zoom, the which extends neer vnto Zutphin on the one ſide, and on the other it reacheth neere to Wageningen: in all which ſoile there are nothing but meades, and very pleaſant and fertile paſtures: which quarter hath a particular officer, which is the Iudge of Arnham, with foure aſſiſtants: and as for the Veluwe the Droſſart hath ten aſſiſtants or councellors whereas hee keepe his courts of pleas. But touching the ſpiritualtie, the towne of Arnham with the whole iuriſdiction, before the troubles was ſubiect to the Biſhoprick of Vtrecht. In this towne the Dukes of Geldres did in former times make their reſidence, and there they were intombed in the great Church before the market place, from

whence they go vnto the Port which leads vnto the riuer of Rhine. The Chancery & the councel of Gelders were eſtabliſhed there by the Emperor Charles the fift in the yeare 1543. when as hee conquered it from William Duke of Cleues, who maintained himſelf to be true and lawfull heire to Charles of Egmont laſt Duke of Gelders, which councell did ſerue as well for the Duchy of Gelders as the County of Zutphen, ioyntly conſiſting of a Chancellor and ten councellors, that is, foure of the Nobility of the foure quarters aboue mentioned, and ſixe Lawiers or others, the which adminiſter Iuſtice with great authority, hauing an Attorney generall, a Regiſter and other Officers, from whoſe ſentence there is no appeale. In which towne the Chamber of accounts was alſo placed by Philip the ſecond King of Spaine and Duke of Geldres, ſucceeding the Emperor Charles his Father in the yeare 1559. whereas all the Officers of Geldres and Zutphen, as well of Iuſtice, as of the treaſure, muſt yeeld an account of their charges and offices. This towne within theſe thirty yeares is wonderfully changed, as well in fortifications and Boulwarks, as otherwiſe: it hath beene often threatned and attempted to be ſurprized by the Spaniſh faction, but it was fruit-leſſe; the which might ſeeme ſtrange, conſidering the eaſie acceſſe they had, when as they held the townes of Deuenter and Zutphen▪
                  
               
            
            
               
               Nymegen.
               IT is a free towne and a fee of the Empire, of ancient foundation: Of the which we read that Magus King of Gaule, the Sonne of Dis, had beene the firſt founder, who called it Maga, by his owne name: And that afterwards Batto King of the Catthes (as we will ſhew more amply in the deſcription of Holland) comming into that quarter, pleaſing himſelfe in the ſcituation, and in the remarkable antiquity, cauſed it to be repaired, and did both amplefie and fortefie it with new walls, wherevpon it was called Nouiomagum the which in the country ſpeech, anſweres to Nyenmegen, vnleſſe that in fauoring the little town of Megen ſeated vpon the riuer of Meuſe, prefering it in antiquity, we will maintaine that Nymegen hath beene built ſince vpon the riuer of Wahal, by the ſame Magus, or his ſucceſſor▪ the which I leaue doubtfull. Heſſel Sonne to Batto fauored this towne of Nymeghen, for that he was borne there, and did ſo inlarge it, as the lower part of the towne is called Heſſel-marckt vnto this day. Among all the ſingularities and antiquities of this towne the caſtle is yet ſtanding, vpon the toppe of a little hill, and ouer lookes the towne, the which ſome affirme was built and re-edefied by Iulius Caeſar, to diſcouer the Country there-aboutes, and to commaund it;

Neither is there any place in all that quarter to be found, which yeelds ſo goodly a proſpect of the country, riuers, townes and villages, as this Fort doth, the which vnto this day they call Des Wallicks Hoff, which is as much to ſay, as the Gaules Court, the which is a probable argument, that Magus or ſome other of the Gaules haue built it. They haue found in this towne & about it within few yeares, memories of the Romans antiquity, as medals and goodly ſtones of ſumptuous buildings and ſepulchers, with inſcriptions and Epitaphes of ſome Captaines & famous men. There are alſo many ruines of the Romaines time along the riuer of Wahal, where as ſome thinke they planted their campe, and placed their garriſons: ſo as the paſſage which is neere vnto the towne, is at this day called in the country language Roomſche Vort, which ſignifieth a Romaine Fort. So as they haue found great ſtones in the wall of the chiefe Port, which they call Heſſell-Port, whereas theſe words are grauen; H
                        •
                     c pes Romani Imperii: Here is the foote of the Romaine Empire. And on the other ſide; Hic finis regni Stauriae, Here is the end of the command of Staurius, whereof we will ſpeake here-after in the deſcription of Friſland. There was alſo found in St. Stephens church-yard a great ſtone, on the which theſe verſes were grauen.
               
                  Anno milleno poſtquam ſalus est data ſaeclo,
                  Centeno iuncto quinguageno, quoque quinto,
                  
                     
                     Caeſar in orbe ſitus, Fredericus pacis amicus
                  Lapſum, confractum, vetus, in nihil ante redactum
                  Arte, nitore pari reparauit opus Neomagi,
                  
                     Iulius in primo tamen extitit eius origo
                  Impar pacifico reparateri Frederico.
                  
                  Twelue hundred years (wanting but forty fiue)
                  After Saluation did appeare to men,
                  
                     Frederick (then peacefull Emperor) did reuiue
                  The Priſtine fame of ruin'd Nymegen,
                  
                  
                     Iulius did build it long before; as then,
                  His firſt foundations ſtood; but farre vnlike
                  To the repaires of peacefull Frederick.
                  
               
               This was when as the Emperor Frederick cauſed the old ruines to be repaired. Vnder this towne are comprehended (as making one quarter of the Dutchie of Gelders) the townes of Bomel and Tyel which are walled in, and Ghendt which lyes open, but yet it enioyes the priuiledges of a towne. The iuriſdictions are firſt that of the Bourgraue, that is to ſay, the Vicont of Nymegen, & of the officers of the ſaid two townes, and of Bomelweerd: then that of the higher and lower Betuwe, and afterwards they that lye betwixt the riuers of Wahal and Meuſe. In the yeare 1248. this towne came vnder the ſubiection of the Princes of Gelders by the meanes which follow. Otto Earle of Gelders did lend vnto William King of the Romanes, Earle of Holland, Zeeland, &c. the ſumme of 21000. markes of pure ſiluer, vpon condition, that if within a certaine time limited, hee did not pay

the ſayd ſumme, hee ſhould inioy the ſayd Towne with the iuriſdiction as his owne proper inheritance. The which the Emperor Rodolphus did continue ſince, & did augment the conditions for the Earles aduantage. And withall the ſaid money was not ſatisfied: whether it were through the negligence of the Princes of the Empire, or that they had not meanes to pay it; wherby the Vicontie and Seigneury of Nymeghen hath remained incorporated vpon certain conditions to the Duchy of Gelders, retaining the iuriſdiction, ſoueraignty and prerogatiue to coyne money, as an Imperiall Towne. In the yeare 1589. Collonell Martin Schencke of Nydeck, made an vnfortunate enterprize vppon the towne, who retyring vnto his boate beeing ouerladen, it ſunke and he was drownd: Since the vnited Eſtates hauing built a mighty fort called Knotſenbourg on the other banke of the Riuer of Wahal, oppoſite vnto the Towne, the which did hinder their nauigation and much anoy them with their Canon, the townſe-men did preſſe the Duke of Parma to free them from this Fort, and to beſeege it: But Prince Maurice comming thether out of Frieſeland, and hauing defeated ſome of the Dukes men, hee was forced to raize his ſeege, and to retyre with his Army into Brabant, he him-ſelfe going to the Spaw: The Prince ſeeing him retyred, made haſte to beſeege the ſayd towne, which he ſoone forced to yeeld vnto

the vnited Eſtates. In the yeare 1592. vnder whoſe obedience it hath euer ſince continued.
            
            
               Ruermond.
               IT is a reaſonable good towne, ſeated vpon the Riuer of Meuze, ioyning to the mouth of that of Ruoer, For Mondt in the duch tongue ſignifies mouth or entrance, and ſo of that word and of Ruer the name of this towne is compounded, as many others are found in the Netherlands of the like definitions, as Dendermond in Flanders, Iſſelmond in Holland and others: in Latin it is called Ruremunda, fiue leagues from Maiſtricht▪
                   & three from Venloo: A towne well peopled, rich & well built, ſtrong both by nature and by art of fortifications of rampars and bulwarkes. It is one of the foure chiefe Townes of Gelders, chiefe of one of the quarters, vnder whoſe Iuriſdictiō are comprehended the Townes of Venlo, Gelder, Stralen Wachtendonck and Er
                        •
                     kelans, al walled and ſtrong, with three ſmall Bouroughes, Montfort, Vucht and Nyeuſtadt, one a league diſtant from another, which are vnder the Iudges and Officers of the ſaid townes, as alſo they of Keſſel, Middeler and Creykenbeeck. Within ſixty yeares this town was appointed to be the Biſhops Sea for the whole Duchy of Gelders: And there are at this day more Prieſtes and Monkes in i
                     •
                   then in any other Towne in the Country. They haue had their

ſhare of troubles in theſe laſt warres, but not in ſo great a meaſure as many others.
               A good league from Ruremond is the goodly Village of Keſſell, with a ſtrong Caſtle built vpon a Mountaine, belonging to a priuate Lord, from which Village there is a little Angle of the Country, called Landt-van-Keſſell, which is of the demaines of the Duchie. This place of Keſſell was ſometimes a towne of great importance, the which Ptolomey calleth Caſtelleum, & makes it the Metropolitaine of the Menapians. This towne of Ruremond with the whole Iuriſdiction, is at this day ſubiect to the Princes of Auſtria.
               
            
            
               Venloo.
               IT is vppon the right banke of the riuer of Meuſe, three leagues from Ruremond and halfe a league from Stralen, it is a good and a ſtrong Towne, the people are martiall and giuen to Armes, and hath in former times reſiſted an Imperiall Armie. And although it hath often had garriſons of VVallons, Germaines, Spaniards and Italiens, yet they haue alwaies found meanes to free them-ſelues by ſome deuice, and to ſette the garriſon at diuiſion one againſt an other, the Citizens fortefying one of the parties, and chaſing away the other; then finding them ſtrong ynough for that which remained and which had fauoured them, they expelled them alſo; as it hapned

in the yeare 1578. to the Seignior of Eſſtournelles, and in the yeare, 1591. to Otto Bentinck their Gouernor: remaning notwithſtanding alwaies faithfull to the Princes of Auſtria, to whom they knew wel how to excuſe them-ſelues. In the yeare 1601. Prince Maurice made a gallant enterprize vpon the ſaid Towne; but beeing ill ſeconded, the Burgers hauing taken armes and recouered their Ports, it ſucceeded not; ſo as he was forced to retyre, with the loſſe of two of his Captaines. In this Towne VVilliam Duke of Cleues, hauing loſt all his Duchy and a good part of Iuilliers and Cleues, came in the yeare 1543. and ſubmitted him-ſelfe to the mercy of the Emperor Charles the fift, where he was receiued into grace, renouncing the league which hee had with the French and marrying the daughter of Ferdinand King of the Romaines the Emperors brother, & abſolutely renounced al his intereſt to the Duchy of Gelders, as we haue ſhewed more amply in another place.
            
            
               Guelder.
               THe Towne of Gelder is (as we haue ſaid▪) that which hath giuen the name to the whole Ducthy, being within two ſmal leagues of Stralen it hath a Caſtle which was wont to be without the towne▪ but now it is comprehended within the fortification. This was wont to be the

Court of the Lords of Pont, Aduocats, and afterwards Earles of Gelders: it is deuided into two habitations, ſeperated by a water, vppon the which there is a bridge, which giues acceſſe from one to the other, ſeated in a country ſome-what Mooriſh, and not very acceſſible to plant the Canon. This towne in the beginning of the laſt troubles, was vnder the obedience of the vnited eſtates. But the Earle of Leceſter Lieutenant to the Queen of England, Protectreſſe of the vnion, hauing placed Collonel patton a Scottiſhman for Gouernor there, hee ſold it for thirtie thouſand crownes in ready money to the duke of Parma, in the King of Spaines name, retaining to him-ſelf the horſes and moueables of Collonel Schenck, and the ranſomes of ſome of the ritcheſt and beſt Cittizens. And ſo this towne returned vnder the power of the Princes of Auſtria, as it is yet at this day.
            
            
               Stralen.
               THis towne is but a league and a halfe from Wachtendonck, a ſmall towne, but ſufficiently fortified for the importance thereof, beeing too neere to Venlo, in the which the Princes of Austria intertaine an ordinary garriſon vnder ſome Gouernor or Captaine whome they place there.
            
            
               
               Wachtendonch.
               IS alſo a ſmall Towne with a Caſtle belonging to a priuate Lord: the which in the yeare 1588. holding the party of the vnited Eſtates, the duke of Parma after that hee had fayled at the ſeege of Berghen vp Zoom, ſent Cont Charles of Manſfeldt to beſeege it, where in the end hee forced them to yeeld. In the yeare 1600. Cont Lodowike of Naſſau ſurprized it for the vnited Eſtates. After which the garriſon of Gelders, Stralen and others thereabouts ſurprized it againe, but not able to take the Caſtle, they were forced to abandon it: So as in the yeare 1605. the Marquis Spinola went and beſeeged it, who receiued it by compoſition for the Arch-Dukes of Auſtria.
               
            
            
               Erchelens.
               SOme will ſay that this towne hath taken his name of Hercules Allemanicus: It is ſituated vpon the fronters of the Duchy of Iuilliers foure leagues from Ruremond, it is a reaſonable good towne, obedient with the like garriſon vnto the Princes of Auſtria. But lette vs now come vnto the townes which are ſeated as wel vpon Zuyderzee, as vpon the riuers of Rhyne, Wahal, Meuze and Iſſell. Firſt,
            
            
               
               Echt
               IT is a league from the Meuze, and as far from Montfort, on the ſide of that goodly Wood which they call Echterwout.
               
            
            
               Montfort.
               IT is a Caſtle of importance, the which was in ancient time a ſmal towne: it lies a league from Ruermond.
               
            
            
               Harderwick.
               IT is a an indifferent good towne lying vppon the Zuyderzee: yet the hauen is bad, ſo as the ſhippes are forced to lye in the Road: Notwithſtanding Charles Duke of Gelders, ſending fiue ſhippes well manned with ſoldiers out of that towne, thought to ſurprize the Towne of Horne in Weſt-Freezeland, whereof he fayled. In the yeare 1503. this towne was by chance ſette on fire, the which was ſo violent, as in leſſe then three houres it was all conſumed to aſhes, except fiue or ſixe houſes, with the loſſe of all their goods, and the death of many perſons which were ſurprized by the fire, or ſmothered vnder the ruynes of the houſes and walles the which was a fearefull and pittyfull ſight.

Since it hath beene in a ſhort time new built, and made more beautifull and ſtronger then before. There are ſome rich and ciuil people in it: The Magiſtrate intertaines a good Schoole there: It hath not much taſted of the miſeries of theſe laſt warres: ſometime it hath maintained a ſmall garriſon of horſe and foote, without any great charge vnto them.
            
            
               Elburgh.
               IT lyes vppon the Zuyderzee like vnto Harderwick, from the which it is diſtant two good leagues, and as much from the Towne of Campen in Oueryſſell It is a little town of ſmal trafficke, but yet good cheap to liue in, and hath during theſe warres followed the ſame party that Harderwick. did
            
            
               Hattem.
               WAs in ancient time a good towne, though none of the greateſt, ſeated vppon the left banke of the riuer of Yſſell. There is a goodly ſtrong Caſtle, which hath taſted of the miſeries of theſe laſt warres, for the Droſſart or Lieutenant of the Country thinking to deliuer it into the Spaniards handes, being diſcouered, they thought to make it good in this Caſtle,

wheras the Eſtates beſeeged them, and the Caſtle was ſo battered and torne with the canon (wherof the marks are yet to bee ſeene) as they were forced and carryed priſoners to Arnham whereas they loſt their heads.
            
            
               Wagheninghen.
               IS a ſmall ancient ſtrong towne, and is the very ſame which Cornelius Tacitus called Vada, as to ſpeake the truth it ma
                     •
                   properly be ſo called, being in a manner compaſſed in of all ſides with moores and bogs, which makes it in-acceſſible on thoſe parts, it lies not far from the riuer of Rhyne, beeing of an equall diſtance from the townes of Arnham and Nymeghen, and foure leagues from Culenbourg.
               
            
            
               Tyel.
               THis Towne is the chiefe place of the Iuriſdiction or Bayliwick which they call Tyelerweerd, the which was wont to be a Peninſula: But ſince theſe laſt warres Derick-vick Seignior of Soulen Bailiffe of the town and iuriſdiction, hath cauſed a chanell to be cutte through the Countrie to ſayle from the riuer of Meuze into the Wahal vppon the right banke wherof the ſaid towne is built 
                     •
                   by which meanes the ſaid Tyelweerd is now made an Iland, for that there is no

entrance into it but by water, or through the towne: It is ſtrong by nature and by art, through the dilligence of the ſaid Amptman or Bailyffe, who ſince the laſt troubles hath made ſharp wars againſt the Spaniards, by the meanes of that garriſon: In the yeare 1528. holding the party of Charles Duke of Gelders their Prince, the Burguignons beſeeged it in the Emperors name, but it was ſo well defended, as they were forced to raiſe their ſeege, to the great honour of the Inhabitants, and the few ſoldiers that were within it.
            
            
               Bommel.
               IT is a faire ſtrong place, the cheefe towne of all the Territory of Bommell-weerd, which the Rhyne and Meuze doe compaſſe in, making it an Iland, the which they ſay was called by Caeſar, Inſula Batauorum (if it extend no farther) the which wee may ſay is now the higher and lower Betuwe, on the other banke of the riuer of Ryne, as farre as Tyel, and beyond to Haerwerden, where at this preſent is the mighty fort of Saint Andrew (whereof wee will preſently make mention) whereas the Wahal and the Meuze kiſſing as the paſſe, ioyne together at Loueſtein at the end of the ſaid Bomelſ-weerd in one body, the which ſoone after from Gorrichom takes the name of Meruve, vntill that

hauing paſt Dordrecht, it reſumes his name of Meuze, and beneath Bryell runnes into the Brittiſh Seas.
               In this Iland there are many fayre Villages and Caſtles, among others Roſſem, whereas Martin van Roſsem Seign ior of Puydroyen was borne; a famous Captaine in his time, hauing beene Marſhall of the field to the Duke Charles of Gelders and William of Cleues, who in the yeare of our Lord, 1534. did terrifie the Towne of Antwerp, and thinking to doe the like to them of Lovuain was forced to retyre.
               In the yeare of our Lord 1598. Arch-Duke Albert of Austria beeing gone into Spaine to fetch his ſpouſe, the Infanta Iſabella, daughter to King Philip the ſecond, and ſiſter to King Philip the third now raigning; left (during his abſence) Cardinal Andrew of Auſtria to gouerne the Netherlands, which were giuen in marriage to the ſayd Iſabella, and Don Franciſco de Mendoza Admirall of Arragon, for generall of his armie: the which hee ſent vnto the frontiers of Germanie to make warre againſt the vnited Eſtates that way, where hauing done what hee liſted, and taken from the Eſtates by ſeege the townes of Rhynberch and Deutecom, and then the Fort of Creuecaeur, hee paſt to the ſaid Iland of Bommell, with an intent to beſeege the towne, the which by reaſon of their workes at the

fortification lay halfe open. The which Prince Maurice vnderſtanding, he poſted thether with all ſpeed, and aſſured it with his preſence and forces, cauſing a trench to bee caſt without the towne, from one ſide of the riuer vnto the other, whereas hee lodged the greateſt part of his Army, where-vppon the Admirall ſeeing there was no way to force them, hee retired farther into the Iland buſiyng him-ſelfe about the building of Saint Andrewes Fort, ſo as the towne of Bommel was freed.
               In this towne was borne that learned man Elbert Leoninus, Doctor of the Lawes▪ who dyed in the yeare 1601. being Chancellor of Gelders and deputy for the general Eſtates of the vnited Prouinces, being aboue 80. years old: he was ſōtimes Tutor to the Prince of Orange which now liueth.
            
            
               S. Andrew.
               
               THis Fort was ſo named by Andrew of Auſtria Cardinal of Conſtance, being Gouernor of the Netherlands (as wee haue ſaid) in the abſence of the Arch-duke Albert. It is the mightieſt fort that hath bin made in al the Netherlands, for the building whereof the Admirall of Arragon diſfurniſhed the whole Iland of trees: It is comprehended in fiue Bulwarks, after the forme of the Cittadel of Antwerp, wherof three are vppon the bankes of Meuze and Wahal, and the two others

towards Haerwerden, either of them hauing a caualier or plat-forme to defend it, with broad and deepe ditches, without the which is a counterſcarpe, the which hath alſo a ditch round about it▪ and ſmall forts to warrant it, eſpecially wheras theſe two riuers imbrace one an other, towards Tyler-weerd, whereas the Fort of Naſſau is ſet oppoſite to that of Saint Andrew, in a corner, which is alſo made an Iſland by art, beeing called Voorne, and is held by the Eſtates: which two Forts did daily ſalute one an other with their Ordinance. The Admirall hauing fyniſhed this Fort thinking thereby to keepe the riuers of Wahal and Meuſe and the whole Iſland in ſubiection, left a garriſon of 1500. men in it, with ſtore of artillerie and munition, and then retired with his army to refreſh it in Brabant. But Prince Maurice did not diſſolue his armie, but kept it togither all the winter, as well in the towne of Bommel, as in the trenches and ſhips which he had lying by: The ſpring time beeing come, hauing recouered the Fort of Creuecaeur, he went to beſeege that of Saint Andrew, the which through want of victualls, was yeelded vnto him, with all the artillery and munition, the ſouldiers being about 1100. and ſome 400. out of Creuecaeur remained in the Princes ſeruice, who afterwards at the battaile of Nieuport ſhewed themſelues both valiant and faithfull. And ſo this Fort of Saint Andrew hath vnto

this day remained vnder the obedience of the vnited Eſtates.
            
            
               Culembourg.
               ALthough this towne be a fee of Gueldres, yet there is a queſtion made whether it bee of that territory. It is ſcituaed vpon the left banke of the riuer of Lecke, a league from Buren, & two leagues from Vianen, on the ſame ſide of the riuer. It hath a goodly caſtle, whereas the Lord doth ordinarily reſide, and a large iuriſdiction, wherevpon King Philippe the ſecond erected it to an Earldome, whereof Florent of Palant was the firſt Earle, beſides many other great poſſeſſions which hee enioyed, whereof his ſonne is now Lord and Earle.
            
            
               Battenbourg.
               ALthough this towne (at this preſent ruined) and the caſtle, bee within the limmits of the Duchy of Geldres, ſeated vpon the banke of the riuer of Meuſe, whereby the Barron of that place makes a great reuenew of the toule and cuſtome which is paied by all the ſhips that paſſe that way: yet the ſaid ſigneury is merely held of the Empire, as William of Bronchurſt did take it vppe of Maximilliam the Emperour: His Sonne ſucceeded him, and dying without heires,

                  Maximillian of Bronckhurſt his couſin Germaine did inherit, and is now Lord of it. This place is of very great antiquity. The Chronicles of Holland affirme, that it was the firſt Caſtle which Prince Battus (of whome Batauia or Holland tooke his name) did build vppon the Meuze in the Countie of Sicambrians, which now is Gelders.
               
            
            
               Buren.
               THis Towne is neither a fee, nor of the territory of Gelders, but a little country of it ſelfe, which holdes of the Empire, carrying the title of an Earle with great Iuriſdiction, a large territory and many Villages, and yet ſhut vp in the lymits of the Duchy of Gelders.
               
               This place is ſeated neere vnto the riuer of Lingen, vppon a little Brooke which in old time was called the ditch for muſcles, a league from Tyl; it is not very bigge, but hath a very ſtrong Caſtle ioyning vnto it, where there is an ordinary garriſon for the vnited Eſtates. That valiant and famous Prince Maximilian of Egmont was Earle of this place, who for his great ſeruices done vnto the Emperor Charles the fift, (whereof diuers hiſtories make mention) left his memory immortail to poſterity: Dying at Bruſſels in the yeare one thouſand four hundred & nine, to whom ſucceeded his only daughter

the ſole heire by her mother of the houſe of Lannoy: Who was the firſt wife of William of Naſſau Prince of Orange, by whom ſhe left a ſon and a daughter, that is Philip William of Naſſau now Prince of Orange, Earle of Buren, Seignior of Lannoy &c. And the Lady Mary of Naſſau widdow to Cont Philip of Hohenlo.
               
               This may ſuffice for the deſcription of the Townes and cheefe Forts comprehended in the Eſtate of the Dutchy of Gelders.
               
               The people of this Prouince are valiant and warlike, from whence they were wont to draw a good part of them at Armes and Archers of the bandes of Ordinance of the Low-countries.
               
               Theſe were the laſt among the Belgick Gaules that ſubmitted them-ſelues to the yoake of the Romane Empire, & the firſt when this Monarchy began to decline, that freed them-ſelues from their ſubiection. Afterwards they were made ſubiect to the French: yet imbracing the occaſion when it it was offered, they did ſhake of this yoak, and began to be gouerned by priuat Lords of the country it ſelfe: the which hapned in the time of the Emperour Chalres the bald King of France: Which Lords were ſimply called Tutors ot Aduocats of the country: The which according o their vertues and merits were choſen & created by the people, the firſt of which was Wrinchard (as we haue ſhewed before)

to whome ſucceeded his ſonne Gerlach in the yeare 910. ſo as there were ſeauen Lords or Feofes ſucceſſiuely iſſued from this familie, the laſt whereof was alſo called Winchard, who left but one daughter called Aleyd or Alix, maryed to Otto Earle of Naſſau: who was the firſt which carryed the title of the Earle of Gelders giuen him by the Emperor Henry the third, in the yeare 1079.
               But the ſayd Aleyd beeing dead hee marryed with the daughter of Gerlach Earle of Zutphen, who was ſlaine in a battaile giuen betwixt Conrard Biſhop of Vtrecht and Thiery the ſixt Earle of Holland. Where-vppon (as wee haue ſayd) the Earldome of Zutphen was alſo vnited vnto the Duchy of Gelders. Otto left theſe Earles after him, Gerrard, Henry, Gerrard & Otto the ſecond, ſurnamed the ſtump-foot. It was he which did purchaſe the Seigneury of Nymeghen, as wee haue ſayd before, which hee did wall in with diuers others, which were but Burroughs, as Ruremond, Arnhem, Harderwicke, Bommel and Wageninghen all in the Prouince of Gelders, and aboue it Goch in the country of Cleues: to the which he gaue goodly priuiledges, as to great Citties.
               To this Otto ſucceeded his ſonne Renald, and to him a ſonne of his owne name, who obtained in the yeare 1329. the dignity and title of Duke of the Emperour Lewis of Bauaria in an imperiall Dyet held at Francfort: As in like manner the

Countie of Iuilliers was by him erected into a Dutchy. After this Reginold the ſecond; Geldres was gouerned by Arnold & Edward his two ſons, but not without great contentions. Both of them dying, Arnold left two daughters of diuers beddes, Ioane and Iſabell, who continued the diuiſion which had beene betwixt their Father and Vncle: but Iſabell dying without children, Ioane remained ſole and peaceable Dutcheſſe, to whom ſucceeded William her ſonne, who was the fourth duke of Geldres, but dying without heires, Reynold his brother the fourth Duke of Iuilliers ſucceeded him, and was the fift Duke of Geldres, who dying without iſſue male, the ſucceſſion went to his only daughter, married to Arnold of Egmond, iſſued from a daughter of the firſt Duke of Geldres, by which meanes the ſayd Arnold came vnto the principality, whoſe Sonne called Adolphe, (who is numbred for the ſeauenth Duke) repyning that his Father liued ſo long, by the perſwaſion of his own Mother, cauſed him to bee ſeazed on in a night, and to bee put in priſon in the caſtle of Buren, where hee detained him many yeares. Pope Paul the ſecond and the Emperour Frederick the third, not able to ſuffer ſo great an impiety, gaue authority to Charles the Warlicke, Duke of Bourgongne to free this miſerable Father by force of armes out of the hands and tyranie of his ſonne: The which Adolph vnderſtanding,

and ſeeing that the Pope and Emperor did imbrace the cauſe, and that he was not able to reſiſt Duke Charles his forces, he drew his father out of priſon, and hauing obtayned a paſport from the Duke, he came vnto him with his father to Dourlans in Picardy: before whome the father caſting his gloue, defied the ſonne: But the Duke who loued this Adolph, labored to perſwade the father to reſigne the Duchy vnto his Sonne, and that being now very old, he ſhould retire to Graue, and content him-ſelfe with that peece and three thouſand florins rent, wherevpon Adolph like an vnnaturall and barbarous ſonne hearing this propoſition made by Duke Charles of Bourgongne, anſwered, that he had rather caſt his father head-long into a wel, and him ſelfe after, then accept of that compoſition.
               That it was reaſon, ſeeing his father had gouerned, forty foure yeares, that he ſhould alſo come in his rancke to the Principality, and enioy it as his father had don. Adding that he was well content his father ſhould haue 3000 florins yerely for his entertainment, but he muſt depart out of the country and ſiegneury of Gelders, and neuer enter more into it: Duke Charles hearing theſe ſpeeches and noting the cruelty of a ſonne towards his father, ſeemed ſo much incenſed thereat, as Adolph fearing his fury, fled in a diſguiſed habit, thinking to ſaue him-ſelfe in Gelders; but beeing knowne, neere vnto Namur hee was taken and put in priſon

at Villevord, & from thence carried to Courtray, where hee remayned till after the death of Duke Charles. In the mean time the father to be reuē
                  ged of his ſon, ſought to diſ-inherit him; reſigning his Duthcy of Gelders & County of Zutphē
                   vnto Duke Charles vppon certaine conditions. By which reſignation the Princes of the houſe of Auſtria haue ſo much pretended vnto the ſayd Dutchy, as in the end after the death of the laſt Duke Charles of Egmont, they haue inioyed it, although by right it ſhould deſcend to VVilliam Duke of Cleues, whome the Emperor forced to yeeld it vnto him. And to return to Adolph he was freed from his priſon at Courtray by the Ganthois, who made him their Generall againſt the Frēch king Lewis the 11. where this vngrateful ſon was ſlaine before Tournay, receiuing the fruits of his deſert, hauing bin ſo cruel to his father. Duke Arnould dying afterwards at Graue, he inſtituted (vpō caution) the ſaid duke of Bourgongne to be his heyre, diſ-inheriting his ſon Adolph of the ſucceſſion, as contumax, ingrat & rebellious: But the Geldrois refuſing to accept of Duke Arnolds diſpoſition & teſtament, the duke of Bourgongne went with a mighty army and by force took poſſeſſion of the country, receiuing their othes of fealty & homage, whervnto he forced the townes & the Nobility of Gelders, And the better to aſſure this new Eſtate he purchaſed from Gerard Duke of Iuilliers and his children,

all the intereſt they had or might hereafter pretend vnto the Duchie of Gelders. This done hee ſent Charles and Philip the ſons of Adolph whome he had by a Princeſſe of the houſe of Bourbon, to be bred vp in Flanders; and by that meanes the Duke of Bourgongne remained in quiet poſſeſſion of the Eſtate of Gelders, and dying left the ſucceſſion to his onely daughter and heyre, who was married to the Emperor Maximillian, but the Geldrois refuſing to obey him, he raiſed a mighty Army, and came to Boiſleduc, where-with the Eſtates of Gelders being terrified, they acknowledged him for their Prince in the right of his wife, and did ſweare obedience vnto him. And ſo Maximillian gotte the quiet poſſeſſion without any effuſion of blood, the which he inioyed vntil that Charles the ſonne of Adolph (who had bene taken priſoner with the Earle of Naſſau in an incounter neere vnto Bethune by the French, and afterwards by reaſon of his Allyance by the mothers ſide, ſet at liberty) with the helpe of the French King and his Kinſmen and friendes, returned into Gelders with a ſmall Army, where without any reſiſtance or difficulty, hee was receiued by the people, as their lawful Prince, and numbred for the eight Duke of Gelders.
               
               This Duke Charles of Egmont was in his time a valiant and warlike Prince: making war againſt all his neighbors, eſpecially againſt Albert duke of Saxony feudatary of Freezland & of Groning:
                  
Gouernor of a part of the Netherlands for the Emperour Maximillian, and the Arch-Duke Philip his ſonne, who marryed the Lady Ioane of Caſtile, and was afterwards Queen of Spaine, after the death of the King Don Ferdinand of Arragon and of Queene Iſſabelle of Caſtile, her father and mother: whereby the Realmes of Spaine came vnto the houſe of Auſtria, and haue continued vnto this day.
               The ſaid Duke had alſo great warre againſt the Lieutenant of the Emperor Charles the fift, ſonne and ſucceſſor to the ſaid Arch-Duke Philip: ſo as in the end there was a peace made betwixt them at Gorcum in the yeare 1528. and afterwards in the yeare 1536. there was an other generall peace made in the Towne of Graue: The conditions whereof were in ſubſtance that Duke Charles of Egmont ſhould hold the Dutchy of Gelders and the County of Zutphen in fee of the Emperor or Duke of Brabant, and Earle of Holland, for him and his lawful heirs: But if hee dyed without iſſue, his Eſtates and Seigneuries ſhould accrue vnto the Emperor and his heirs. This duke died without children in the yeare 1538. And ſo according to the ſaid Accord and tranſaction, and the rights which his great grandfather the Duke of Burgongne had gotten, theſe countries ſhould deſcend vnto the ſaid Emperor: But Iohn Duke of Iuilliers pretending an intereſt by reaſon of their ancient rights,

(renounced and ſold as we haue ſayd by his Anceſtors) was not receiued by the Eſtates, ſo that after the death of Duke Charles of Egmont the Cleuois had laboured to draw ſome by loue and others by force vnder the ſubiection of the King, and to make them his vaſſals, where-vppon they tooke armes againſt him. And worſhipping the ſunne riſing more then the ſunne ſeting, neglecting the old Duke, they did choſe and receiue his ſonne William, who was made ſure to the daughter of the Duke of Albret and heire to the Crowne of Nauarre: which election was confirmed and better eſtabliſhed in the yeare of our Lord 1539. by the death of the ſaid Duke Iohn: at which time neither the Emperors title nor authority could preuaile any thing to make him to be acknowledged Lord of this Prouince. But this was not all, for the Emperor being in Spaine, his countries were ſodainly inuaded by the French King and this Duke William: Where-vppon the Emperour beeing returned from his laſt vnfortunate voyage of Affricke, hee went into the Netherlands with a mighty army, and ſodainly ſubdued in a a manner all the townes of the Dutchy of Cleues and Iuilliers, and among others thoſe of Duren & Sittant. Where-with Duke William being amazed, and fearing this mighty enemy, by the perſwaſion of the Princes of Germany, his Allies, he went and humbled him-ſelfe vnto the Emperor

in the towne of Venlo, to whom he was reconciled, yeelding abſolutely vnto him the ſaid Dutchy of Gelders and Earldome of Zutphen, renouncing alſo the league which hee had with the French King and his pretended marriage with Ioane of Albret Princeſſe of Nauarre, and marrying with the daughter of Ferdinand King of Romanes, the Emperors Brother. In conſideration wherof all his other Countries which the Emperors men had taken from him were reſtored againe. To which Accord the Eſtates of Gelders did willingly conſent, vpon certain e conditions conteyned in their pattent. And ſo Gelders and Zutphen returned againe to the houſe of Auſtria vnder the Emperor Charles the fift in the yeare 1543. and in the yeare 1549. there was receiued for Prince and homage done vnto Philip of Auſtria Prince of Spaine, the only ſon vnto the Emperour, as future and lawfull Lord of the ſaid Duchy & Earldome: who gaue the gouernmēnt thereof vnto Charles of Brunen Earle of Meghen. Vntill that in theſe laſt wars the ſaid Prouinces hauing entred into the general vnion of the Netherlands▪
                   by the pacification of Gandt they haue (notwithſtanding the diſ-vnion of them of Arthois, Henau
                        •
                     t and others) continued alwaies conſtant in the ſaid vnion, and ſo remaine at this preſent, hauing taſted the bitter fruites of the ſaid wars, as the hiſtorie of the Netherlands makes mention.
            
            
               
               The Earldome of Holland and of VVeſt-Frieſland.
               
               BEfore I vndertake to deſcribe Batauia (which is now called Holland) in old time the mother of good horſemen, and the miſtreſſe of martiall diſcipline, not tributary, but companions and allyes to the people of Rome, I thinke it fit in the relating the originall of the nation to make a repetition of that which hath bin collected of their antiquity by anciēt records, & redeeming them from forgettfulneſſe to reſtore them to their ancient glory and honour. To which effect as I hold it very abſurd to abuſe the reader with fables and lyes, ſo will I not altogether reiect that which hath beene deliuered by our Anceſtors. I know that the curious reader affects new things more then ancient, the memory wherof is almoſt extinct: but I will intreat them to giue mee leaue to remember the honour which the Batauians haue purchaſed by armes, regiſtred by al ancient writers, whereof we wil preſently make mention.
               Firſt of all it is well knowne that the Batauians are originally deſcended from the Cattes a people of Germany, whoe driuen from their natiue ſoyle by inteſtine diſſentions, hauing paſt the Rhyne ſought a new habitation, and ceazing vppon the borders of Belgia which were

inhabited, they planted them-ſelues in the Iland which the Rhyne doth enuirō. The which Tacitus a Knight and a faithfull Romaine writer doth witneſſe in his booke which hee hath written of the manners of the Germains. Omnium (ſaith hee) harum gentium virtute precipui Bataui, non multum ex
                        •
                     ripa, ſed inſulam Rheni amnis incolunt, Cattorū 
                  quondam populus, et ſeditione domeſtica in eas ſedes tranſgreſſus, in quibus pars Romani Imperii fuerūt: manet honos & antiquae ſocietatis inſigne &c. That is to ſay: of al the natiōs (meaning the Germaines) the Batauian are the moſt valiant not farre from the bankes, but inhabiting of the Iland of the riuer of Rhyne.
               
               
                  In ancient time a people of the Cattes, and by their ciuill diſſentions tranſported into theſe parts to make a portion of the Romaine Empire, they yet inioy the honour thereof. Bataui donec trans Rhenum agebant pars Cattorum, ſeditione domeſtica pulſi extrema Gallicae orae vacua cultoribus ſimul
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   inſulam inter vada ſitam occupauere: quam mare Oceanum a fronte, Rhenus amnis tergum ac latera circumluit.
               The Batauians whilſt they remained beyond the Rhyne were a part of the Cattes, chaſed away by Ciuill diſſentions, planted them-ſelues vppon the extremities of the Gauliſh fronters In an Iland lying among the mariſhes hauing the Ocean Sea in Front, and the Riuer of Rhyne behinde and on either ſide. By theſe

words wee are taught that the Battauians muſt fetch their firſt beginning from the Catthes; but it is queſtionable in what part of Germany the Catthes did dwell; for Iohn Stella who hath written the Philippi peregrination, ſayth, that they did reſide at Heidelberg, Heilbrunen and the Othonian foreſt. Schonerus the Mathematician makes them Saxons: Marlianus ſends them to the foreſt of Hongary, Irenicus will haue then Turingians, all which opinions are full of obſcure errors. But Stella flying a heigher pitch like vnto Icarus, one error drawing on an other, makes the Viſipiens to be neighbors vnto the Catthes, aſſigning thoſe of Fancford and Conflens, euen vnto the riuer of Moſelle whereas it falls into the Rhine. Hee affirmes more-ouer that the Teucteres neighbors to the Catthes now called a part of Heſsen, remayning along the riuers of Laue and Lippe. For my part I hold them to be of Heſſe, with the which many learned writers doe concurre, for Tacitus doth make them to bee neighbors to the Cheruſques (which are the people of Lunebourg) and to the Hermodures, which were they of Miſnia, beginning their iuriſdictions from the forreſt Hircinia: whereof the riuer Sala is a good witneſſe for the enioying whereof the Catthes were in continuall quarrell againſt the Hermodures, which diuiding the

Biſhopricke of Naumburg and Merſpurg falls into the riuer of Elbe limiting in old time the Signieury of the Cattes. The riuer of Eder is alſo a witneſſe running through the country of the Cattes, which (as the ſame author doth report) the yong men of the Cattes did ſwim through when as Caeſar Germanicus did charge them ſodenly. This riuer falls into that of Fulda, vpon whoſe banke Battenburg is ſeated, from whence we may coniecture that our Batto, or at the leaſt they of the houſe of Battenburg are iſſued. The which alſo they of Catſenellebogen doe teſtefie, hauing a Caſtle vpon the banks of theriuer of Rhine of that name, ſhewing the antiquitie of the name of the Cattes Meliboces: In the countrie of Heſſen, wee haue alſo for reliks of this nation two villages of the Cattes, the one vpon the ſea, called Catwyck vp Zee, and the other neere vnto the village of Rinſburg called Catwycke vppon the Rhine, both of them of the iuriſdiction of Holland; and Cattes a towne of Zeeland, which ſome ſeuenty yeares paſt was drowned, And ſince, with Cortgeen and the ile of Northbeueland (an Iſland of Zeeland) within this ten yeares recouered from the ſea. There are ſome that affirme that the cauſe why the Cattes remooued from the place of their birth was, for that they loſt a battayle againſt the Hermodures, being in continuall quarrell for their ſalt, which (as we haue ſaid before) was made of the water of the riuer of Sala,
                  
whereby the Hermodures became more puiſſant; but I hold it a detraction from the Batauian honour for that they by the aſſiſtance of the Romans hauing obtained a great victory, conſtrained the Cattes to change their place, and to come to inhabit this Iland of the Rhyne. For which cauſe the Cattes may with great reaſon bee ſaid to bee the beginning andfirſt Fathers of the Batauians, or Hollanders. A people renowned for their ſkill in warre, Cornelius Tacitus attributing much to their induſtry and dexterity in the diſpoſing of an armie, and alſo in obeying their Commaunders, to take or put of the combat as it ſhould be thought fit; of great courage, firme and hard bodies, wel lymmed, of a fierce and menacing aſpect, fearefull for the horrible length of their beardes and hayre, which faſhion and countenance hee ſaith was not lawfull for them to leaue off, or change although they had brought victory from their enemies.
               Some ſay that Batto iſſued from the royall bloud of the Cattes, was moued to change his naturall abode to a new one, not for the deſire hee had to finde a better or more fertile country, or in regard of too great a multitude of people (which are the two maine occaſions that nations remoue their ancient habitations) but that his ſtep-mother laid diuers ambuſhes for him, and fearing to bee poyſoned (beeing at oddes with her) his father conſenting thereto,

or at leaſt not oppoſing it: By reaſon whereof, what with the ſplendor of his heroicall vertues, his gratious and amiable carryage, and his condition truly royall, hee drew vnto him a good part of the Nobility, and a great number of the people, who beeing out of hope of better times followed him willingly; and by the councell of the King of Tongres (his good father) hee addreſt him-ſelfe to the confines of Belgiae there to inhabit: and hauing paſt the Rhyne, not farre from the riuers of VVahal and of Meuze, hee happily built the Caſtle of Battengbourgh vppon the riuer of Meuze, which hauing paſt at the parting of the Rhyne, where the VVahal retyres and takes his courſe apart, hee inioyed all the whole circuit, euen to the Ocean Sea, parting the land amongſt the Nobles and common people ſo that of his name it was called Battauia, which ſignifies nothing elſe but the heritage of Batto, as if one ſhould ſay Batous Haue, for Haue in the old Dutch, and yet at this preſent ſignifies heritage: So that then this Prouince hath taken his name and that lawfully, from a Prince, the ſon of a King: al which is witneſſed by diuers authors, amongſt whom the moſt worthy of beleefe is Cornelius Tacitus, a Romaine Knight, a rare writer of the Story of Auguſtus, and Commiſſary for Gaule Belgique, who makes mention of Claudius Ciuilis deſcended from Batto, iſſued from a royal branch of the Batauians or Hollanders.
               
               
                  
Here you may ſee that Plyny, not without great reaſon, called this Iſle the moſt noble Iſle of Batto: The which name of Batto hath heretofore ſpread it ſelfe very far amongſt the Allemans and Dalmatians, and Dion a Romaine Hiſtoriographer makes mention of two Battoes; the firſt Batto duke of Bruces (which is a part of Pannonia, which I now hold to be the country of Pruſſia confining Poland & Hungary:) the other Batto Deſidiate, who ſtirred vp the Dalmatians (beeing too much exacted vpon by impoſitions) to take armes againſt the Romanes, to whom hee gaue many affronts. The ſame Dion reports in his 55. & 56. booke a memorable anſwere that the ſaid Battus gaue Tyberius Caeſar, who demaunding of him why he had ſtirred vp the people to ſo long and bloody a war? Anſwered that the Romāes thē-ſelues were cauſe, in that they had ſent them wolues for their gardiens, not dogs & ſheapheards. But as it commonly happens amongſt theſe barbarous natiōs, through the weaknes or ignorāce of the men of thoſe times, wee haue nothing left vs whereby wee may know who were the kinſmen or ſucceſſors to this Batto of Holland; ſo that we know not any thing for certaine of their cuſtomes or manner of liuing, but that Tacitus hath toucht at thē, as if it were in paſſing by, and that breefly. Some ſay that this Batto re-edefied the Caſtle of Nymeghen, and compaſt the town with wals, & that he being dead his ſon Heſus augmented it by adding therto that quarter which is called Heſelbergh, or

the hil of Heſus. The which town the Kings that ſucceeded after him cauſed to be the metropolitaine of Batauia or Holland, and their ſeege royal. Al which Gerard of Nymeghen recites, affirming that he had drawn them from the commentaries of Princes. Strabo the Geographer makes mention of one Peremire king of the Batauians, who had a daughter called Rhamis, married to the ſon of Siquier Duke of the Cheruſques, who afterwards was led in triumph to Rome by Germanicus Caeſar. I haue not known any man that hath writ how great the limits were, or how far the inheritance of Batto extended; ſome haue made it too little, in taking away a great part from it; wherefore I wil aſſigne him his confines to a haire (as it were) to remaine firme and ſtable for euer.
               
                  Batauia then which I cal the antient, took heretofore his beginning from the ſeparation of the Rhyne at the caſtle of Lober, & was incloſ'd on one ſide with that which we properly call the Rhyne, (which had wont to fal neer unto Catwick into the Brittiſh Ocean, which gulph is now choakt vp, as wee will ſhew hereafter) and the Wahal, from whence falling again into the Merwe, and from thence into that which we cal the Meuze, paſſing by Bryel renders him▪ſelf into the ſame Sea: In which cōpaſſe and circuit of the Rhyne ther are a great number of Townes, and to beginne aboue, firſt, Hueſſen, Tyell, Buiren, Wickterduirſted, Vtrecht, Viane▪ Culembourg, Aſpeney, Hen
                        •
                     
                     l
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ Leerdan, Iſelſteyne, Montfort, VVoerden

Oudewater, Gorcum, Wandrichom, Schoonhouen, Dordrecht, Goud, Leyden, Delft, Rotterdam, Schiedā
                   and the Bryell. I will not meddle with Nieuport right ouer againſt Schoonhouen and Haesrecht; for that by their ruines other townes haue beene augmented. If any oppoſe to the deſignements of the limits, ſaying that the Betuwe (which is a part of the Dutchy of Gelderland) is that which properly ought to bee called Batauia: I will ſend him to the iudge and principall defender of the cauſe, Ptolomeus of Alexandria, who puts Lugodunum (which is Leyden) amongſt the Batautans, where hee ſayes expreſly 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Lugodunum Battauorum, which is a Towne diſtant foure thouſand paces from thence. What will this controuler ſay of Caeſars meaſuring of it, who reckons it to bee fourſcore thouſand paces after it parts from the Rhyne before it enters into the Sea; between which two riuers hee cannot deny but that the Batauian Iſle is incloſed: Tacitus him-ſelfe ends it at the Meuze, from whence it deſcends to the Sea. This inheritance of Battus which I willingly cal the old Batauia, for that certaine hundreths of years after his death Druſus, of two branches or gulphs made three, the 3. falling into the middle ſea cōmonly called Zuyderzee firſt paſſing by Campen in the country of Oueryſſell, amplifying thereby the territory of Batauia: the which he did to excerciſe his army to preuent idleneſſe in

them; beginning at Iſeloort, which brāch is called the riuer of Iſell; it ſeemes alſo that he gaue them an other Iſle of the Rhyne more large and ſpatious which we may cal a new Batauia. To expres this name, al that is comprized between the gulphes of the Flye▪
                   the old Rheyne and the Meuze, render them-ſelues into the Brittiſh ſea, the firmneſſe of this middle gulph of the Rheyne being the cauſe hat al this land holds together. The which (by reaſon of the continual ditches or downes made to reſiſt the rage of the Sea) ſeperates Batauia from Freezland. Pomponius Mela the Geographer calls it a great Lake, which is not ſo vntil the flowing of the Ocean come into the Zuyderzee, and ſo to Amſterdam and Sparendam, and from thence by Scluſes to Harlem: Al which agrees very well with Tacitus, who ſaies it is but a ſhort paſſage from one ſide to the other, & yet it is ſo large from Encuyſen to Harlinghen, that with a faire ſeaſon and a good wind it will aſke ſome foure houres paſſage.
               To conclude who wil know the manners, faſhion of liuing and military vertue of the ancient Batauians or Hollanders, let him read for the ancient, perticularly Cornelius Tacitus, and for the moderne Hadrianus Iunius a Phiſition of the towne of Horne, in his Batauia: wherein I doubt not but he ſhall find much to content him.
               Concerning their vertue and military diſcipline, I dare affirme that the Hollanders at this

day, doe not only equall their predeceſſors but farre exceed them (both by Land, and Sea, wherein their Aunceſtors had no experience) as it hath well appeared for theſe forty yeares againſt all the attempts of that puiſſant Monarch of Spayne.
               
            
            
               Dordrecht.
               THis towne is the firſt in order of 28. in the County of Holland, & hath the firſt voyce in the aſſembly of the Eſtates for that County. It is ſeated vpon the Merwe, but ſo as this riuer is cō
                  poſed of the Rhyne, the Wahall, the Meuze and Ling, which all being ioined in one, paſſe before the town, ſo as we may ſay it is ſeated vpon 4. riuers, the Merwe, Wahal, Meuz & Ling. And ſo they▪ repreſēted the portrait of it by theſe two lattin verſes at the happy entrance of king Philip the 2. into their town in the yeare of our Lord 1549.
               
                  Me Moſa, et Wahalis, cum Linga, Merua
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      cingūt
                  Aeternam Batauae virginis ecce fidem.
               
               
                  Guirt with the Meuſe, Wahal, the Merwe & Ling
                  
                  See Hollands virgin faith vn-altering.
               
               THere are great diuerſities of opinions about the etimologie of the name of it, ſome there are that would haue it called Durdrecht and not Dordrecht, ſaying that this word Drecht was

heretofore as much as to ſay a Fayre or a free market, called in lattin Forum: Of the which name there are diuers townes after the names of great perſonages, as Forum Varronis not farre from Milan; Forum Cornelii in Emilia, which is now called Imola. Forum Claudii now called Tarentaiſe, Forum Iulii, Forum Liuii and others, and ſo by that reaſon Durarecht ſhould haue its name from ſome certaine man called Duret; yet the Annals of Holland make but ſmall mention of any ſuch. The ſame may bee ſayd of Haesstrecht three thouſand paces from Tergoude, heretofore a towne that had three Caſtles, and two Monaſteries, now a Village in the middeſt of the Earldome of Blois, between the townes of Schoonhouen and Goude, which three townes were the proprietary inheritance of the Earles of Blois, as you may more amply read in the general hiſtory of the Netherlands.
               
               The ſame may likewiſe be ſaid of Moore-drecht, Papendrecht, Suyndrecht, Barendrecht, and Slydrecht all Villages of Holland not farre from Dordrecht, which is alſo witneſſed by the old ſeale of the ſaid towne; the circumſcription is Sigillum oppidanorum in Durdrecht: The ſeale of the townſmen of Durdrecht.
               
               It is alſo found in rec ords, & amongſt others in the Bull of the Emperor Henry the fourth, Thure-Drecht. Be as it may be in regard of the ancientneſſe of the vſe and that it laſts to this day,

we wil giue it no other name but Dordrecht.
               
               This Towne is long in forme of a compaſſe rich and well peopled, and indeed a very ſtorehouſe of all things neceſſary for mans life: being ſince the yeare of our Lord, 1421. become an Iland: the Wahal the Meuze, and the Sea, by the breach of a ditch filleth all the gulph (which before was firme land and ioyning to the Dutchy of Brabant) and drowned 72. Villages, where there periſhed aboue an hundreth thouſand ſoules, with al their ſubſtance. The time of this deluge is expreſſed by theſe two lattin verſes.
               
                  DurDreChto InCVBVItVIs atroXInCIta VentIs
                  Vrbſ quâdIſsILVItprotInVs haVſta MarI.
               
               
                  In one thouſand four hundred twenty and one
                  
                     DORT felt that feareful diſſolution.
               
               THis deluge hapned by the wickedneſſe of a country-man that enuying the proſperity of his neighbour, aſſayed to drowne his land that lay neere the Sea, or at leaſt to ſpoyle it, not thinking what would follow: and to accompliſh this his curſed reſolution, he wrought a hole through the earth and made a gutter, that the water of the Sea might drowne his neighbours land; but the vehemency of it was ſo great, that of a little ſtreame, the Sea gayning more, it made ſuch a gap, that it was vnpoſſible to be ſtopt, and

ſo all the country about Dordrecht, as it is yet to bee ſeene was loſt. Notwithſtanding ſince by little and little Adrian Cornellis vander Mylen a Bourgue maiſtet of the ſaid town and his children haue recouered, and yet dayly doe recouer a good part of it, by vertue of a grant giuen by Charles the fifth Emperour to the ſaid Bourguemaiſter, ſo that at this day there are fayre feeldes, in firme land, adioyning to the ſayd Towne, with the little Caſtell of Craesteyne, belonging to the ſaid Vander Mylen.
               
               This Towne eſpecially the ſtreete called Den Langen-dike hath the moſt fayre and lofty buildings that are to bee found in all Holland, with their ſtore-houſes and caues for Wines all vaulted, ſo that they neuer ſee neither Sunne or Moone. There is a fayre great Church where there had wont to bee a Colledge of Chanons. The hiſtory of Holland ſets downe certaine fooliſh fables of the foundation of this Church, which I forbeare to repeat for that they are too ridiculous.
               A Faucon ſhotte from that part of the towne towards Papendrecht; there are high and eminent reliques of the Caſtle of Merwe neere to the ditch where before the Inundation was, as alſo of the Village and Barony of Merwe, from whence the Lords of Aſperen and Langueraeck haue their Barony, inioying yet

both profits and preheminences in the towne of Dordrecht.
               
               Holding vppon certaine dayes in the yeare, either in his owne perſon or by his Bailyffe or ſheriff, as large power in iudging cauſes as the Bourguemaiſter and Councell of the town whoſe authority in caſe of iuſtice at this day ceaſes.
               In this drown'd land and in the Merwe there are great ſtore of Salmons and Sturgeons taken, beſides it abounds in ſundry other ſort of fiſhes, the water beeing for foure or fiue leagues ſweete.
               The priuiledge and right of the ſtaple for all ſorts of Marchandiſe, as Wine, Corne, Wood and other commodities that paſſe by them comming out of Germanie, Gelderland, Cleues and Iuilliers belonging to this towne of Dordrecht.
               
               VVell ſeeing wee haue made mention of this word Staple, it followes neceſſarily for the true vnderſtanding of it, that we ſay ſomething both for the name and vſe of it.
               The word Eſtaple is a French word, deriued from the lattin word Stabulum, ſo that the word Staple is a market or publicke place in a towne ordained for the beſtowing of VVine, Corne, VVood and other Marchandiſe that comes frō other countries; euery Towne hauing their ſeuerall priuiledges, according to the graunt of the

Prince. Not without great greefe and vexation to others both Marchants and Marryners that bring them thether. As for example, The towne of Arras is the Staple for Arthois, and Valenciennes for Henault, for Wines that are brought out of France by land into the Low-Countries: So that the Marchants or Carryers are conſtrained to bring them thether before any other place, and there to bee ſtayde a certayne time in the Staple to ſee who will buy in the Market, the which beeing done they may carrie them away whether they thinke beſt.
               The towne of Middlebourgh in Zealand is the Staple for Wines that come from France, Spayne▪ Portugal and other Countryes brought thether by Sea. But the priuiledges of the town of Dordrecht are more ſtrickt and compelling; for they are of fuch force and vertue, that what-ſouer is brought either by the Rhyne, or Meuze, be it corne, wine, pitch, cole or any other Marchandiſe paſſing by them, they are compelled (vppon paine of forfeyture of all, if they bee taken, not hauing payed their duty) to diſcharge their boates or barkes in their Hauen, and to paie all rights, cuſtomes, impoſtes and other duties what-ſoeuer, and alſo to diſcharge their Marchaundiſe in Shippes of the towne or of the Cittizens and free Marryners: or elſe to make ſome agreement with them and ſo

they may paſſe them in thoſe that belong to the cuſtome or impoſt. And notwithſtanding that the priuiledges are at this preſent diuers, and vary one from another, according to the nature of the marchandiſe and condition of the townes to whome ſuch priuileges are graunted, yet they haue euer from the firſt beginning beene called by the name of Eſtaple. The which (being ſometimes in one towne, ſometimes in another, either for the ſcituation or ſome other occation) cauſe a great commodity and benifit to the country both in generall and particuler, and a faire reuenew and large profit to the Prince of the ſame.
               This towne as the firſt in rancke hath power to coyne both ſiluer and gold, a priueledge denied to any other towne of Holland what-ſo-euer. In this towne the Prince or Earle of Holland is put in poſſeſſion of this county, taking his oth to the ſtates of the country, and receiuing their homage and feallty.
            
            
               Harlem.
               THe ſecond towne of Holland in rancke and prerogatiue is the towne of Harlem, which within this thirty yeares, before Amſterdam was made greater, was the greateſt and faireſt of all Holland, as well in faire buildings, as ſweete and good temperature of ayre, hauing neither the Sea nor Mariſhes or Fens to annoy it, feared in

the middeſt of a good land fit both for tillage and for paſture, enuironed with faire country houſes, Farmes, little woods and many caſtles and villages, and to conclude ſeated reaſonable high, and very pleaſant. It hath one very great Church with a high ſteeple ſupported with great columnes or pillars, and much longer then any other in the Low-countries. There paſſeth now through it a riuer called Sparre, which falls out of a lake of freſh water into the chanell that runnes towards the townes of Amſterdam and Leyden, which is called the ſea of Harlem; which riuer hath bene drawne with great labour and charge from that of Tye by the ſluces of Sparendam, about halfe a league from thence: before the towne on that ſide towards Leyden there was heretofore a very pleaſant wood which during the ſeege of the Spaniards was cut downe by the Allamaines that were quartred on that ſide in the village of Hemsted; But within a few yeares after the Magiſtrate of the towne cauſed it to be replanted, ſo as in a ſhort time it became as pleaſant as it was before, ſeruing the inhabitants of the towne for delightfull walkes for the excerſiſe of their ſpirits, and keeping many people of the towne from the Tauernes and ſuch other places, in paſſing their time there. There is there likewiſe made very great ſtore of fine white linnen cloth, much deſired and ſought for from Spaine, Italy, and other countries, and alſo good wollen

cloth, which for the dye equalls any other country, and is like-wiſe tranſported into forraine regions.
               Touching the Etymology or deriuation of the name, I may not rely vpon Lewis Guichardine, who hath followed the old Dutch chronicle of Holland, but rather follow that learned Phiſition and Hiſtoriographer of Horne, Doctor Adrianus Iunius, who affirmes that the Harlemois are iſſued from the bloud of the Kings of Freezland, who firſt built both the their towne and caſtle in the yeare of the natiuity of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt fiue hundred and ſixe. The caſtle was ſeated vpon the chanell that runnes towards Egmont, not farre from Heimskirk, all built of great and large bricke, as yet at this day is to be ſeene by the ruines and ground worke of the walls. The demoliſhment whereof ſome attribute to the tyrany of the Lord of the place, others to the fury of the people, who ſought to extirpe and roote out the Nobility. This caſtle alone at this time was not demoliſhed, but like a violent thunder they threw downe all to the ground. Seeing wee are ſpeaking of this caſtle, I thinke it not amiſſe (although it be ſet downe in the hiſtory of the Netherlands) to relate a memorable accident that then hapned, as a ſtrange▪ note of true coniugall loue. And thus it was.
               
                  
The Lord of the place hauing by his exaction and cruelty made him-ſelfe odious to all his people, and he and his wife being beſeeged, and ſo preſt for want of victualls, that he was compelled (hauing no other meanes to eſcape) to enter into treaty for the rendering of the towne. His wife (atrue mirror of piety and loue towards her husband) among other articles for the rendring of the towne, capitulated that ſhee might haue as much of her moſt pretious mooueables as ſhe could carry out at one time, the which being graunted, ſhee (with the helpe of her chamber-maide) carried her husband lockt in a cheſt out of the caſtle, leauing all her rings and iewells behind her: In imitation of the wife of Guelphe Duke of Bauaria, who in the like neceſſity prayed the Emperor Conrad, that ſhe and her Ladies might carry out that which they held moſt deare and pretious: the Emperor imagining it was nothing but their rings and iewels, ſhee (and all the Ladies after her example) tooke her husband on her ſhoulders and her little childe in her armes and ſo iſſued forth. But let vs returne to Harlem; to the which (and that iuſtly) wee may attribute the noble inuention of the Art of printing, although ſome (to ſelfe-willed) maintaine that it came from Mogunce ot Mentz, an imperiall and electorall towne of Germany; but it is for certaine confirmed by many notable and auncient perſonages

of the ſaid towne of Harlem that from father to ſonne they haue held, and yet to this day doe hold it, that about a hundreth and ſeauenty years agoe there dwelt in the ſayd Towne in a very fayre houſe, which is yet to bee ſeene ſtanding right againſt the royall Pallace, one Laurence Ians ſurnamed Sachriſtain (which was a good and honourable hereditary office in his family) to whome this place of honour (which ſome other heretofore haue robd them off) belongs. This man walking forth for his recreation into the Wood of Harlem (as it was the cuſtome the of beſt Burguers after dinner & ſupper) began to cutte in little peeces of wood the letters of his name, printing them on the backe of his hand, which pleaſing him hee cutte three or four lines, which he beat with Inke and printed them vpon paper, wherewith beeing much ioyd (as it is ſaid the worekman delights in his worke) he determined to find out an other kind of inke more faſting and holding, and ſo with his kinſman Thomas Peterſe, who left foure ſonnes; who al came to the place of Burguemaiſters (which I ſpeak to that end that I would haue no man thinke that ſo noble an inuention could haue beginning from lowſpirited and mechanical men) found out an other way to print whole ſheetes, but of one ſide only, which are yet to be ſeene in the ſaid towne, and beſides a booke in Flemiſh called the mirrour of health; which hee did in the inſtancy of this art,

no inuention being brought to perfection at the firſt aſſay) and aſſaying to print the ſheet on the other ſide, the right ſide tooke not, and ſo hee ſpoyled the impreſſion. Afterwards he changed his letters of wood into lead, and after that into tinne to make them more firme, leſſe plyant and more dnrable, the remainder of which Caracters are yet to be ſeene in the houſe of the ſaid Laurence, ſince poſſeſt and dwelt in by Gerard Thomas an honourable old Cittizen, who died within this fifty yeares. This new Art neuer ſeen before made euery one ſo inamoured of it; that it yeelded him much profit, and his buſineſſe ſo increaſed that he was conſtrayned to take ſeruants to help him, but in the choyce of them he was ſo curious, that hee intertained not any, but hee took an oth of thē not to diſcouer the art to any body, beeing very deſirous to keepe the principall ſecrets to him-ſelfe; yet notwithſtanding al his care, one of his ſeruants called Iohn of his owne ſurname, who hauing learnt to compoſe, caſt the letters, and other things belonging to this Art, ſpyed his time and oportunity to runne away, the which he did vppon Chriſtmas day at night when euery body was at Euen ſong, and his maiſter abſent, taking away the Caracters & other thinges belonging to this Art, running away like a Domeſtique theefe with the goods and honour of his maiſter to Amſterdam, from thence to Cologne, and afterwards to Mogunce or

                  Mentz where he might liue more ſafe and keepe open ſhop of his theft. Laurens Ianſe printed the Doctrinall of Alexander, a grammar then much in vſe, and the treatiſes of Peeter of Spaine. Behold then what hath beene affirmed from time to time by many ancient and honorable perſonages of the firſt inuention of it, beſides the good and ſufficient proofes that they of Harlem haue; wherefore it were a great wrong to robbe them of the honor of this inuention, as that theefe did his Maiſter, to make his name famous in the towne of Mentz.
               
               
                  Polidore Virgill in his treatiſe of the inuention of things, attributes it to one Iohn Gutttenbergh a gentleman of Germany. I muſt needs grant that the art by ſucceſſion of time was brought to a greater perfection then in Holland, but they like infants ſuckt their milke from Laurence Ianſe of Harlem the firſt inuentor. Well wee ſee that it was ſufficiently diuulged, for in the yeare one thouſand fiue hundred, fourty eight, one Conrade (a German alſo) carried this art into Italy and ſo to Rome. After him Nicholas Iohnſon a French man inricht it meruelouſly; but aboue all Aldus Manutius a Roman, a man well read and very learned in the Greeke and latin tounges, brought this art to perfection, by his extreame dilligence & great trauail, neuer ſhrinking at any charge or trouble but only reſpecting his honor & the publique good, ſo that euery man deſired his bookes

of Aldus edition, they were ſo neate and exactly printed, hee beeing the firſt that euer ſette vp a printing preſſe for the Greeke tongue.
               The people of this towne of Harlem had the honour of the taking of Peluſium (now called Damiette a famous towne in Aegipt) which the Chriſtian princes had long time beſeeged, among whome was William Earle of Holland: While the Princes were conſulting how they might firſt get the hauen of the town, wnich was ſhut vp with 2. great chaines of yron, faſtned to two ſtrong Towers from one ſide to the other, they of Harlem cauſed a hulke or two bee armed from the toppe to the bottome with ſawes made of yron a purpoſe to cut the chaynes, and with a good gale of wind at the returne of the Sea, ranne with full ſayles ſpread againſt the chaines, which they broke: and notwithſtanding all the arrowes and other ſhotte made at them from the two Towers, paſt on and got the hauen, making paſſage for the reſt of the Chriſtian ſhips and ſo the towne was wonne The honour whereof was giuen to them of Harlem, and in memory of their valour their armes (which before was a dry Tree) were by the Emperour changed to a Swoord compaſſed with ſixe ſtars, to the which the Patriarke of Ieruſalem added vpon the point a croſſe Patteé, which are at this day the Armes of the towne of Harlem.
               
               This town was greatly afflicted and diſtreſſed

in the yeare 1572. the Spaniards lying before it eight moneths to their great loſſe, yet in the end by reaſon of famine it was conſtrained to yeeld to the mercy of the the Duke of Alua, the violent fury of whoſe ſoldiars brought it well neere to ruine. During this ſeege there was obſerued in the Bourgers and inhabitants a meruailous reſolution to defend, and conſtancy to maintaine them-ſelues; the garriſon ſoldiers & they neuer diſ-agreeing, which gaue examples to the other townes of Holland to arme them-ſelues againſt the Spaniſh fury, as we will ſhew hereafter in the deſcription of the towne of Alcmar.
               
            
            
               Delf.
               THe Towne of Delf (heretofore renowned) (but now much more) for brewing good beere which they tranſporte through all Holland, Zeeland and other neighbour countries, not much inferior to that of England) holdes the the third ranck and ſuffrage in the ſeſſion of the Eſtates for the Country of Holland. This Towne hath his name from his ſituation, being ſeated vpon a chanell that comes from the Hage, and falls into the Riuer of Meuze at Delfs-Hauen, which chanel cut in a right line coſt a great deal of labour and charge before it was made.
               This town was firſt founded by Godfrey called the crooke-backe Duke of Lorraine, who beeing

called in and aſſiſted by the Biſhoppe of Vtrecht, chaſed out of Holland Earle Robert the Friſon, the Lady Gheertruyd his wife and hir little ſon that ſhe had in her firſt marriage by Florent the firſt of that name and ſixth Earle of Holland.
               
               This Duke of Lorraine inioyed the ſaid Earldome aboue foure yeares, during which time he built the towne of Delf.
               
               But the little ſonne of Geertruyd being growne ſomewhat bigger with the helpe of neighbour Princes, both Germaines (in regard of his mother) and others, re-entred with a goodly army into Holland to giue him battaile, where he ouerthrew him, and hauing chaſed him out recouered al his coūtry: But ſhortly after one of his ſeruants as hee was at the priuy run him into the fundament with a Iauelin, of which hee died in the towne of Maeſtricht.
               
               This towne of Delf was ſtraightly beſeeged by Count Albert of Bauaria (as you may read more amply in the hiſtory of the Netherlands) ſo as being conſtrained to yeeld, the Earle cauſed a great part of the wall to bee throwne down. Yet notwithſtanding ſhortly after they did him great ſeruice in the warre hee had with the Friſons (the other Townes refuſing to ayd him) and couragiouſly releaſed certain Engliſh ſoldiers engaged in a Fort beſeeged by the Friſons, for which duty and valour of theirs, the Earle conſented to the re-building

of their walles. There befell a pittifull accident to this towne in the month of Maie 1536. being ſet on fire by caſualty & the fire ſo diſperſt that it was almoſt burned before there could bee any helpe, yet they wanted not water, for it hath two chanels that paſſe through the towne.
               But the wind being very vehement, ſo diſperſt the fire, that there ſcarce could any thing be ſaued; yet like the Phaenix renuing out of her aſhes, this Towne was built againe more fayre and magnificent then euer before, remedying their error in the firſt building (which was the cheefe cauſe of their ruine) by not ſuffering one houſe to bee thatcht with ſtraw; but high and ſtately buildings without, with their inward ornaments and furnitures ſo neat and fitting that in the whole Netherlands it is not to be parraleld; the ſtreets likewiſe ſo cleane and well kept, that notwithſtanding the greateſt rayne there is no durt to touch the ſhoo, ſo as indeed they ſeem to be alwaies waſht.
               In this fire there hapned ſo memorable an accident, that (happily) the like hath not beene recorded in antient or moderne ſtorries: It is moſt true that Pliny and other authors ſet downe (as a matter of notable and great conſideration) that the young Storkes when the old ones are growne in yeares and paſt helping of themſelues ſupply that want by feeding them, and when their winges fayle in paſſing the Sea,

the young ones take them on their backes: But that which hapned of the ſame birds in the towne of Delph is of greater conſequence and more remarkeable.
               This towne is ſo ſeated for the feeding and bringing vp of theſe birdes that it is hard to ſee any houſe vppon the which they are not neſted to breed in: This fire hapned vppon the third of Maie in the yeare aforeſaid 1536. at which time the young Storkes are growne pretty and big, the old ones perceiuing the fire to approch their neſts, attempted to carry them away but could not they were ſo waighty, which they perceiuing neuer ceaſed with their winges ſpread couering them, till they all periſhed in the flames. Gaſpar Veldius (an author of reuerent eſteeme) in his booke of Storkes recountes the ſame, and alſo D. Adrianus Iunius in his hiſtory of Holland, from whom I haue drawn theſe lattin verſes following.
               
                  Candida et obſtreperis inuiſa Ciconia ramis.
                  Pignora ab ardenti viderat igne premi.
                  Aeripatne ſuos, et aperta pericula tentet?
                  Hinc ſuadet Pietas, vitae amor inde vetat,
                  Hanc luctam pietas generoſa diremit, et vrna
                  Eſſe 
                        •
                     adem, et ſobolis vult libitena ſuae.
                  Iam minor Aſſyrium Phaenicem fama boquatur
                  Viuerae quae buſto quaerit, at iſta mori.
               
               
                  
                  The white hu'd Storke that neuer ſits on bowe
                  Seeing her young in flames; ah how it paines her!
                  Shall ſhe for them aduenture life to looſe?
                  Piety bids her trye, but feare reſtraines her:
                  Yet piety her feare ſoone ouerthrowes,
                  And ſo one tomb with her poore yong containes her,
                  Giue place thou Phaenix then: thou ſeeks new breath
                  By being Burnt: but ſhe ſought onely death.
               
               AT Delf there are excellent clothes made both great and ſmall that are much deſired in other countries, commonly called in their language Delfs puyck.
               
               In this towne was borne that abhominable Monſter for hereſie and impoſture called Dauid George, but his right name was Hans van Burcht a painter of glaſſes and the ſonne of a painter, one that infected with the poyſon of his hereſie the towne of Munſter in Weſtphalia; A man altogether vnlearned, yet of ſo ſubtile a memory and vnderſtanding and withall ſo eloquent, accompanied with a kind of grauity, that hee could perſwade his followers to what hee thought good, whereby he not onely made him-ſelfe chiefe head of a new ſect, but cauſed him-ſelfe by his deſciples and followers to bee adored as GOD him-ſelfe, perſwading them that hee was the true Meſſias.
               
               This Gallant (or rather Diuell) was married and had children, gouerning his familie in outward ſhew indifferent honeſtly, but in effect had neiher

religion, vertue or any goodneſſe whatſoeuer: notwithſtanding (the people being for the moſt part light and inconſtant, louers of nouelties, wicked and contentious, feeding their ambition by the firſt occaſion offered) hee ſowed and diſperſed his hereſie vnder colour of diuers extrauagant lawes throughout the lower Germany, being already ſo far aduanced in this buſineſſe that diuers that followed him as his deſciples bound them-ſelues to the will of this damnable Arch-hereticke: But this impiety beginning to bee diſcouered and the Magiſtrate making dilligent purſuit and ſeuere inquiſition after it, as the caſe required, this monſter fled to Baſil in Suitzerland with his wife, children, houſhold and all other his baggage, where being ariued hee was taken to be a rich Marchant of the Netherlands fledde thether for his religion, and to auoyd the fury of the Imperial Placarts, where by his friends and confederates hee was welcomed and much made off. When hee went to Church with his wife and children hee was accompanied (like a great Lord) with a troope of followers and ſeruants, ſhewing at his firſt comming great liberallity to the poore, which made him to bee much admyred. Being well prouided of money he bought a fayre houſe in the towne, and a Caſtle called Benningen halfe a league out of the towne, dwelling ſometimes in the one and ſometime in the other: To augment his loue and

reputation with the Cittizens hee matcht ſome of his children with the principall of the towne endowing them very ritchly, ſtill aduancing and teaching in priuate his moſt damnable hereſie, confirming thoſe that were abſent by letters and bookes which hee cauſed to bee printed in his Caſtle of Beningen: Hee dyed in the ſayd towne of Baſil in the yeare of our Lord 1556. for meere greefe that one of his followers was reuolted, fearing that by his meanes hee might be diſcouered and ſo puniſhed. Before his death his diſciples that thought him to bee God ſeeing him draw towards death, hee reſolutely ſayd vnto them, bee not amazed, I goe to beginne to ſhew my power. Chriſt my predeceſſor (to ſhew his power) roſe again the third day, and I to ſhew my greater glory will riſe againe at three yeares. O horrible blaſphemy! The Magiſtrate beeing throughly informed of his life and doctrine cauſed his proceſſe to be drawn after his death, & by a ſentence his body was taken out of the ground, and iuſtice done as if he had bin aliue; his goods being confiſcated, & his books burnt: ſome of his followers acknowledged & abiured their errors. and imbracing again the reformed religion were with al courteſie and gentleneſſe pardoned, and the whole hiſtory of it ſet forth in print, both in lattin and dutch to the view of the world. In oppoſition to this wicked monſter the town of Delf hath brought forth many excellent perſon ages &

among the reſt Ioos Salſbout an excellent Poet and Chancellor of Gelderlād; Arnoult his ſon who ſucceeded his father in the ſame office of Chancellor, and ſince Preſident of the priuy Counſell at Bruſsels, and from that to be Preſident for the affaires of the Netherlands in Spaine▪ Cornelius Muſa Prouoſt of S. Agatha, a man of rare vertue and knowledge, a great Diuine & an excellent Poet. who was vniuſtly put to death by the Earle of March about thirty-fiue yeares ſince.
            
            
               Leyden.
               THere hath bin much diſpute and great diuerſity of opinions about the deriuation of this name of Leyden, but I will content my ſelfe that Ptolemy called it Lugdunum Battauorum, & Antoninus in his Itinerary or guide for waies to Rome, cals it Lugdunum Caput Germanorum, the head citty of the Germaines, or the firſt Citty of the Romaine Empire, from it beginning his Iourney to Rome; concerning the lattin and dutch woord of Leyden I will content my ſelfe with the antient vſe, for that many learned lattin Authors haue alſo called it Leyda; bee it as it may, yet this is moſt certayne that it hath beene here-to-fore a towne of great importance, for the Romain Praetor that gouerned that quarter kept alwaies his reſidence and garriſon in that towne; and the hiſtoryes of Holland recount that from

the firſt▪ Earles and long after it was called the chamber of Holland.
               
               It is ſeated in a low and euen country, full of ditches and chanels, beutified with farmes, gardens and other delights round about. It incloſes in it ſelfe thirty one Iſles, paſſing from the one to the other in boates, beſides nineteene more that haue bridges to paſſe ouer.
               To conclude there are in this towne 145 bridges, an hundreth and foure built of free ſtone, and the reſt of wood: It is one of the ſix chiefe townes of Holland, and the fourth in preheminence and ſuffrage: It is the cheefe for that quarter of Rind-Land, hauing vnder it 49. townes and villages, the moſt part of which bring their commodities thether (as butter, milke, cheeſe, lard, foule, fruites and other neceſſaryes) to bee ſold in the Market, abounding in all thinges elſe that the earth may bring forth, and ſufficiently ſtored with fiſh, the Sea being not aboue a league from it and compaſſed with many freſh waters. It is likewiſe ſo ſtored with ſundry kinds of fowle, that it is incredible but to them that know it.
               This town is fairly ſeated in a delicate proſpectiue, euen in the heart of Holland, neatly built and fit for the muſes to dwel in; for which cauſe the Sates of Holland in the yeare of our Lord 1575 after they were releaſed of their long and dangerous ſiege erected an vniuerſity there, furniſhing

it with profeſſions in all languages, giuing them good and ſufficient ſtipends, drawing to them the ſufficients men in all profeſſions that can be found in Chriſtendome, as at this day the Seignior of L'eſcale, Cluſius, Baudius, and others profeſſing Phyloſophy, Phyſicke and the lawes: They want not alſo moſt excellent and learned Diuines, hauing within this tenne yeares loſt three as rare ones as any were in Chriſtendome, to wit the Lord of Saint Aldegond, D. Francis Iunius and Trelcatius
                        •
                     , profeſſors in the greeke and lattin tongues, and in Diuinity.
               In the middeſt of this towne there is an old Caſtle ſeated vppon a higher mote, in the which there is a great large and deepe Well all of ſtone, but now dry, there is not a houſe in this Caſtle to dwell in, but compaſſed about the more and aboue with ſome trees, and although it bee of no vſe, yet it is reſerued for the antiquity of it. Ianus Douza a learned Gentleman and Poet of Leyden, hath written of it in theſe verſes.
               
                  Putatur Engiſtus, Brittanno orbe
                  Redux, poſuiſſe victor.
               
               
                  Tis held, victorious Hengiſt builded me
                  At his returne from conquered Britanie.
                  
               
               SInce called Bourg of which came the name of Burgraue (which is as much as to ſay an Earle

of a Towne, which wee call Viſcounts) the title remained long in the Noble family of the Lordes of Waſſenare, who held the Viconty of Leyden and the Iuriſdiction of Rhyn-landt, with the Dependances both of it and Ter-goud, vntill the yeare of our LORD 1251. after the death of Vicont Iames, his daughter Chriſtienne beeing vnder the protection of the Earle of Holland who vtterly ſpoyled it, yet the poſſeſſion thereof was deliuered againe by the Counteſſe Iaqueline, vnto the ſayd family of the Waſſenares, but Philip Duke of Burgondy ſucceeding in the ſaid County tooke it away againe; where-vppon Viſcount Iames, the ſonne of Henry in a full aſſembly of the Eſtates conteſted againſt the Duke, demaunding againe his antient patrimony, but his meanes beeing too weake againſt ſo puiſſant a Prince, hee was conſtrayned to ceaſe his title, and to content him-ſelfe with what it pleaſed the Duke to giue him, which was but the bare title of Viſcount.
               There are in this Towne three pariſh Churches, in Saint Pancratius there is a company of Chanoins, and in Saint Peeters there is a lofe of bread turned to a ſtone, ſafely kept in a place yrond about for a perpetuall remembrance of the ſtrangeneſſe of the accident, and this it was: In the yeare of our Lord 1316. a great famine happening in the towne, a poore woman went

to her owne ſiſter that was very rich to borrow a loafe of bread, to ſaue her and her children from ſtaruing, her ſiſter denyed that ſhee had any in the houſe, ſhee inſiſted that ſhee had, where-vppon her ritch ſiſter fell a ſwearing and curſing, praying God that if ſhe had any it might bee turned into a ſtone, which God miraculouſly ſuffered to bee done, to the confuſion of this pittileſſe and periured woman, it is not long ſince there were two loaues, but now there is but one.
               Two little leagues from Leydén is Waſſenare a fayre and beautifull Village, with the two Catwicks, Voorburch and Voorſcoten, belonging now to the Counts of Ligne, the maſculine lyne of the Vicounts of Leyden and Lords of Waſſenare being vtterly extinct. In this towne Hans van Leyden a knife-maker by his trade was born a moſt diſloyal Anabaptiſt, and one that by ſtrange and extraordinary meanes ſo beſotted the people that hee made him ſelfe King of Munſter in Weſtphalia to the great and pittifull ruine of it. In the end he was beſeeged by the Biſhoppe (aſſiſted by the Princes of Germany) and after almoſt a yeares ſiege this King of perdition and his complices were taken and puniſhed according to their merites. This Kinge and one of his cheefe Councellors (called Knipperdolinge) were putte into two Cages of yron and hung out of a high Tower, where they

ended their cruell and moſt miſerable liues and reigne.
               This town in oppoſition to this il hath brought forth many vertuous and learned men, as Iohn Gherbrand an excellent hiſtorian: Englebert of Leyden a rare Poet and Gramarian; Nicholas Leonce a good Retorician, and aboue all Ianus Douza Lord of Noortwick a moſt knowing man in the tongues and a moſt famous Poet, as his printed workes teſtifie.
               In the yeare of our Lord 1574. this towne was ſtraightly beſieged by the Spaniards and blockt vp with ſome thirty-ſixe fortes to famiſh them, wherein there dyed aboue ſeauenthouſand men of famine and the peſtilence: the raizing of this ſeege and deliuerance of this towne can bee attributed to none but to GOD, although the Prince of Orange and the States of Holland did what they could as well by breaking of ditches and drawing vp Scluſes as otherwiſe, drowning all the countrie almoſt to the towne, but not ſo deepe that it would carry boates, vntill GOD ſent a ſtrong South-weſt-winde which draue the Sea into the riuers and land that great boates paſt a floate and victualled the towne: Which the Spaniards perceiuing they quitte all their Fortes and fledde for feare of beeing intrapped.
               But behold the wonderfull and re-markeable

worke of GOD who two daies after the Towne was victualled ſent as ſtrong a North-weſt-wind that beat backe the Sea againe from whence it came, as you may read more at large in the hiſtory of the Netherlands.
               
            
            
               Amſterdam
               LEt vs now come to the towne of Amſterdam, which within theſe hundreth yeares is become ſo rich and opulent that the very name of it is famous throughout the whole world. It takes name from the Riuer of Amſtell that runnes cleane through the towne, and fals into the Zuyderzee, from whence they ſayle into all Seas, yea the moſt remote and farre off of the whole world.
               They of the family of Amſtell heertofore moſt rich and opulent (now vtterly extinct) were the firſt that compaſſed it with palliſadoes and h
                     •
                  ld the proprietary Lordſhip of it.
               This towne ſince the decay of Antwerpe is become the moſt renowned of all the Netherlands; ritch in people and of all ſorts of Marchandiſes, ſituate in the middeſt of Holland in a mariſh country: It is ſtrong by reaſon of the ſituation, but ſtronger by art, the foundations of their houſes being made of piles of wood armed with yron and other neceſſaries of or that purpoſe▪ ſo that the charge of building of moſt houſes is

more chargeable vnder ground then aboue. The ordinary courſe of their Nauigation is to all other parts of the Netherlands, as France, England, Spayne, Portugall, Germany, Poland, Denmarke, Liflandt, Sueden, Norway, Ostlandt and other ſeptentrional parts, where one may ſee twice a yeare, foure or fiue hundred great ſhippes arriue from Dantzick, Rye, Reuell and Varna with diuers and innumerable quantity of Marchandiſes; ſo as this Towne is become a wonderfull port or Staple, to the amazement of the beholders to ſee ſo many great hulkes belonging to the Cittizens and Inhabitants of the towne arriue there, and within fiue or ſixe dayes to be all vnladen and ready for a new voyage.
               There is yearely built there a great number of tall & warlike ſhips as wel for trade in Marchandiſe as for the war: Within this 25. or 30. yeares the town hath bin made greater (as wel in the circuit of the walls as in beautifull and faire building) by the halfe with a new church built where Saint Anthonies gate heretofore ſtood: It is flanked about with great bulwarks, that anſwering one na other makes it inpregnable: what with the waters about it and the induſtry of man it is warranted towards the Sea with a long double palliſadoe from the Eaſt to the Weſt, in which aboue a thouſand great ſhips and innumerable of leſſer ſorts may ſafely lye out of daunger. There hath

bene of long tyme two churches, the one called Saint Nicholas the old, the other our Lady the new.
               To conclude this towne is a moſt ritch Storehouſe, not onely for the Low-Countries, but in a maner for all Chriſtendome, where al thinges neceſſary for the vſe of man are as ſoon to be foūd as in al the world beſids. D. Adrianus Iunius in his hiſtory of Holland hath writ certaine accroſtique verſes in praiſe of it, which I thinke not vnfit to bee here inſerted both in lattin and Engliſh.
               
                  A ureus, vt perhibent, quondam ab Ioue perpluit imbar
                  M agnificis turgentem opibus Rhodon: horrea Romae
                  
                  S icaniam eſſe Ceres, victuro munere 
                        •
                     eſſit.
                  T orſit et huc occulos facilis Deus ipſe benignos
                        •
                     
                  
                  E t me mactam opibus iuſſit, florere
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      rebus
                  L aetis: at circundor aquis, pigra
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      palude
                  O bſita: roboreo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſolo stant culmina nix
                        •
                     
                  
                  D epactis altê trabibus, ſurgentia caelo.
                  A lternanſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſtatis vicibus, maris eſtus aperti
                  M aenia ſubcingit, qua parte exotica puppes
                  V elliferae inuectant onera, exportant
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      frequenti
                  M ercatu, Heſperias qua ſe dimittit in vndas
               
               
                  B arbara
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      
                     Eous pandit quâ littora Titan.
                  E xpedio▪ quos nostra tamen non area verrit,
                  L egifere cumulos Ceraris, genitalia dona,
                  G argara prouentu tanto non farris abundant.
                  I nferior fuerit, vel Momo iudice, mecum,
                  C ontendit locuplete penu ſi Trinacris ora,
                  Aequaleiſque ferax non Affrica ſtipat aceruos.
                  
                     
H orr
                        •
                     um et agnoſcit me non male Belgica faelix,
                  O mnigenas, vt opes ſic vitae altmenta miniſtro.
                  R ecte vt quis ſaturae ſimilem me dixerit aluo
                  R obore defectos ſuccum quae didit in artus.
                  E ximiae hine adeo Caeſar me ferre coronam
                  V ertutis decus, ac munus ſpectabile Iuſſit.
                  M ateriem, at linquo ſoribendi vatibus a
                        •
                     pla
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  A ſhowre of gold fell once from Ioue, men ſay:
                  M any commend Rhodes wealth▪ 
                     Sicilia
                  
                  S ay diuers) was the Store-houſe vnto Rome▪
                     
                  
                  T rue, once▪ but Ceres now is hether come;
                  E uen ſhe, and all the Deities haue laid
                  R itches on me. Be euer ritch they ſaid:
                  D rown'd is my ſeate thereof in fenny ſtrand
                  A nd on wood-piles doe all my buildings ſtand:
                  M y walls are waſht with waues that ebbe and flow
               
               
                  B ut from thoſe waues doth mine aduancement grow.
                  E ach quarter of the world ſends ſhips to me
                  L aden with waues of worth, for vſe, for eye.
                  G reat is my gaine by trades▪ but greater yet
                  I s that which by my vent of Corne I gette.
                  A ffrica, Sicilia and the Idaean field
                  S et paralels with me for that muſt yeeld:
               
               
                  S uch is my ſtate▪ recorded by fames hand,
                  T o be the Store▪houſe of all Netherland.
                  
                  O f all things man doth need (nay rathermore)
                  R itch, needy, here may all haue choyce and ſtore.
                  E uen as the ſtomachs ſole digeſtion,
                  H elps Mans whole forme with growth of fleſh & bone.
                  O ur worth thus tryde, made Caeſar ſet a Crowne
                  V pon our ſheeld, as badge of due renowne.
                  S tay, now no more▪ but leaue againſt our will
                  E tern
                        •
                     ll matter for a purer quill.
               
               
                  
They of Amſterdam made a great preſent of money to the Emperor Maximillian the firſt of that name, for the which hee graunted them leaue to beare an Imperiall Crowne vppon the Armes of their Citty, a dignity neuer granted to any Towne before. There is yet to bee ſeene in a glaſſe window of the old Church certaine purſes painted with their mouths downeward, ſcattering gold and ſiluer, ſignifying this liberallity of the Amsterdammers.
               
               All ſorts of people of moſt nations haue recourſe and free leaue to dwell in this towne: as French, Germā, Italian, Spaniard, Portugeſſe, Engliſh, Scottiſh, Cymbrian, Sarmatian, Sueden, Dane, Norweghian, Liflander, and other of the Septentroniall parts.
               At the ſame time or ſhortly after that the Anabaptiſts domineerd in Munſter, there was a commotion of the ſame kinde of people in this towne, who one night after they had beene at their priuate aſſembly, tooke armes and poſſeſt them-ſelues of the Market place and the Magiſtrates houſe, killing ſome Burgeſſes, and among the reſt one Burguemaiſter, but they were repulſt and cauſed to flye ſome here and ſome there, by Boates into Freezeland and other places: Some of them both men and women as they ranne vppe and down the ſtreetes all naked were taken and executed after diuers and ſundry faſhions. An antient Cittizen of this

towne hath alſo made theſe verſes follow ing in honour of his country.
               
                  Haec illa eſt Battauae non vltima gloria gentis
                  Amnis cui nomen, cui cataracta dedit,
                  Dicta prius Dammum, raris habitata colonis
                  Cum contenta caſis, ruſtica vita fuit.
                  Hinc Amſterdamum, iam facta celebrior, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                  
                  Fortunae creuit tempore nomen item:
                  Vrbs bene nota prope, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      procul dictant▪ bus oris
                  Dotibus innumeris ſuſpicienda bonis.
                  Diues agri, diues precioſe veſtis et auri,
                  Vt pleno cornu copia larga beet.
                  Quod Tagus at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      
                     Hermus vehit, et Pactolus in vnum
                  
                     Ʋerê huc congeſtum dixeris eſſe locum.
               
               
                  
                     Belgiaes bright glory we this towne may call
                  Which had the laſt name from the riuers fall
                  VVhilom the name was Dam, the people ſuch
                  As had they meat & clothes, thought they had much▪
                  
                  Hence hight it Amſterdam, and with the name
                  The Fortune hath increaſed and the fame
                  T'is known vnto far Coaſtes and Continents
                  And may be well ſo, for the good it vents.
                  Tis ritch in Corne, in Coyne, in Fleſh, in Fiſh
                  And all aboundance that the world can wiſh.
                  Breefely it is ſo ritch, it ſeemes to hold
                  All Tagus, Hermus and Pactolus gold.
               
            
            
               Goude.
               ALthough the Hiſtoriographers do diſpute much about the name of this town, ſome ſaying that it came frō a Lady ſo called, heretofore inheritrix of it, others from the golden leaues where-with the Steeple of their church was couered

to ſhew their ritches and magnificence: for Goude in the dutch tongue ſignifies gold, yet it ſeemes to me moſt probable, that it is deriued frō a certain water called Goude, beginning from the ſluce of Goude neere vnto Alphen, where heretofore the Romains had their abode, calling it Caſtra Albiniana, running euen to the riuers of Yſſule, vppon the which at the entry of that water is the ſaid town built. It is a ſtrong town, populous and pleaſant, enuironed with goodly feelds & farmes, ſtrong wals and deep ditches, and within beautifully furniſhed with faire houſes, but eſpecially vppon both ſides of the hauen and the Market place: Abounding in all ſorts of victuals by reaſō of their commodious ſituation, and the continual paſſing of ſuch infinite number of ſhippes, whereby they haue this aduantage, by reaſon of their riuers and chanels, that they may victual thē-ſelues and ſerue the Prouinces of Holland, Zealand, Brabant & others, the greateſt part of their wealth cōming in by that meanes. The aire by reaſon it is far from the Sea is more healthſome then any other part of the Prouince; there runs a chanell of freſh-water through euery ſtreete of the towne, by reaſon whereof (here-tofore) there hath beene in this towne 305. Brewers, who ſerued all the reſt of the Prouinces, their beere being called for the goodneſſe of it the renenew of Goude; but the neighbour townes (notwithſtanding the goodneſſe of it) haue taken that

commodity from them. It hath a faire and ſpatious Market place in an Ouall forme, and in the middeſt thereof a great and magnificent State-houſe, which the Lady Iaquelin Counteſſe of Holland cauſed to be built, when at the purſuit of Phillip Duke of Burgondy (being abandoned by almoſt all the townes of Holland) ſhee was forced to retyre to the Caſtle of this towne; yet notwithſtanding it ſeemes this State houſe was finiſhed after her death, in the yeare of our Lord 1440. I haue ſeene at the Hage a chaire of wood, vpon the backe whereof their were two A. A. in gold, and theſe words Trou aen din. Theſe two A. A. ſignifie Gouda, which is in Dutch A. of gold & Trou aen din. faithful to thee, which was the deuiſe of the ſaid Counteſſe, confeſſing that they of Gouda had beene alwayes faithfull and true vnto her: vnder the State-houſe is the Shambles of the towne, curiouſly ſeated vppon pillars not wrought by the hands of a ſimple Architect; and on the backe part is a high place built vppon the like pillars which is the place of execution, be it either beheading by the ſword or otherwiſe. The pariſh-Church of this towne is very magnificent & eſteemed to be greater then any one in the Netherlands, exceeding both in length and greatnes the Archiepiſcopal Church of Cologne, paſſing al beleefe in the beauty of glaſſe windoes, made by two brothers borne in this towne, whoſe equals in this art of painting haue not to this houre bin

found: The 12. of Ianuary 1552. the ſteeple of this Church was burnt by thunder and lightning, of the date whereof D. Adrians Iuuius in his Batauia hath made this diſtique.
               
                  LVX bIſſena fVIt IanI hora veſpere nona,
                  CVM ſacra IohannIS VVLCano CorpVII aedes.
               
               
                  The tWeLfth of IanVar
                        •
                     e SaInt Iohns SpIre.
                  At nIne a cLoCk was MVCH Impaird with fire.
               
               The which miſchieuous fire burnt nothing but the ſaid ſteeple, and a part of the church, notwithſtanding that it was enuiron'd with houſes. But about an hundreth yeares before in the yeare of our Lord 1438. the 18. of Auguſt vpon Saint Lewis his day, the towne was wholy burnt, except three houſes vpon the Hauen, the old ruines of them being yet to bee ſeene. At this time the old charters and priuiledges of this towne were burnt, wherevpon this diſtique was made.
               
                  FLetIbVs Id dIaICI qVIa GoVda Cre Mat LVdoWICI.
               
               
                  Sorrow allowde with ſighes proclaimes,
                  That Lodowicks Goude is all on flames.
               
               It is not long ſince, that about halfe a league from the ſaid towne were found diuers peeces of ſiluer with this circumſcription on the one ſide, HLVDOVICVS IMP. and on the other

CXRISTIANA RELIGIO, which ſeeme to haue beene coyned in the time of the Emperor Lewis the Debonaire, the ſonne of the Emperor Charlemaine, and the Father of the Emperour Charl
                        •
                     s the bauld, who after he had ſetled Chriſtian religion in thoſe parts, gaue the Earldome of Holland to Thierry of Aquitaine, the firſt of that name.
               There is mention made in the ancient charters and priuiledges of this towne, how Florentius the fift of that name Earle of Holland told a Knight called Nicholas van Cats, that this towne had beginning in the yeare 1272. Others, and among the reſt Doctor Adrianus Iunius 1262. notwithſtanding that the ſaid towne hath beene knowne to haue beene long time before, whereof many Gentlemen haue taken their names, and chiefly among the reſt Thiery Vander Goude, one of the priuie councell to Earle William King of the Romaines, and the priuiledges granted to them of Vtrecht in the yeare 1252. ſhew the like. A quarter of a league out of the towne is yet to be ſeene the place where the Church ſtood, and is commonly called the old Church-yard, where during the Romiſh ſuperſtition, they vſed to goe on proceſſion in Rogation weeke; and likewiſe a way called the old Goude. But for that this place was too farre from the riuer of Iſſell, the Inhabitants for their more commodity remooued from their former dwellings to the place where the Towne

now ſtands.
               The freedome and iuriſdiction of this Towne at the beginning was no more then the compaſſe of it within the portes and walls, with very little land without, but was afterward in the yeare of our Lord 1484. much amplified by the Emperour Maximillian the firſt, and the Arch-duke Philip his ſonne▪ with at leaſt a league of land in compaſſe on both ſides the riuer of Yſſell.
               
               The gouernment of this towne appertained heretofore to the Earles of Blois, Lords of the ſame, and was ſeated in the center or middeſt of the ſayd Countie: Iohn of Beaumont Earle of Blois by his wife, was made Lord of it and Schoonhouen with their dependances, by his brother William the Good Earle of Holland, to augment his reuenews, in the yeare 1306 who by the conſent of his brother, inſtituted the firſt payments and rights of cuſtomes, with the houſes and ſluces where hee receiued his right: hee inlarged and much beautified the Caſtle of the ſayd towne, the which long time after was choſen by the Eſtates of Holland (as a place very ſtrong) for the keeping of the charters, priuiledges and lawes of their Countie; which Caſtle (except the Tower where their charters were kept) was in the yeare 1577. demoliſhed, at which time there were many others throwne downe in the Low-countries.
               
                  
                  Iohn of Beaumont Lord of Blois, died in the yeare 1456. leauing one onely ſonne likewiſe named Iohn, who being a Knight of the Teutonique or Dutch order, went into Pruſsia againſt the Infidels, and there died, leauing two ſonnes, Iohn and Guy, Earles of Bloys and of Soyſon.
               
               
                  Iohn of Chaſtillon Lord of Goude, riche and ſtrong, iſſued by his father from the Earles of Holland, and by his mother from the Kings of France, married Madam Mathilda Dutcheſſe of Gelders and Counteſſe of Zutphen, at that time when the houſes of Bronchorſt and Heeckers aſſaied to ſhutte out the ſayd Lady from her patrimoniall inheritance. To remedie the which the Earle of Blois came into Geldres, accompanied by many Lords and Knights, and a good troope of ſouldiers beſieging Wagheningen and Groenſvoerdt, which he tooke, and afterwards in the right of the Lady his wife, was receiued into Arnhem and acknowledged for Lord and Prince. This Lord and Lady as Dukes of Gelders, gaue priuiledge to the Citizens of Goude, to ſaile with their Marchandize through-out the Dutchie of Geldres and Earledome of Zutphen freely, without eyther taxe or toll. This priuiledge was giuen in the towne of Arnham, in the yeare of on Lord 1372.
               
                  Iohn of Chaſtillion dyed in the yeare 1381. without children, leauing all his goods to his brother Guy of Blois, who married Mary the daughter

of the Earle of Namur (by whom hee had one ſonne called Lewis Earle of Dunois, who dyed young at Beaumont) the two and twenty of December 1397. After whoſe death the right line of Iohn of Blois was extinct; ſo that the Signeuries of Goude and Schoonhouen, with their dependances (which were called the Baliage of the countie of Blois) returned to the country of Holland, in the time of Albert of Bauaria: notwithſtanding Guy of Blois left a baſtard called Iohn of Blois Lord of Treſlon and Henault, who (as the hiſtor
                     •
                   of the Netherlands makes mention) had by his wife ſix ſons.
               It is apparent that the townes of Goude, Dordrecht Harlem, Delft, and Leyden, with the Knights and nobles of the country, repreſented the Eſtates of Holland and Weſtfreezeland long before the towne of Amſterdam was receiued for a member, as it appeareth by diuers records and letters of ſtate, paſt vnder the ſeales of the ſaid fiue townes, together with the iniuries that they of Amſterdam haue done to them of Goude vpon the ſame. The ſaid towne of Goude for the good order which they haue alwaies held in diſcipline and Scholaſticall inſtruction hath brought forth many great & learned perſonages, to their eternall fame: as Henry and Iohn of Goude, whom Trithemius Abbot of Spanheim puts in ranke of the rareſt writers. William Herman of Goude, whom Eraſmus Roterodamus in his Epiſtles calls his delight, a moſt excellent Poet and Hiſtoriographer. Hermanus Goudanus a great

Diuine. Iacobus Goudanus a famous Poet: Th
                        •
                     odorus Gerardi, Reinerius Suoy a Phi
                     ••
                  ion and hiſtoriographer, who haue all written learned workes worthy to be conſecrated to poſterity. But Cornelius Aurelius likewiſe borne in this towne ſurpaſt them all in excellent Poeſie, as appeareth by the Lawrel crowne that the Emperor Maximillian the firſt ſent him by his orator Stephanus of Crocouia. It was he that firſt controlled Gerard of Nymegen in his booke that he writt of the true ſituation of Batauia or Holland, betweene the Hornes of the Rhine, which the ſaid Gerard of Nymegen would haue attributed to the Betuwe, a part of Gelderland; wherein the ſaid Aurelius liuely expreſſes the honor of the Hollanders, who in his youth was brought vp by that ſo much renowned Eraſmus of Rotterdam, being begotten at Goude, but by remooue of dwelling borne and brought vp at Rotterdam.
               
               There are many other learned & famous perſons ſprung from this towne, too long here to rehearſe, of whom Iuſtus Lypſius, Ianus Gruterus, and Dominicus Baudius of Lille in Flanders, haue amply written in their workes. Notwithſtanding that throughout all the townes of the Netherlands many bloody decrees haue beene executed for religion on both parts, yet they of this towne haue bin ſo moderate euen to great Papiſts their neighbors and in their power, that in a hundreth years & more there haue bin but three executed vpon thoſe placarts or decrees, whereof one was an Anabaptiſt, who being

ſecretly aduertiſed by the Magiſtrat that he ſhould retire himſelfe, yet hee came and rendred himſelfe into the hands of the officer: whereby it may appeare that they of Goude haue euer deteſted tyrannie and perſecution, beleeuing that it belongs onely to God to command the conſcience.
            
            
               ENCHVYSEN.
               THis towne of Enchuyſen hath taken name from the fewneſſe of houſes it had at the firſt, being by little and little become a great towne, as is to be ſeene at this day: this word Enckle huyſen ſignifying little 
                     •
                  r ſimple houſes. It is a faire towne and by the naturall ſituation very ſtrong, oppoſed to the rigor of the ſea, ſtanding vpon a corner of the land, their traffique by ſea makes them riche and opulent, it is for the moſt part built of faire maſonrie, hauing very few houſes of wood, for feare of fire, which they haue once or twice before had experience of; for you may read in the Annales of Holland, that in the yeare of our Lord 1297. the Lords of Arkell & Putten burnt it all, and yet within twenty yeares after it was made greater by the halfe, for all the ſalt pitts that were along the ſea banke and the mariſhes behind, are now within the walls, with many faire gardens & fiſh-ponds. There are two paſſages out to ſea, and three hauens, at one of the which entrances there is a great tower, wherevpon is engrauen a Lattin diſtique made by D' Adrianus Iunius, vpon the attempt that Charles the laſt

Duke of Gelders made for the ſurprize of it that he might get an entrance into Holland, it expreſſes the time of the attempt, and is this.
               
                  EnChVſaM InſIdIIs taCitIs ſVh noCte ſILentI
                  Ob
                        •
                     Vere adnI Xa eſt Ge LrICa perfIdIa.
               
               
                  The trecheroVs GeLDrols ſoVght by Violent Might
                  T' haVe tane EnchVIſen, through the Vayle of n Ight.
               
               This town is rich in ſalt pits, the Inhabitāts fetching groſſe ſalt from Brouage by Rochel, or in Spaine, and ſome-times from the ſalt Ilands where they haue it for nothing, and after boile it again, and refine it, multiplying it with ſea-water brought them in boates, taking the heate away & making it white fit for the table, their are as ſufficient ſtore of ſluces in this town and about it for the paſſage of ſea-water as in France or Spaine but the ſharpneſſe of the ſunne is not of that force to congeale and harden it as in other places; heretofore they made great aboundance of ſalt of the aſhes of turues & ſea-water, after the manner of making of ſalt-peeter at this day, which they call Silt-ſout, whereof they make a great traffick: but ſince that they haue traded to Spaine and France, & from thence brought in their great ſhippes what quantity the will, this maner of making it is come to nothing, it beeing vnpoſſible that that which they made in diuerſe places ſhould be ſo good as that which is made of the pure ſea-water. This towne may very fitly be called Neptunes ſeate, for that their ſhips paſſe all the

ſeas of the world, and haue had the honor to carry and bring backe the Emperor in diuerſe of his expeditions, and likewiſe ſundry times King Philip his ſonne, and ſince 
                     
                        •
                     nne of Auſtria his wife the daughter of the Emperor Maximillian the ſecond. They carry in their armes three herrings argent and two ſtars or, in a field Azure, as a fatall and certaine Augure preſaging that after the manner of herrings they ſhould cut through all ſeas, and trade to the one and other pole, which at this time they doe: In this towne dwelt Doctor Paludanus an exquiſite Phiſition and great gatherer together of ſtrange and rare antiquities, to ſuch an Infinite number that they could hardly bee ſeene peece by peece in three daies, the maruelous workes of nature as well proceeding from the land as the ſea, and the ſecret workes of God being therein to bee contemplated & admired, but I vnderſtand ſince, a great part of them haue bin ſould to the Lantgraue of Heſſen.
               
            
            
               HORNE.
               ABout the yeare 1316. in the time of Count William the third of that name called the good Earle of Holland, Zeeland, Henault and Weſtfreezeland this towne tooke his little beginning in this manner: When the towne of Veronne neere Alckmar was deſtroyed by the Friſons, there was a great ſluce in the ditch where at this day

the market place of the ſayd towne ſtands which was called Roeſtein by the which the country people entred into the ſea with their barkes. It happened that three brothers cittizens of Hambourgh came and went thither with ſhippes laden with beere, who cauſed three high houſes of ſtone to be built there for the Friſons, for the Danes came thither ordinarily with oxen, kine, horſes and other marchandiſe, paſſing the ſea with their little ſhips, from the Cimbrique Cherſoneſus, or the country of Holſtein, ſo that from time to time by little and little it began to augment in buildings, & firſt became a village, afterwardes a towne, and at laſt a good city: one of theſe three houſes remained entire 220. years after, vntill the yeare 1430. The other two beeing ruined were built againe but not with ſo great ſtones as this third.
               There is ſome diuerſity of opinion about the etymology of the name of Horne, which ſignifies as well a hunters horne as otherwiſe, ſome ſay it is of the hauen of the towne that turnes in forme of a little horne; others ſay that this ſame place was full of bogges, where now the ditches and walls of the towne are, and that there grew there certaine plants in great quantity in forme of a horne, the which beeing cut either aboue or below one might winde as of a cornet.
               The ſtreete of the ſaid towne that is called the New Dam, where the woodmongers and ſhoomakers dwell, and where the turue boats arriue was

made in the time of the Count William when there was not water inough without the Sluce of Horne, but that the great ſhippes of Denmarke and Hambourge were forced to ſtay at the ſea ditch, and therefore they cauſed a little long ditch to bee made which they called the New Dam, beginning at the great ditch a good diſtance from the mouth of the ſea, from whence they brought their horſes and oxen to the towne. All this is now within the towne; fairely built, and called the New Damme.
               
               In the yeare of our Lord 1350. Duke William of Bauaria the ſonne of the Emperour Lodowick and Marguerite Counteſſe of Holland gaue to the Burgeſes of Horne as large and ample priuiledges as they had giuen to them of Medenblick which to this day they enioy. There is a ſtreete in the ſaid towne called Heer Gerits Landt ſo called of Gerard of Hemskerke who cauſed a faire houſe to bee built in a large garden now full of houſes, the which Gerard died in the ſayd towne in the yeare of our Lord 1398. after hee had ſerued Duke Albert in his wars againſt the Friſons.
               
               In the time of the Lady Iaqueline Counteſſe of Holland &c. certaine townes of Weſt-Freeſland rebelled againſt her, and called in Philippe Duke of Burgundie the Sonne of her Aunt, vnwilling to bee gouerned any longer by a woman, wherevpon grew great warres, the Kennemers taking part with their Princeſſe and making warres

againſt the Waterlanders, and Eaſt Friſons, the Hornois by reaſon of their ritches and great traffick that they had from North to South, being growne proud.
               It happened at this time that a young man of the ſaid towne, the ſonne of one of the cheefeſt marchants called Ian Lambrechts Cruyf, being in the towne of Goude, where the Counteſſe Iaqueline kept her reſidence, ſeeing the ſaid Counteſſe paſſe by, ſaid, without thinking any hurt: It is great pitty and ſhame to vſe ſo noble a Dame in this ſort, as if ſhe were a common woman.
               
               Theſe words were worſe taken then they were meant. Where-vpon 
                     •
                  hee was committed to priſon. Lambert Cruyff hearing of his ſonnes reſtraint, poſted thether with a good ſumme of money to redeeme him. Hauing treated with the Iudges, and preſented this money, they gaue him good words, telling him that his ſonne ſhould not dye, but ſhould be onely lead to the place of execution: Whereas the executioner drawing out his ſword, the Counteſſe ſhould crye out, which ſhould cauſe the headſ-man to ſtaye, and ſo his ſonne ſhould bee freed.
               The father was ſomewhat comforted with this anſwer, and ſeeing there was no other meanes, hee recommended the cauſe vnto God. The ſonne being vpon the Scaffold, and the e
                     •
                   ecutioner hauing drawne his ſword, the Counteſſe made no ſhew of crying out, ſo as this poore young

man was vniuſtly executed, wherewith the father being much moued, he ſayed vnto himſelfe, being vnderſtood by ſome other. Thou ſhalt not remaine Conteſſe of Holland neither ſhalt thou hereafter enio
                        •
                     e that Country in peace. And therevpon he returned with his money to his owne houſe. Beeing come to Horne hee acquainted the Magiſtrates and the Bourgers with the wrong which the Conteſſe had done vnto his ſonne, in the towne of Goude, wherevpon a councell was held of all the chiefe of the towne, who concluded ioyntly neuer more to acknowledge her for their Princeſſe, and to fortefie themſelues againſt her. The father of this young man that was executed, full of diſcontent and deſire of reuenge, did giue or lend a great ſum of money, to beginne the fortification of the towne.
               And this beeing in the yeare 1427. they began to compaſſe in this towne with goodly walls and deepe and large ditches. Doctor Adrianus Iunius (a curious ſercher out of Antiquities, as appeeres by his hiſtory of Battauia) was borne in that town, ſonne to Peter de Iouge a Bourguemaſter. This towne abounds with all ſorts of victualls, halfe of it all along the ſea, is defended with good paliſſadoes, and banks, made of a ſmall graſſe which they call Vlyer, in Latin Alga, wherewith moſt of the bankes in that quarter of Westfriſland are armed, for that it ſettles cloſe together, and doth not rot in a long time, and being rotten it becomes firme

earth. They gather ſhippes ladings of this graſſe in a certaine ſeaſon of the yeare, in the ſea about the Iſland of Wyeringhe, from the which it is named, and they keepe great heaps thereof in ſtore, to repaire their bankes at neede when as they are any way decaied. It is ſtrange that is reported of this herbe, that wild ſwannes at a lowe water pull it out of the botome of the ſea, the which floting vpon the water, ſtaies in a certaine place, whereas they goe to gather it. This Iſland of Wyeringhe is not farre from that of Texel, nor conſequently from Enchuyſen, Medenbilck nor Horne, the which beſides all other delights which it yeelds, brings forth aboundance of great Skirrit rootes, as delicate a meate as can bee preſented before a King, wherein Plinie reports that the Emperor Tiberius did ſo delight, as hee cauſed them to bee brought out of Germanie to Rome.
               
            
            
               ALCMAR.
               THis towne is three leagues diſtant from Horne, where ends the iuriſdiction of the Canenefates, or Kennemers in the countrie language: It is in a manner enuironed round about with diuers great Lakes, the which are made by the brookes which fall from the ſandie Downes, ſo as in my opinion this name was giuen it by reaſon of the multitude of theſe Lakes, the which in the Cymbrians tongue they call Meer
                        •
                     n, as if they

would ſay Almeer▪
                   and ſome in Latin call it Almeria. There are tenne of theſe Lakes, the which by Sluſes and Mills to draine out the water, vpon hope of greater profit, haue beene laide drie, partly at the charge of the Lords of Brederode, and Egmont, as alſo by Thierry Teyling a Receyuor and other good Bourgers of Alcmar; the names of which Lakes thus recouered, were Bergen, conteyning 1200. Acres of ground, Daele, Veronne, Suyn, Bouckler, Heyuluen, Grobber, Temple, Argillar and the Lake behind. There are yet fiue remayning, that of Diepee Voere, Scherme, Byems and that of Waerd: the which they haue no meaning to lay dry, by reaſon of their depth, and the benifit they reape by the freſh water-fiſh which they yeelde. They ſay that this towne was firſt founded by Adgill King of Friſland a Godly man, nothing reſembling his impious father Radbod, who mocking at the Saints in Paradiſe, hauing demanded what was become of his predeceſſors which had dyed Infydells, and anſwere being made him that they were in hell, going to the Font to bee baptized by the Biſhoppe of Soiſſons, hee retired backe ſaying, that after his death hee would goe where his Parents were. Of whome theſe rough verſes were made.
               
                  O' Iocus, ò dirum et tibi formidabile ſemper
                  Elogium, Radbode, tuum poſt triſtia fata.
               
               
                  
                  O ieaſt, and diſmall memory withall,
                  
                     (Radbode) for thee, and thy dire funerall.
               
               This Adgill, raygned in Friſland in the yeare 720. whoſe lymits were very great, he founded the towne of Alcmar but it doth not appere by any Annales, when it was walled in, yet of late yeares they haue deſcouered the foundation of a Caſtle, which Petrus Nannius a learned Hiſtoriographer borne in the ſame towne affirmes that hee hath ſeene: the queſtion is if this caſtle were built by King Adgill, and if it were called Alcmar, which town (the Friſons hauing ruined ſome 450. yeares ſince) is now wel fortefied with goodly ditches, & mighty walles, flanked with nine great Bulwarks, which haue beene made within theſe 35. yeares, after that the Spaniards had beſieged it, battred it and giuen maine aſſaults, were in the end forced to raiſe their ſiege with diſhonour and loſſe, the Bourgers, yea the women and children ſhewing themſelues as courragious and reſolute to defend their rampars, as any martiall men could haue done, hauing a late preſident of the Duke of Aluas cruelty againſt them of Harlem after their yeelding. It is a faire and pleaſant towne, and exceedingly well built, furniſhed with fiſh and foule at an eaſie rate, by reaſon of the Lakes: They haue great aboundance of butter, cheeſe, beefe, mutton and conies, the ayre is holeſome and the ſituation pleaſing, hauing goodly medowes round about

it. Beſides the caſtle aboue mentioned, there were two others not farre from thence to ſtoppe the incurſions of the Friſons, who did annoy Holland daylie; which two caſtles Martin van Roſſen Marſhall of the campe to Charles Duke of Gueldres did burne and ruine ſome three ſcoore and tenne yeares ſince. About a thouſand paces from the ſayd towne, in olde time was the towne of Veronna, the which was faire, ſpatious and well peopled; of great welth, and the Metropolitaine of all the baſe Friſons, whereof at this day there is nothing to bee ſeene, but the ruines, the foundations whereof giue good teſtymonie what it hath beene.
               In the fieds of Veronna (which bee verie fertill in corne) is a village called Saint Pancrat. Wee muſt beleeue that this towne of Veronna hath beene the chiefe of all the baſe Friſons, the Fierbrand of warre and all combuſtions againſt the Hollanders, to whom they were neere neighbours: and for their trecherie and breach of faith were often aſſayled by the Princes of Holland, ſo as in the end, Iohn Earle of Holland, hauing conceiued an irreconciliable hatred againſt them, cauſed it to bee razed to the grounde, and plowed vppe, forbidding them euer to build it vp againe, for the ruining whereof hee drewe in the Engliſh, to whom hee gaue it in prey: the ſayd towne hauing beene deliuered vnto him by the treaſon of Phobe Bourguemaſter thereof,

who had ſold it for a boote full of ſiluer, whoſ
                     •
                   ſepulcher, (beeing caſt al
                     ••
                  e into a hole, and couered with dunge) is yet to bee ſeene in a towre of theſe ruined caſtles, the which is at this daie called Phobes tower. The Hiſtorie of the deſtruction of this towne, (the which a certaine Preeſt hath written) hath beene for theſe many yeares kept in the cloyſter of Henloo, but I knowe no
                     •
                   what is become thereof ſince it was ruined in theſe laſt troubles. William Goudan Schoolefellow to Eraſmus of Rotterdam in his Hiſtorie which hee hath written of Hiero a Scottiſhman who was ſlaine by the Danes, ſpeaking of this towne ſaith.
               
                  Quos priſ
                        •
                     i Friſios olim dixere minorés
                  Arctoò a fluvio, pelagi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      venitis ab ora,
                  Tunc vobis Verona caput, nunc campus et arua &c.
               
               
                  You, whom old writters leſſer Friſons call
                  Come from the Northren coaſts the firſt of al,
                  Then Veron was your head, that now lies waſte &c.
               
               In an other place he faith.
               
                  —Friſiis, ſi quando bella vocabant
                  Dux Verona fuit ac tantae gloria gentis.
               
               
                  —When vnto warres the Friſons went
                  
                     Verona was their guide, and ornament.
               
               
                  
Whereby it doth plainelie appeere that this towne of Veronna hath beene verie famous. But whie the Annales haue made ſo baſe a mention thereof, I can yeelde no other reaſon, but that it might either bee through the ignorance of writers, or for the great malice and hatred they bare againſt this towne, the memorie whereof they deſired to haue extinct.
               This inſcription doth witneſſe the yeare of her deſtruction. ECCe CadIt Mater frIſIae 
                  
                     •
                  303. There are yet two Belles to bee ſeene that were caſt in the ſayd towne of Veronna, the one in the village of Val
                        •
                     kenooge, and the other in the Cittie of London in England.
               
               The rights of fiſhing which the ſayd towne hath had, in all the Lakes, the Rhine and the Meuſe, which at this daie they call Veronna, beeing anexed to the reuenues of the Princes of Holland, giue good teſtymonie how ritch and mightie it hath beene: and the accounts which are held of the territorie of the ſayd towne, which they call the accountes of Veronna, doe well witneſſe it. The ſeale of the ſayd towne hath beene found within theſe fiftie yeares; in which was grauen an Eagle looking vppe to heauen, with the winges diſplayed, and on the ſide of it a ſworde, with this inſcription. SIGILLVM CIVIVM DE VRONELGEYST.
               
                  
There was about a league and a halfe from Alcmar, a good part of the countrie called La Sype, twiſe or thrice drowned, vntill that the well affected Bourgers, with the helpe of manie Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, both of Holland and Brabant, had (with their great cha
                     •
                  ge) recouered it, and fortefied it with ſo good bankes, as they haue no more cauſe to feare any inondation, whereof they haue made a fertill countrie, fit both for tillage and paſture, with many goodlie farmes. Although that Adrianus Iunius would make Horne the Metropolitaine of Weſt-Friſland, yet this towne of Alcmar hath the firſt place and the firſt voice, in the Eſtates of the ſayd Prouince.
            
            
               MEDENBLIC.
               
                  MEdenblic is ſeated vppon the ſea, in the fartheſt part of North Hollande, two leagues and a halfe from Enchuyſen
                        •
                     ; it hath a port made by art, fortefied with that ſea graſſe aboue mentioned; a ſafe retreate for ſhippes in fowle weather, hauing a ſtronge caſtle. It was quite burnt by the Friſons in the yeare of our Lord and Sauiour 129
                     •
                  
                  ▪ and the caſtle was ſo long beſieged, as they were forced for to ea
                     •
                  e horſes.
               The ignorant multitude 
                     •
                  old 
                     •
                  n opinion that the Fabulous Medea gaue the name, and that

her Image of braſſe guilt, beeing ſette vppon an heigh eminent place, did ſerue as a ſea marke to all ſaylers: Alſo when as the Sunne did ſhine vpon this Image they did call vppe their ſeruants to worke, crying Medeeblinckt (Medeeſhynes) and that thereof it tooke the name of Medenblyck.
               
               They hold that King Radbode, who (as wee haue ſaied) went from the font when hee ſhould haue beene baptized, held his Court there. It hath within 34. yeares beene ſo fortefied with walles and bulwarkes as it is now held impregnable; the country about it beeing intrencht with ditches, is full of medowes fit to ſat cattell it is well furniſhed with victualls, and good cheape.
            
            
               EDAM.
               THat which at this day is called Edam, was in olde time named Yedam of a current of water which is called Ye vry Yde, the which running about the C
                     •
                  urch, fell by a Sluſe, (which they call Damme) into the great chanell of the towne, which goes vnto the ſea, that is to ſay, the Sluſe of Yde. There is a certaine village in the mideſt of this water, called Middelye. The towne is at this preſent well walled in, and ditcht, it is famous for the good cheeſe which is ma
                     •
                  e there, it hath a long hauen, to the which there belongs many great and goodly ſhippes, which are built there

euery yeare, beeing as ſtately and of as great charge as any in Holland or Zeeland bee it either for warre or Marchandiſe.
               In the yeare of our Lord 1404. ſome women of this towne going in barkes to feed their cattell in the neere paſtures of Purmermeer, they did often ſee at the ebbing of the water, a ſea woman playing in the water, whereat in the beginning they were afraied, but beeing accuſtomed to ſee it often, they incourraged one an other, and with their barkes entred into this water, into the which ſhee was come at a full ſea, and could not finde the waie out againe: theſe women hauing deſcouered her, made with their boates towardes her, and the water beeing not deepe ynough for her to diue vnto the bottome, they tooke her by force, drewe her into a boate and carried her to Edam, where in time ſhee grew familiar, accuſtoming her ſelfe to feede of ordynarie meates: They of Harlem deſired much to haue her, to whom ſhee was ſent, and liued ſome fifteene yeares: ſhee neuer ſpake, ſeeking often to gette againe into the water, you may reade this diſcourſe at large in the Hiſtory of the Netherlands. This towne is two leagues equally diſtant as well by ſea as by land from Horne.
               
            
            
               
               MONICKENDAM.
               THis towne on the South-ſide lookes towards, the Ile of Mark, which is oppoſite vnto it: the ſea therein reaſonably ſtill, for that it lies vnder the Lee of the ſayd Iſland: It is not verie ſpatious, and towardes the Land it is walled and ditcht. It takes the name of a Lake neere vnto it called Monicker-meere, the which beeing at this daie defended with bankes, is made a ſea, whereas great ſhippes lie ſafely beeing couered with that Land. The armes of this towne are a Monke clad in blacke, holding a maſe in his hand whereby wee may conclude that both the Lake and the towne tooke their names from a Monke, but why or what hee was, it is not, knowne. This towne was built in the yeare of our Lord and Sauiour 1297. When as the Friſons came thether with a fleete of ſhippes to goe and ſuccor the Biſhoppe of Vtrecht, it is but a league from Edam.
               
            
            
               PVRMERENDE.
               THis towne ſtands in the mideſt of Moores, lying at the end of the Purmer ſea, where is a Sluce, by the which they of the towne ſayle towardes Edam, Monickendam and other places that border vpon the ſayd ſea, on the other ſide

there is nothing but Lakes, which coaſt the townes of Ryp, Graft, Wormer, euen vnto Alcmar. In theſe three Bouroughes, they are ritch men which imploy themſelues moſt at ſea, as well in fiſhing for herring as in trade of marchandiſe. At Wormer they make aboundance of good by ſcuit, which they carry to ſell in all the townes of Holland, Zeeland and Friſland, for the prouiſion of their ſhippes.
               This towne is verie ſmall; it hath beene fortefied during theſe laſt warres, againſt the towne of Amſterdam, the which in the beginning of the troubles held the Duke of Aluas party, but this was allied to the townes of Alcmar, Horne, Enchuyſen, Medenblick, Edam, Monickendam, with other places of Weſt-Friſland, againſt whom the Spaniards could not preuaile, but loſt many men in this watriſh countrie, the which is rightly called Waterland: in the which are the ſayd townes of Purmerende, the three Boroughes aboue mentioned, and many other villages.
               This towne was firſt built by a priuate perſon, but verie ritch, the which came afterwardes with the caſtle to the Earles of Egmont, and ioynes vnto his hauen vpon Alcmar ſide: It is verie cheape lyuing there, by reaſon of the aboundance of fleſh and fiſh.
            
            
               
               MVDEN.
               THe towne of M
                        •
                     den is ſeated at the mouth of the riuer of Vecte: ſome fortie yeares ſince it was but a poore paltrie village, feeling then the miſeries, which it had endured by the burning and ſpoiles of the Duke of Guelders, but within two yeares it was repaired. Since the laſt troubles (yea within theſe twelue yeares) it hath beene wholy finiſhed and beautified, with ramparts, goodly bridges and faire houſes: It hath a ſtrong caſtle vpon the gulphe whereas the Vecte runnes into the Zuyderzee. This caſtle is famous by the taking of Floris the fift Earle of Holland; who hauing forced the wife of a Knight called Gerard van Velſen, was (by the conſpirac
                     •
                  e of many noble men of Holland) taken being a Hawking, and carried into this caſtle, thinking to tranſport him from thence into England, there to end his dayes, and to call home Earle Iohn, who had married the Kings daughter: but they found no opportunitie to effect it: beſides the commons of the Waterlanders did riſe of all ſides to ſuccour him; the which the conſpirators finding, meaning to carry him by land into ſome other countrie, they ledde him from thence; but as they were egerly pourſued; Van Velſen being loth to abandon his priſoner, whom hee had mounted vpon a paltrie Iade, comming to leape o
                     •
                  er a ditch (as all the country is full of trenches) the horſe falling, ouerthrew

the Earle into the ditch. Van Velſen (ſeeing that he could no longer keepe him,) with a furious deſire of reuenge, gaue him eighteene wounds with his ſword, whereof hee died vpon the mount of Naerden, whether the peſants carried him Van Velſen and the other conſpirators ſaued themſelues in the caſtle of Croenenburg, where they were taken and grieuouſly puniſhed: The Lords of Amſtel, Woerden, and ſome others, eſcaped, and wandred long vp and downe. The Siegnior of Nyuclt is captaine of this caſtle of Muyden, with a good garriſon well prouided of all things.
            
            
               NAERDEN.
               ALthough that this towne hath ſuffered much, being firſt ruined by that warlike Prelate the Biſhop of Vtrecht, of the houſe of Arckel, who changed the place of ſituation, and did cauſe them to build it where it now ſtands, being a faire and a ſtrong towne, the which we may iuſtly ſay is but a ſhopp of Weauers, whereas they make great aboundance of very fine cloath. The houſes of this towne are very faire, being newly built within foure and thirtie yeares. For the Duke of Alua meaning to bee reuenged of the Hollanders, (who were for the moſt part reuolted, by reaſon of his tyrannie,) he ſent Don Frederick his ſonne thether with an armie: who approching neere vnto the towne of Naerden: the Bourguemaiſter & councell of the towne, went forth to meete him, and to preſent

him the Keyes of the towne: when being entred with his troops, the Bourgers ſeeking to giue them all the contentment they could deuiſe: the Spaniards (contrary to their faith and promiſe) fell vpon them, and murthered a great number (whom they had cauſed to retire into a church) in colde bloud, forced and deflowred the wiues and virgins, ſpoiled the towne▪ and hauing carried away their bootie, they ſet it on fire; the which was a good preſident for the other townes of Holland: by the which the townes of Harlem and Alcmar tooke example, the firſt being as cruelly intreated after their yeelding, and the other ſo incouraged to defend themſelues, as after a ſiege of ſixe weekes and diuerſe aſſaults, the Spaniards were forced to retire to their diſhonor and loſſe. This towne of Naerden is the chiefe of the Bayliwicke of Goeland, which the Biſhops of Vtrecht haue often pretended to belong vnto them, but ſince it is annexed to the reuenewes of Holland.
               
            
            
               GORRICHOM.
               THis towne of Gorchum or Gorrichom, from a ſmall beginning, is growne to the greatneſſe and ſtate wherein you ſee it at this day, for it takes his name from poore Fiſherman, who had their lodgings or cabins along the riuer of Lingen, vntill it ioynes with the Meuſe and Wahal, who by reaſon of their po
                     •
                  uertie; were in contempt called Gorrikens: whom Iohn of Arckel the ſeuenth Baron

of that race, Lord of the countrie of Arckel, cauſed to come and dwell behinde and about his caſtle, where by degrees hee built a good towne, the which he walled in about the yeare 1230. And to the end they ſhould retaine their name of Gorrikens, hee called this towne Gorrichom, as much to ſay (hom or h
                        •
                     ym, in old time ſignifying a houſe or aboade) as the dwelling of theſe Gorrikens. There is in this towne a great market of fiſh, fowle, and all other prouiſion needfull for the life of man, whereof they make a great trade, as well into Brabant, as other places, which doth much inriche the towne: for the Bourgers themſelues are both marchants, marriners and factors, one man alone ſupplying the place of three: from the top of the higheſt ſteeple you may ſee in a cleere day two and twenty walled townes, beſides bourroughs and villages, which are very many, being a pleaſant ſight to behold; Neere vnto it is the Champian countrie where (as they ſay) Hercules Alemanicus did campe. Wherevpon they call all that quarter the country of Hercules, the which the common people did afterwards terme Herkel, and from that to Arkel: when the ſaid towne was obſcured by the houſe of Arkel, by reaſon of the continuall warres which their Lords made againſt the Earles of Holland.
               
               
                  Charles 
                  
                     •
                  uke of Bourgongne cauſed a goodly caſtle to be built there vpon the riuer, nee 
                     •
                   vnto the Port of Do
                        •
                     d
                        •
                     ect▪
                   the which ſince theſe laſt

troubles hath beene razed and fortified after an other manner; ſo as there remaines nothing but a place for the paiment of the cuſtome: it is ſo fortified with twelue bulwarkes, beſides halfe▪moones and counterſcarps without it, together with that aboundance of water, as one would ſay it were impregnable. It is made halfe bigger then it was twenty yeares ſince: the riuer of Linghen runnes through the middeſt of it, being alwayes full of ſhips: it falls into the Meruve, and mingles it ſelfe with the riuers of Wahal and Meuſe: all which together paſſe before Dordrecht, Rotterdam, Delfs-hauen, Schiedam and the Briele, where it falles into the Brittiſh ſea. Maiſter Ihon Harie Chanoine of the Chapell at the Hage in Holland, was borne in this towne; hee was ſo great a louer of pi
                     •
                  tie, vertue, and learning▪ as during his life he ſought out (with great care, diligence and coſt) all bookes, in all languages and faculties. When he came to reſide at the Hage, hee brought ſo great a number of bookes with him, as the people thought there were not ſo many to be found in all Holland: wherwith he made a goodly Library, the which he did augment with great care euen to his dying day, which was in the yeare 1
                     •
                  32. where of he made the Emperor Charles the firt his heire.
            
            
               WORCOM.
               ALthough this towne bee out of the limit
                     •
                  s of the Countie of Holland, beyond the riuer of

                  Wahal, on Brabant ſide, right againſt the ſtrong caſtle of Loueſtein, hauing a little lower on the other banke the towne of Gorchom, the which in ancient time did belong vnto the Earles of Horne, which the King of Spaine did confiſcate, and ſince it was quite burnt: but the Eſtates of Holland hauing ſeazed thereon, and fortified it with good rampars, bulwarkes and ditches, it hath beene new built, and is made a faire towne, where the Eſtates doe entertaine an ordinary garriſon, with a Captaine ſuperintendent.
               Of late yeares the Eſtates (to cut of all controuerſie touching the iuriſdiction of the ſayde Towne) agreed with the Lady Walburge Counteſſe of Moeurs and Nyeuwenaert, widdow to Philip of Montmorency the laſt Earle of Horne, who ſold them the proprietie of the ſaid Towne, with the caſtle and territorie of Altena, not farre from thence, beeing in ancient time all drowned, but now it is a countrie full of good paſtures: So theſe two peeces of Worcom and Altena, are anne
                     •
                  ed to the reuenewes of the Countie of Holland, where-with it is ſo much augmented. There is an other Worcum in Friſland vpon the ſea, not farre from Hindelopen, the which hath the title and priuiledge of a towne, although it bee but a Boroughe without any walles, but it is great, and almoſt three thouſand paces long.
            
            
               
               HEVSDEN.
               IS a reaſonable faire towne and well built, ſituated on Brabant ſide, vpon the riuer of Wahall, with a goodly caſtle, where the Gouernors do reſide, the laſt of which was Floris of Brederode, Siegnior of Cloetinge, brother to the Lord of Brederode laſt deceaſed, who left one ſonne the only heire of all the houſe of Brederode. The Siegnior of Locren commands there now for the Eſtates. It was long vnder a priuate Lord. They of Brabant pretended it to be of their iuriſdiction, but Holland hath held it vnto this day. It hath a large command.
            
            
               LEERDAM.
               THis towne is ſmall, yet walled in, ſtanding vpon the bankes of the riuer of Lingen; it hath beene ſo often ruined in the old warres, as they haue had no great care to repaire it, ſo as it is of ſmall moment, it belongs to Philip of Naſſaw now Prince of Orange, Earle of Buren, and hath a caſtle which is ſtill maintained.
            
            
               HENCLOM.
               
                  HEnclom is a towne ſeated alſo vpon the riuer of Lingen, oppoſite to Leerdam: it is a little towne and very ancient, but goes to decaye. It hath an olde Caſtle which they ſaye was built by Hercules Alemanicus, but GOD beſt knowes how true it is. The Lordes of this

little towne are deſcended from Otto, the yonger ſonne to Iohn the eight Lord of Arkel, who gaue him this Siegneurie in his life time.
            
            
               ASPEREN.
               IS ſituated vpon the banke of the ſame riuer of Lingen, which the Inhabitants call Lyeuen, that is as much to ſay as Loue, for that the ſtreame runs ſo gently. In the yeare 1516. it was grieuouſly afflicted by the Geldrois, who being accompanied by ſome rebells and mutinous Hollanders, beſieged it, and in the end tooke it by aſſault, notwithſtanding all the valiant reſiſtance of the beſieged, whom they put to the ſword, and ſet fire of the towne, not ſparing the very Churches, into the which the women and children were retired, whom they intreated ſo barbarouſly, as Turkes in their greateſt fury could not haue exceeded them.
            
            
               OVDE-WATER.
               THis word fignifieth Old-waters, which they terme in Latine Aquas veteres, it is a reaſonable good towne, and hath riche Bourgers in it: it ſtands like vnto Goude, vpon the riuer of Yſſell, a league from Woerden, betwixt which townes they ſowe great aboundance of hempe, wherewith they make ropes, cables and netts for fiſhing, which is the chiefe worke of the poorer ſort, & the greateſt

profit of the richer. This towne was beſieged by the Lord of Hierges for the Duke of Alua, and valiantly defended, but in the end it was taken by aſſault, whereas the Spaniards after they had vſed their accuſtomed cruelties, ſet fire of it, ſo as it is not yet repaired.
            
            
               ROTTERDAM.
               
                  ROtterdam is ſituated neere vnto the Meuſe, vpon the mouth of the channell which they call Rotter, where-vnto adding Dam (which is a Scluſe) it makes Rotterdam, the Scluſe of Rotter. Of that which Guichardin and Sebaſtian Munſter write of the foundation and antiquitie of this towne, I beleeue no more then Doctor Adrianus Iunius doth: for it is a matter without all doubt or controuerſie, that the place where as the towne now ſtands, was heretofore an arme of the ſea, without the riuer of Meuſe, which the remainder of the bankes doe yet witneſſe, the which extended from the caſtle of Honingen (belonging to them of the houſe of Aſendelfe) vnto Croeſwicke, which was a caſtle vpon the Rotter, and ſo went on vnto the village of Ouderſchye, and ended at the ditches of Schiedam. Rotterdam is augmented more then a moitie within theſe two and twenty yeares, hauing remooued the port of their hauen (which they haue made of goodly Free-ſtone) from the old ſeate, at the leaſt a hundred paces neerer vnto the mouth of their hauen,

and to the point: Neere vnto which porte is a goodly Bourſe for Marchants with three galleries, which ſtand vpon pillers of free-ſtone. The towne doth dayly increaſe in wealth, Firſt by their fiſhing with their great ſhippes, called Buſſes, the which are ſtrong and well appointed both to incounter an enemy, and to reſiſt the violence of the ſea: and of late yeares by their trade to the Eaſt and Weſt Indies, and ſeeking their fortunes againſt the Spaniards, from whome they haue many times taken great prizes: The hauen is long, built all of a blew ſtone, which doth reſiſt the violence of the water, in which hauen a great number of ſhipps may ſafely lye.
               Euery yeare there are goodly great ſhips built in this towne for theſelong voyages, and galleys where there is any need of them for the warre, vpon the coaſt of Holland and Zeland. Some fiue and thirty or ſixe and thirty yeares ſince the Earle of Boſſu hauing ſurprized it by the Duke of Aluas command (where ſome Bourgers were ſlaine) by the negligence of ſome inſolent ſoldiers, it was fired, the which by the meanes of a great tempeſtuous winde, did conſume aboue nine hundred houſes, and ſome ſhips, where there were men loſt. The loſſe was great, but it was ſoone repaired, and the houſes built fairer and higher then before, the moſt of them being of blew ſtone. That great light of learning and knowledge Deſiderius Eraſmus Roterodamus was borne in this towne, almoſt right

before the Church doore, in a ſtreete which goes vnto the market place, of which towne hee doth often ſpeake honorably in his writings. There is ouer the doore where he was borne being a little houſe, where I haue ſeene a Taylor dwell, a ſmall round circle, whereas his face onely is drawne, with an inſcription in Latin and Spaniſh, ſaying, Heere that great Eraſmus of Rotterdam was borne: and in the Market place looking towards the hauen, his picture is planted at length with a booke in his hand. Hee hath deſerued this honor and much more for his great knowledge, whereof hee hath giuen good teſtimonie, by ſo many Bookes which hee hath put forth to the honor of God, and the inſtructions of Chriſtians: yet all men ſpeake not equally of him, but enuie neuer dyes. Hee had beene an Auguſtine Monke, and therefore the Monkes were his greateſt enemies: yet he was held in good reputation, and had a liuing from Pope Leo the tenth. Hee died at Baſill in Swiſſerland, and is interred in the Cathedrall Church, where I haue ſeene his Sepulcher entring into the Quier.
            
            
               SCHIEDAM.
               IS a towne ſituated vpon a current of water, which comes not farre out of a countrie called Schie: from whence it takes the name, as if one would ſay the Sluſe of Schie. It hath a good hauen vpō the Meuſe. It is apparent by the priuiledges of

the ſaid towne, that it was made a towne in the yeare 1274. and had their priuiledges granted from the Earle of Holland, with power to adminiſter Iuſtice, with many good lawes, wherof mention is made in the foundation & of the building of the ſaid towne, which was then called Nyeuwen-Dam, that is, the New Scluſe, which name it carryed vntill the yeare 1300. and ſince it hath beene alwayes called Schiedam. In this towne there is an hoſpitall, which for antiquitie is equall with the foundation, the which they called the Hoſpitall of the new Dam, which hath this priuiledge, that a Bourger or any other dying, eyther within the towne, or in the liberties thereof, the beſt garment hee leaues, doth belong vnto the ſayd hoſpitall.
               The chiefe trade of this towne is fiſhing for herring, to which end they do euery yeare ſend forth a good number of Buſſes into the North ſea, and from thence they tranſport and ſell them farre and neere. It is a rich marchandize and much deſired in France and the Eaſt countries, as at Danſick, Conixbergen, Hambourg, Lubeck, Bremen, and generally through-out all Germanie. It is a common ſaying, that the herring is a little fiſh, but ſtrong enough to ruine his Maiſter, when hee playes with his tayle, that is to ſay, when hee ſells not, but when the fiſhing and the vent is good, it makes them ritch. Beſides this fiſhing, they commonlie ſend forth euery yeare many great

ſhippes, which traffick through-out all the ſeas of the world; ſo as there are many good maiſters of ſhippes, Pilots, and expert marriners in the towne. The Marchants and Bourgers of this towne are ſincere and iuſt in their dealings, who imitating the ancient paines of the old Hollanders, hate all pride, pompe, and ſuperfluitie, as well in bankets, apparell, as riche moouables, wherein they are very moderate, with an honeſt parcimonie, ſuch as their predeceſſors vſed, which is an honour vnto them.
            
            
               BRIELE.
               IT ſeemes this towne hath taken his name from the largeneſſe of the gulfe, where as the Meuſe and the Rhine (ioyned together) fall into the Ocean or Brittiſh ſeas, in which place they ſay that Claudius Ciuilis (iſſued from the bloud royall of the Battauians did fight with the Romaine fleete, but with-out any great gaine to eyther parte. This word of Briele, doth well agree with that of Hiele in Plinie, which for the largeneſſe of the gulph may bee called Bre-heile (which is a large heele) and by corruption of the tongue Briele. This towne with that of Gheervlyet (a ſmall towne in the ſame Iſland of Vorne) are reaſonablie good, the Inhabitants for the moſt part are ſea-faring men, which gette their liuing by fiſhing, and that which belongs therevnto. The ayre of this towne is groſſe and heauie, lying ſo

neere vnto the ſea, ſo as it is euery yeare viſited with ſome diſeaſe or other. The countrie about it is very fertill, and yeelds aboundance of good wheate, and all other victuals are plentifull and good cheape there.
            
            
               SCHOONHOVEN.
               THis towne takes his name of the goodly and pleaſant gardens, which are both within and about it, abounding in diuerſe ſorts of fruites. For this worde Schoonhoven, ſignifies goodly gardens. It is ſituated vpon the left banke of the riuer of Leck: they hold that it was built of the ruines of the towne of Nieuport, the which at this day is but a Bourg, on the other ſide of the ſayd riuer, oppoſite to Schoonhouen: In all this paſſage euen vnto the village of Leckerke; there is great fiſhing for Salmons, which they ſell in the ſaid towne, and the villages there-abouts.
               
                  Chriſtopher Longolius that excellent Orator, was borne in this Towne, although that ſome would haue him a French-man, or a Wallon. The which Peter Longolius his Vncle, a very learned man did witneſſe, whoſe teſtimonie is ſufficient to confute all other opinions. There paſſeth a channell through this towne which comes out of the riuer of Yſſell, very commodious to paſſe from one riuer vnto the other.
            
            
               
               ISELSTEYN.
               IT is a ſmall towne but very ſtrong, beeing ſo fortified by reaſon of their great warres. It is ſo called of a little channell which paſſeth, comming out of the riuer of Yſſell▪
                   There had beene a long controuerſie betwixt the Hollanders and them of Vtrecht for the iuriſdiction of this towne, either partie pretending an intereſt. Some foure and thirtie yeares ſince, the Church ſteeple was burnt by lightning from heauen but did no other harme vnto the towne. It is of the patrimonie of the houſe of Egmont, whereof the laſt Lord was Maximilian of Egmont, Earle of Buren and Iſeiſteyn, who left one daughter, ſole heyre to the Lord of Launoy, whom William Prince of Orange did marry, being his firſt wife, ſo as all the inheritance of theſe houſes of Buren and Launoy came to Phillip William, and to the Lady Mary of Naſſau Counteſſe of Hohenloo his ſiſter.
            
            
               WOERDEN.
               IS a reaſonable good towne and well built, with a market place, whereas all prouiſions are to bee ſolde once a weeke: it ſtands in a moore hauing a ſtrong caſtle, whereas they keepe priſoners of importance: as of late dayes the Admirall of Arragon, the Earle of Buſquoy and others. The Lord of Hierges hauing taken Oudewater (as wee haue ſaid) for the Duke of Alua, & the towne of Schoonhoven,
                  
he went to beſiege Woerden, where hauing begun to make his approches, and to plant boates for his batterie, they of the towne let goe all their Sluſes, the which in one night drowned the countrie about, ſo as hee was forced to riſe and leaue two peeces of ordinance. This towne was built by Godfrey Biſhop of Vtrecht, a man giuen to armes, to ſuppreſſe the courſes of the Hollanders. And therefore the ſuperioritie thereof was for a long time queſtionable betwixt the Earles of Holland and the Biſhops of Vtrecht. It hath for long time had a particular Lord, among others a brother to the Lord of Amſtel, who being one of the conſpirators of the death of Cont Flo is the fift fled and continued a vagabond; ſince b
                     •
                   the law of Armes the Hollanders haue enioyed it.
            
            
               VIANE.
               IT is a little ſquare towne ſeated vppon the left banke of the riuer of Leck, a free Baronie belonging to the houſe of Brederode, which would neither be ſubiect to the King of Spaine, nor to the Earles of Holland whereof there hath bin ſome queſtion, (yet it is held of the dependances of Holland but it is not yet decided. It hath a faire Caſtle, which is the ordinarie aboade of Walrard Lord of Brederode, Baron of Viane, Ameide, &c. hauing a large iuriſdiction. It hath endured much after the retreate of Henry Lord of Brederode, in the yeare 1567.
            
            
               
               SAINT GERTRVYDENBERGHE.
               THis word ſignifieth the mount of Saint Geertruyde, it may be, for that the place had beene dedicated to that Saint. It is a ſtrong towne both by nature and art, ſituated vpon the left bank
                     •
                   of the riuer of Meruve: more famous for the taking of great Salmons then any part of all the Netherlands; and ſuch aboundance of Aloſes or troutes, as on a market day you may ſee aboue 18000. great and ſmall, and many great ſtu
                     •
                  gions, which in a conuenient ſeaſon are tranſported to Antwerp, Bruſſelles, Gand, Bruges and other places, beſides that which is diſtributed into Holland, Zeeland and the reſt of the vnited Prouinces. The like is found in the riuer of Yſſel nere vnto the towne of Campen in the country of Oueryſſel. In former times there hath beene great controuerſie for the proprietie of the ſayd towne, the Brabanſons pretending a title therevnto for that it ſtand▪ on their ſide, and the Hollanders making claime alſo vnto it, by reaſon of their ancient poſſeſſion. Which queſtion proceeded ſo farre, (there beeing no meanes to reconcile it) as the Eſtates of Holland (when they did receiue their Earles) bound them by a ſollemne o
                     •
                  h to keepe it vnder the ſayd Earldome, and they of Brabant on the other ſide did binde their Dukes to recouer it: Yet it appeeres plainely by the Chronicle of Holland, that when as their Earle (who was alſo Earle of

                  Henault) intended to goe to Mons, Valenciennes or any other place of the ſayd Earldome, the Nobility of Holland came to accompanie him to this towne, whether they of Henault came to attend him, and did conduct him whether he would goe, as alſo in his returne they brought him thether, where as they of Holland did incounter him to conuoie him into Holland. This towne is of the inheritance of the houſe of Naſſau, in whoſe name it was cunningly ſurprized in the yeare 1573. and ſo continued vnder the vnion of the vnited Eſtates, vntill that ſome leud perſons (vnder collour of an ill grounded mutynie,) ſold it in the yeare 1588. to the Duke of Parma, for readie money. But ſince in the yeare 1593. it was recouered by ſiege in viewe of the old Earle of Manffeldt, who was generall of the King of Spaines armie, and gouernor by prouiſion after the death of the Duke of Parma: It is at this day vnder the vnited Eſtates, better fortefied then euer, and alwaies manned with a good garriſon, and furniſhed with all other neceſſarie prouiſions.
            
            
               THE HAGE.
               BEſides Citties and walled townes which they account to eight and twenty in number, there are in Holland manie great Bourroughs, which their Princes haue inricht with goodly priuiledges being nothing inferior to ſome walled towns,

both in greatneſſe, buildings and beautie. Among the which no man can de
                     •
                  ie but the Hage holds the firſt place, which they doe commonly call the Earles Hage: which place the old Earles and Princes did chooſe for their Court, and for the ſeate of their great councell, whereas all cauſes are ended as well vpon the firſt inſtance, as by appeale to the Earles of Holland, Zeeland and Weſt-Friſland. This place is as ſtately, and pleaſing, as well in buildings and houſes of Princes, great perſonages and of the meaner ſort, as in gardins and other delights, as any other in Chriſtendome. The Pallace is great and dicht about, where as all the councellors both for iuſtice, gouernment, warre and treaſure aſſemble. It was built by William King of Romaines and Earle of Holland who cauſed the councellors to bee tranſported from Graueſandt (which is neere vnto the ſea) to the Hage. The great hall of the Pallace is built with wonderfull art, beeing not ſtrengthened with any great beames a croſſe, but onely with a roofe in forme of an Arch, which binds the whole building; the timber was brought out of Ireland, which hath a propertie not to endure any poiſon, and therefore you ſhall not at any time ſee a cobweb there. On the North ſide it hath a great poole, and aboue it a little hill planted with great trees, where as there are pleaſant ſhadie walkes for Summer▪ and feats to reſt themſelues on.
               
                  
Along theſe walkes are many houſes of Noblemen, Preſidents, Gentlemen, Councellors and other men of quality▪ Going out of the Courtgate on the North-ſide alſo, you come vnto an other goodly place, which is appointed for the execution of Iuſtice, all ſo neatly paued, as the more it raynes the cleaner it is, the ſtreetes clenſing themſelues with the rayne: Paſſing on they come to an other great walke full of trees, one ioyning to an other, the which in the ſpring time yeeld a ſweete and pleaſant ſmell; this walke comming behind the houſes and a ſtreet betwixt both, it goes to the gardins of the Harguebuziers and Crosbow-men, whereby they enter into the court on the backe-ſide. This Pallace is the ordynarie reſidence of the Gouernors of Holland, Zeeland and Weſt-friſland, who at this day is that great captaine Prince Maurice of Naſſau, Marquis of Campver
                        •
                      Fluſsing &c. High Admirall for the vnt
                     •
                  ed Prouinces, ſecond ſonne to that valiant and wiſe Prince of Orange, William Earle of Naſſau. It is halfe an houres paſſage to goe from the South which comes from Delfe, vnto the end of the North, (which goes to Scheueling vpon the ſeaſhoare) it is not muchleſſe from the Eaſt to the Weſt, which are the two bredthes compaſſing in the Bourrogh: going out on the Eaſt-ſide towards Leyden, you enter into a pleaſant little wood ſome 1500. pace
                     ••
                  ong, but not ſo broade, well planted with oakes and all other ſorts of trees, and

full of Deere and Conies, a very pleaſant place, the which in the Somer time is much frequented; whether the Aduocats and Proctors goe often to walke when as they come from pleading, before they goe to dinner. The Prouinciall councell conſiſts of a Preſident and foureteene councelors, (among the which is numbred the Aduocate Fiſcall) an Attorney generall, a Regiſter and other Officers. There alſo doth the Receiuor generall of the ſayd country and of Weſt-friſland remaine. The Chamber of accounts which was wont to be there for Holland, Friſland, Groning, Oueryſſel, Vtrecht and Zeeland, is now reſtrained to Holland and Weſt-Friſland alone: the other Prouinces hauing withdrawne themſelues, euery one hauing his Receiuor and chamber of accounts apart: True it is they haue ſubiected themſelues to bring the money which riſeth of contributions and taxations thether, and to deliuer it vnto the Receiuor generall, and to be accountable vnto the Treaſorer generall of the vnited Prouinces, and to the Exchequer of the generall Eſtates. In this Pallace is yet remayning that great and royall Library, which was gathered together by that famous Chanoine Iohn Harrie aboue mentioned. About three ſcore and 
                     •
                  en yeares ſince Martin van Roſſen came with his Geldrois of the garriſon of Vtrecht, at noone day to ſpoile this goodly Bourg, all the councellors and Aduocates flying away and abandoning their houſes to theſe inſolent ſouldiars, who carryed

away their ſpoile in boates to Vtrecht, without any oppoſition. They ſaid that if this goodly Bourg had beene walled in, they had not beene ſubiect to calamitie. Within theſe ſix and thirty yeares they had attempted it, but by reaſon of the furie of the Spaniards it was not held fit: for ſuch as were oppoſite vnto it, ſayed▪ that comming to bee beſieged it ſhould bee quite ſpoiled and ruined: whereas finding it open and the people fled, they did but lodge there ſometimes as they paſt, and ſometimes they ſtayed there, whileſt they did ouer-runne the villages of Weſt-holland. In this place was borne that learned Prelat Iohn Iugenhage being of a Noble family, of whom the Abbot Tritemius and William Vuytenhage make mention, beeing the firſt comicall Poet of the Lower Germaine. Of the ſame place was Gerard Signior of Aſſendelf, who was Preſident of Holland, of an honorable houſe, very learned in Greeke and Latin, and an excellent Poet, and his ſonne Nicholas of Aſſendelf very learned alſo. In like ſort Hippolitus of Perſin Preſident of the Prouince of Vtrecht was borne there, with Splinter Hargene Siegnior of Ooſterwyck, and Arnold Knebel, who was treaſurer for the Eſtates of Holland, and his brother Philip councellor of the priuy councell at Breſſelles, all men of great knowledge.
               Halfe a league from the Hage in our time was a goodly Abbay of Relligious Noblewomen of the order of Saint Bernard, called Loſdune, whereas is

yet to bee ſeene in the Church of the ſayd Abbay which hath beene quite ruined by theſe laſt furious warres) the tombe of the Lady Marguerite of Holland Counteſſe of Hauſberge, with her Epitaph both in Latin & Dutch, ſet there by reaſon of her ſtrange & miraculous deliuerie of three hundred ſixtie and foure children at one birth, whereof Eraſmus Roterodamus, Iohannes Lodouicus Viues and many other famous Authors make mention in their writings, the which I forbeare to relate being ſet downe at large in the Hiſtory of the Netherlands.
               An example of the like child-birth is to bee found in the Annales of Brunſwyck▪
                   with whom Albertus Crantzius, Hiſtoriographer to Erneſtus Prince of Anha
                        •
                     t doth accord in his Comentaries of Vandalia, who writes that ſeauen and thirtie yeares after the ſayd child-birth, the like happened to the Lady Marguerite daughter to the Earle of Holſtein, the which were all baptized. Martin Cromer in his Chronicle of Poland writes that in Cracouia in the yeare 1269. the wife of the Earle Buboſlas was deliuered of ſixe and thirty children all liuing, the which is againſt all the rules of Phiſick and naturall Philoſophy; yea againſt the courſe of nature it ſelfe, yet there is no rule but hath ſome exception, whereas the grace or diuine vengeance interpoſeth it ſelfe, the which ouer-rules Nature and the force of the Elements.
            
            
               
               VLAERDINGHE.
               ALthough this bee but a Borroughe at this day yet it is put in the firſt ranke of all the walled townes of Holland, the riuer of Meuſe (vpon whoſe bankes it ſtands) hauing in a manner eaten it vp with the caſtle, and by great tempeſts driuen it into the ſea. Thierry of Waſenare doth maintaine that it ought be called Verdinge, by reaſon of the tolle which doth yet belong vnto the Lords of Waſſenare, where they did bargaine as well as they could, it is two leagues diſtant as well from Delfe as Rotterdam.
               
            
            
               SEVENBERGHE.
               THis towne is ſeated vpon the riuer of M
                        •
                     ruve, three leagues beneath Gheertruydenberghe, and as much from Breda. The towne lies open; it is ſmall, but reaſonable good, where there was a mighty fort during all the time of the laſt troubles, the which was held by a garriſon for the vnited Eſtates: It belongs now to the Earle of Aremberghe, who hath liberty from the Eſtates, that paying contribution, it ſhall remaineneuter, as it hath done.
               All the aboue named townes although they bee not ſo great as thoſe of Brabant and Flanders, yet they are not much inferior, beeing for the moſt part greater by the halfe, ſtronger and better peopled then they were thirty yeares ſince: ſo as

they which haue not beene there ſince, eſpecially in Amſterdam, will not know it. Of all theſe townes there are fiue which ſhould bee held for Bourroughs, whereof wee will preſently ſpeake ſome thing: that is to ſay, the Hage, (which deſerues well the name of a towne) Vlaerdinghe, Seuenbergh, Muyden and Voorn: yet there is an other towne not walled in, called.
            
            
               GOEREE.
               WHich I finde to bee the laſt of the townes of Holland, it is ſituated in a little Iland inhabited for the moſt part by fiſhermen, and makers of nets, which is their greateſt labour and trafficke: it hath as good and as deepe a roade as any is in Holland, where as great ſhippes which go long voiages caſt anchor, attending their laſt prouiſion, and a good winde. This place hath of late yeares beene ſpoiled by the garriſons of Woude and Hulſt, as alſo Hellevooet-ſluys, oppoſite vnto it, which is the Sluſe of the Iland of Voorn on that ſide towards the ſea, whereas Bryle lies on the other ſide vpon the gulphe of the riuer, which they call the old Meuſe.
               
            
            
               BEVERWYCK.
               THis word is as much to ſay as a retreate for Ba
                        •
                     arians for it ſeemeth that the Kings of France hauing ſubdued Holland, did diuide the

inheritances of the countrie amongſt their olde ſouldiars, whether they ſhould retire themſelues and inhabit, the which they did diſtribute by nations. This Bourg is two leagues from Harlem, vpon the riuer of Tye, not aboue two thouſand paces diſtant from the ſea; it is well built and hath goodly farmes about it. The Nobleſt of all Borroughes and Villages ending in Wyck, is Calwyck, whereof there are two, the one vppon the ſea, and the other farther vppe into the countrie: which haue beene built by the Cattes, fathers to the Battauians or Hollanders, who following their Prince, Batto, went and ſeated themſelues neere vnto the gulphe whereas the Rhine diſchargeth it ſelfe into the ſea: which place by reaſon of the commodity of the ſituation, hath beene heretofore ample, ſpatious and verie fit to receiue ſhippes and marchandiſe, but diuers times deſtroyed and ruined by the incurſions of Barbarians and Pirats.
               Beſides there is Suydwyck neere to Waſſenare, where there is a Mil vpō the South ſide, the which by a breuiation they call Suyck: then there is Noortwyck on the North ſide, to the which it ſeemes that the Normans which came out of Denmarke and Suedland gaue the name, whereof that worthy man Ianus Douza was Lord, and left it to his children. Then haue you Oſterwyck, which ſome hold was inhabited by the Vandales or Eſterlings, vnleſſe that 
                     
                        •
                     oppo Lord of Arckel gaue it the

name of Eſterwyck. Then is there Naeldwycke, wherof the Lords of the direct line are dead, and now it belongs vnto the Earle of Arembergh, where there is a Chanonry; Martin van Dorp a great diuine and a Poet was borne there. After it is Riſwyck nere vnto the Hage; Stolwyck famous for the good cheeſe which is made there nere vnto Goude: Bleyſwyck belonging vnto the Siegnior of Bronckhurſt: Brerdwyck, beeing ſo called of the Bardes, Gaules, or of the Lombards a people of Germanie: Brandwyck, Schalcwyck and Hontwyck, whereof it were hard to write the etimologies & beginnings.
            
            
               NIEVPORT.
               IS on the other bancke of the riuer of Leck, right againſt Schoonhoven: It hath beene in former times a good towne, but as the condition of humaine things is frayle and tranſitorie, it ſeemes that the ſpoyles of Barbarous nations, & the inteſtine warres which they haue had in Holland hath brought it to decay, yet it is ſtill a good Borrough.
            
            
               SCAGE.
               IT is a good Bourg, well built like vnto a towne the market place is made of a triangle forme, and goes into three ſtreetes, where there are little paſſages from the one to the other. It hath the beſt & moſt frutfull ſoyle of all Holland, both for tillage and paſture; the Bourgers are verie rich.
               
                  
There is a goodly caſtle, all which belongs vnto the Siegnior of Scagen and Barchom, who deſcends from Duke Albertus of Bauaria Earle of Holland.
               
               It were an infinite thing to deſcribe the other Bourgs and Villages of the ſayd county, the which we will omit and ſpeake ſomething of the caſtles; as well of thoſe which haue beene ruined during the factions of the Hoocs & Cabillaux, as of the reſt which are yet ſtanding. Among thoſe which are ruined are the caſtles of Brederode, halfe a league from Harlem, and of Egmont, being 5000. paces from Alcmar: It was firſt ruined long ſince, and afterwards in the laſt troubles, in reuenge that the Earle of Egmont the father, left the Noblemen of the Netherlands, who had entred into league againſt the Duke of Alua, the which coſt him his head, and for that the ſonnes (in ſteede of reuenging the ignominious death of their father) followed the Spaniards party. Then is the caſtle of Teylingen, where as the Counteſſe Iaqueline tooke great delight, betwixt Leyden and Harlem, ruined alſo nere vnto the walls, but it might be eaſily repaired. On the other ſide of the town of Schoonhouen, is the great and mighty caſtle of Lyſfeldt, nere vnto the bankes of the riuer of Leck, belonging vnto the Duke of Brunſwyck, if of late yeares hee had not exchanged it together with the towne of Woerden, with Philippe Earle of Hohenlo. At Vianen there is alſo a faire caſtle belonging to the

Lord of Brederode as wee haue ſayd, with that of Ameden, which is betwixt Viane and Nieuport, on the ſame ſide.
               Wee haue heretofore made mention of the caſtles of Woerden, Goude, Gorchom, Medenblyke and Muyden. There is neere vnto the towne of Alcmar the caſtle of Aſſenburg, which is the place of the Lord of Aſſendelf, who hath an other caſtle nere vnto Rotterdam, called Hemingen. The caſtle of Abcoude is one of the Nobleſt and moſt antient, betwixt Leyden and Vtrecht; there is a remainder of a little caſtle neere vnto Hemskerke, ſeated vpon a hill, with foure towers, the which for the hight doth ſome times ſerue as a ſea-marke vnto Mariners. Thoſe of the houſe of Adrichom had a caſtle neere vnto Beuerwyke, which the Friſons did raze and ruine; with the ruines whereof the Siegnior Antony Vander B
                        •
                     rcht heire of that place by his mother, hath cauſed a houſe and a farme to bee built there, all walled about. The old caſtle of Riuiere nere vnto Schiedam, as wee haue ſayd, doth belong vnto the Siegniors of Mateneſſe. After it is Kenebourg belonging vnto Iames of Egmont van Merenſteyn, or to his heires. Then Mereburg to the Siegnior of Lochorſt: and the caſtle of Duyuen nere vnto Seuenhuyſen to the Siegnior of Sprangen. There was nere vnto the Hage not farre from Voorburg a caſtle called Elin, at this preſent wholie ruined. The ruines of the caſtle and temple of Hildegarde, within a league

of Rotterdam are yet to bee ſeene vpon a high eminent place, whereas in old time there kept one Hildegarde a kinde of Sibille or diuine, whoſe Oracles did repreſent the times which wee haue now ſeene in Holland▪
                   There yet remaines a tower all tattered, the ground of which caſtle is the inheritance of the houſe of Mateneſſe. Within the compaſſe of the walles of Rotterdam there is to be ſeene the ruines of Bulgeſtein, and of the caſtle of Veen which they call Thoff, that is to ſay the Court, ſo as the gate which is ſet in that place, is called the Hoff-port. You may ſee vpon the riuer of Schye the remainders of the caſtle of Sterr
                        •
                     burg the which belongs vnto the Siegnorie of Duyvenvorde, there was alſo in former times an old caſtle in the village of Capelle, whereof the ruines are yet to bee ſeene; it comes from the houſe of Naeldwycke, and doth now belong to the Earles of Aremberghe. The caſtle of Hodenpyle in the iuriſdiction of Vlaerdinghe, is quite downe. The like hath happened to the caſtle of Polanen, the which did belong vnto one of the nobleſt families of Holland: All theſe ruines happened during their curſed factions of Hoecks & Cabillaux, wherof theſe Noblemen were the chiefe ſupporters, taking a diuiliſh delight to ruine one an others houſes, yea in townes the ſtrongeſt factions of the Bourgers chaſing awaie the others which factions continued not much leſſe then two hundred yeares.
               
                  
The caſtle of Velſen, for that Gerarde van Velſen Knight had murthered Floris the fift Earle of Holland was in like manner ruined, nothing remayning but certaine old peeces of walles, the ground whereof belongs vnto the heires of Ianus Douza Siegnior of Nortwyck: nerevnto which ruines Adrian Groeneveen a rich Bourger of Harlem hath built a faire houſe with large ditches, almoſt like vnto a caſtle▪ 
                  Sandenburg which was a caſtle of the Earles of Holland, (after that the Court had beene tranſported from Graueſandt to the Hage, by Count William King of Romaines) was alſo ruined, and ſo remaines. The like happened to the caſtle of Zyle, in old time called Thoff van Zyle.
               
               The caſtle Ter Does had beene alſo ruined, but within theſe foureteene or fifteene yeares it hath beene repaired. Altena (that is to ſay, to nere) ſo called for that it was feared by them of Delfe, by reaſon of the fort, beeing neighbour vnto them, belongs to them of Almonde: Croeſwyck on the other ſide of the riuer of Rotter; and Croelinghen halfe a quarter of a league from Rotterdam are alſo ruined, but if the Signior of Croelinghen had a good purſe, it ſhould bee ſoone repaired. Loueſtin right againſt Worcom, and Henſelaers-Dyck neere vnto Naeld-Wyck are yet in being.
            
            
               
               Of the Nobility of Holland.
               I Will content my ſelfe with that which diuers Authors haue written touching Nobilitie, how it is pourchaſed and maintained, what the dutie is, and wherein true Nobilitie conſiſts: who deſiers to be inſtructed, let him read Adrianus Iunius in his Battauia, in the chapter De Nobilitate Batauica, But I will here relate ſuccinctly what the ancient Nobilitie of Holland was, how it came to decline, and what hath remained. The ancient Nobilitie of Battauia or Holland, tooke their greateſt exerciſes in Armes, by the which they ſought the degrees of honour, for as Tacitus ſaith. Vt Gallos pro libertate, Germanos pro praeda, ita Batauos pro gloria ad capeſſendam pugnam olim fuiſſe inſtigatos. As the Gaules for libertie, the Germaines for prey, ſo the Battauians were in old time prouoked to enter battaile for the deſire of glorie. They were moſt commonly the beſt mounted, and had the faireſt and moſt reſolute troupes of horſe, that ſerued vnder the Romaine Emperors.
               After that Holland had a particular Prince, beginning with Thierry of Aquitane their firſt Earle, the Nobility of Holland began to ſhew them ſelues, ſo they grew to haue many great and worthy families, & a great number of gentlemen, who had pourchaſed their nobility, either from their Anceſtors, or by their own vertues and proweſſe.

But I cannot but lament, that ſo many great, noble, riche and mightie families, are now extinct, as well by their inteſtine warres againſt the Friſons, as againſt ſtrangers; for which conſideration the heyres males fayling, the ſucceſſions fell to the women, and ſo came to other families: beſides the furie of Gerard van Velſen had many companions, all which were put to death, and their neereſt kinſmen purſued to the death, euen vnto the ninth degree (a moſt cruell reuenge) and ſuch as could eſcape, were forced to become vagabonds in forraine countries, ſuch as had hidden themſelues vntill this furious reuenge was paſt, were afterwards forced to take borrowed names of other families, and to leaue their owne. To come then to that which remaines, and to thoſe which are paſt. We will ſay that the houſe of Waſſenare (as wee haue ſaid elſe-where) was the moſt ancient of Holland: as it appeares by this common prouerbe Vaſſenare the most ancient; Brederode the most noble (for that they deſcend from the firſt Earles) and Egmond the most rich. Wee haue ſcene in this laſt age, Iohn of Waſenare, the ſubduer of the Friſons, a braue and valiant Knight, who was ſlaine in thoſe warres leauing one onely daughter and heire, married to the Earle of Lingue, whereby this familie and ſurname is extinct.
               The memorie of the houſe of Brederode may eaſily be found in the Annales of Holland, being come from Ziphard the ſecond ſonne of Arnulph
                  
the third Earle of Holland and Zealand, who to auoyd his fathers wrath, retyred into Freezeland, and there without his priuity he marryed the Poteſtats daughter of the country, by whome hee had two ſonnes, Thierry and Simon: Being afterwards reconciled to his Father, he had certaine land alotted him for his portion, which was meaſured by the great rod, the which in the country language is Brederode, f
                     •
                  om whence they tooke their name. His father gaue him alſo the Caſtle and Territory of Theylingen; the which Zyphard at his death diſpoſed to his two ſons; to Thierry he gaue Brederode and to Simon Teylingen, from whence are iſſued the two families of Brederode and Teylinge, the which ended by the death of two bretheren, who were ſlaine with their Prince VVilliam King of Romans in the warre againſt the Friſons. As for that of Brederode we haue ſeene foure bretheren of the right lyne dye alſo in the warres againſt the French in few yeares, ſo as it fell by a collaterall line vnto VValrauen Lord of the ſaid Brederode, Vianen, Ameyden, &c. who hauing not any children, and not likely to haue any by reaſon of his age and his wiues; all muſt returne to Floris of Brederode his Brothers ſonne, who may raiſe vp the houſe being now halfe extinct.
               The beginning of the houſe of Egmont is doubtfull, for the Lordes thereof cannot truly ſhewe a continuance of their deſcent for three hundred yeares: yet they ſay they are iſſued from

                  Radbod (I know not which) King of the Friſons, but I thinke it would bee a tedious thing to finde out this pedigree. Such as contradict it ſay, that they are deſcended from a Receiuer of the Abbay of Egmond, which Office had beene called Aduoe, and vnder this title hauing inriched them-ſelues with the goods of this Abbaie, by little and little they attained to great wealth, and thereby to great allyances, which haue augmented their houſe, as well in poſſeſſions, as degrees of honour, ſo as in the end they marryed a daughter of the famous houſe of Arckel, the which was heire to the Dutchie of Geldres: Whereas Arnold of Egmond the firſt Duke of that houſe, had one ſonne called Adolph, who did much trouble his father, yea hee detained him in priſon, vntill that Charles Duke of Burgongne ſette him free. Adolph retyring into France, marryed a Lady of the houſe of Bourbon, who hauing one ſon named Charles▪
                   hee was afterterwards ſlaine being Generall of the Ganthois before Tournay: After whoſe death the Emperour Charles the fift vnder coullor of ſome tranſport which hee pretended, that Duke Arnold had made vnto duke Charles of Burgongne beeing in diſlike with his ſon, hee ſeazed vppon the whole Duchy: but Charles of Egmond, ſonne to Prince Adolph (for he was neuer Duke) with the helpe of the Princes of the houſe of Bourbon, who ſtirred vp the French King, returning into his Countrie

hee was receiued and acknowledged for Duke in many townes, & the Emperors men chaſed away. Afterwards (being of a turbulent ſpirit) hee had great warres, ſo as in the end hee dyed, about the yeare 1536. without any children, and in him failed the diſtrect lyne of this houſe of Egmond: The Seignieury of Egmond falling to the yonger houſe who was father to Iohn the firſt Earle of Egmond, which Iohn had one brother Maximliā
                   of Egmond, Earle of Buren, Lord of Iſelſteine, whoſe daughter being iſſued of a Lady of the houſe of Launoy and the onely heire, marryed with William of Naſſau Prince of Orange, ſo as the poſſeſſions of theſe two houſes of Buren and Launoy are diſcended to Prince Philip eldeſt ſon to the deceaſed Prince of Orange, as wel by his grandfather, as by his father.
               Some do account next among the moſt ancient and Noble families, that of Vander Merwue as deſcended from Merouee King of France, in honour of whome ſome beleeue that in that place the riuer of Wahall was changed into Meruwe: but this Original is farre fetcht: There is yet ſome remainder of a Tower in the midſt of Meruve, which in old time was the place where they payed toll, the which is now receiued in Dordrect, whereas the Baron of Meruve, who is alſo Lord of Aſpren, hath one day in the yeare all right of ſuperiority and power to pardon murthers and al other offences. The houſe of Arckel did for a long time command inſolently in the Earldome of Teyſterbandt, betwixt the Wahal
                  
and the Leck, the which the riuer of Linge doth croſſe, and paſſing through Gorichom it fals into the Meruve. In this County there are many other Townes then Gorichom with the Caſtle; as Leerdam, Henkelom, Haerſtricht, Aſpren, Euerſteyn, Hageſteyn, and Gaſprien, wherof the three laſt and Haarstrecht haue beene burnt and ruined: It ſeemes that all the neighbour Princes haue conſpired againſt this houſe for their great pride: For Frederick Biſhop of Vtrecht hauing taken Gaſpren, Hageſtein and Euerſteyn, he ruined them quite. The Lord of Vianen wreſted Rhynſtein from him. Arnold Duke of Geldres tooke Leerdam and Steenvoerd. Albert Duke Bauaria Earle of Holland took Haeſtrecht from him and ruined it. Afterwards the ſaid Duke bought of Iohn the laſt Lord of ſo many townes, and Seigieuries, that of Gorichom, with conſent of his ſonne, and vnder his hand writing, who notwithſtanding ſoone after diſavowed the contract, the which hee brake after his fathers death, and found meanes to ſurprize the ſaid towne. The Counteſſe Iaqueline went thether with an armie, beſieged it, and took it by aſſault, whereas the ſaid young Lord receiued the reward of his diſloyalty, for he was ſlain there: Theſe Lords of Arckel were ſo mighty, as beſides the County of Teyſterband (in the which are the townes aboue mentioned) they had liuing in Brabant, Lembourg, Bar, Vtrecht, Geldre, Holland and Zeland, which poſſeſſions made them proud, arrogant & hatefull vnto their neighbours, ouer whom

they did inſult, vntill they came to the end which we haue ſpoken of.
               The houſe of Batenbourg is without al queſtion one of the moſt ancient: taking their name from Prince Batto, from whome Battauia is come whereof there were of great fame for their vertue ſome fiue hundred yeares ſince, Albert, Rodolphus and Thierry Lordes of Battenbourg, as of late Thierry, G
                        •
                     ſbercht, and VVilliam, who beeing Lieutenant to the Prince of Orange, leading an army to victuall Harlem, beſeeged by the Duke of Alua, was defeated by the Spaniards: This Towne of Battenbourg was afterwards burnt, and the Caſtell held long by the Spaniardes. The ſayd Ghiſbrecht had beſides William three other ſons, wherof one was traiterouſly ſlayne at Collogne, Ghiſbrecht and Thierry beeing taken priſoners in the Warre by the Earle of Arembergh, hee deliuered them to the Duke of Alua, who cauſed their heades to bee cutte off at Bruſſelles, with other Gentlemen of their religion: But it was not long before this Earle receiued his due puniſhment, for before a yeare paſt hee was ſlayne in Battaile in the ſame Countrie where hee falſified his faith to theſe two young Barons.
               The race of the Lordes of Harlem is alſo very ancient, and noble, who they ſay tooke their beginning from the Kinges of Freezeland, which had built the Caſtell of Harlem according to

their name in the yeare a thouſand ſixe hundred. The ruines of this Caſtell are yet to bee ſeene not farre from Hemſkerke. It appeares by the Annales of Holland that one Iſbrandt of the houſe of Harlem, did accompany the Ladie Sophia Princeſſe of Holland, and Prince Otto her yongeſt ſonne in a Pilgrimage which they made through deuotion vnto Ieruſalem. Some Knights of this houſe vnfortunate in the warre againſt the Friſons, haue loſt their liues there. Of this houſe was Simon of Harlem knight, who conuerted a faire houſe which he had within the wals of the towne, into a Cloyſter of Carmelites, in the yeare 1249.
               Of which houſe by changing of the name, they of the houſe of Aſſendelfe haue obtained the inheritance and the Armes vnto this daie. Nicholas Lord of Aſſendelfe was wont to ſay, that his father hauing built the Caſtell of Aſſenburch, had repented him a hundred times that hee had not ſet it vppon the ruines of the Caſtell of Harlem, to preſerue the honour of antiquitie. This houſe of Aſſendelfe takes his name from the Village which is richer, the which in ancient time (as at appeares by old Charters) was called Aſ
                        •
                     
                     maundelfe.
               
               
                  Cralinghen or rather Carolinghen, is ſaid to haue had their beginning from the Emperour Charl maigne: for the French had for a long time cauſed a part of Germanie and Gaule to be gouerned by them of Meruwe and Craelingen, which

are two noble families, and very famous in Holland.
               
               We read that the houſe of Heuſden (where there is a towne and Caſtle) is iſſued ſome eight hundred yeares ſince from the Earles of Cleues, hauing carryed the armes as well of Edmond King of England whoſe daughter Baldwin Lord of Heuſden ſtole away and marryed her, who hauing many children by her, would haue his nephewes to carry a wheele of Geules in a field Or. The reaſon was that when as the King of Englands ſeruants ſent to ſeeke his daughter, came to the Lord of Heuſdins, they foūd her ſpinning at the wheele, with ſome pretty children about her, which brought her into fauour againe. Since the yeare 1290. the Earle of Cleues reſigned all the intereſt he had to the Lordſhips of Heuſden and Altena, to Floris the ſixt Earle of Holland to hold them of him in fee; but this reſignation did not hold long; for the Duke of Brabant came and fell vppon Heuſden, and became maiſter of it, but he held it as little, for Count VVilliam of Bauaria) being a mediator betwixt the duke of Brabāt & the Earle of Flanders) dealt firſt for himſelfe in ſuch ſort, as hee ſhould haue Heuſdē
                   the which hath bin annexed to this day to the conty of Hollād.
               
               Thoſe of Duyvenuoorde are iſſued from the houſe of VVaſſenare. This word hauing taking his beginning, for that two Bretheren of the houſe of VVaſſenare being a fiſhing, the elder to cauſe the boate to aduance, ſaid to his younger Brother

                  Dole Voort, that is to ſay, aduance, which word as a good preſage, remained to the younger houſe, whereof are come by corruption of the word, the Siegnior of Duyuenvoort. This name was firſt giuen to Philippe the ſecond ſonne of Aldewyn Vicont of Leyden Lord of Waſſenare and of Rhinlandt, who alſo gaue him libertie to carrie his armes, which were three Croiſants. Or in a field Sables. Philippe Curat of Waſſenare doth report it ſomewhat otherwiſe: hee ſayth this Philippe had fiue ſonnes, whereof the eldeſt being heire of the name and armes, was called Thierry, the ſecond Philippe Signior of Duyuen-Voorde: the third Iohn Lord of Polanen, who carried in a field Argent three Croiſſants Sables: the fourth called Sandthorſt who remained vnknowne, and the fifth Arnold of Groenevelt, who carried Sinople, and the Croiſants ſiluer: of which houſe the Signior Arnold of Groenevelt is yet lyuing, beeing Collonel and Gouernor of Nymegen for the vnited Eſtates. In the yere 1353. William of Duyuenvoorde Signior of Oſterhout was ſo ritch as hee knew no end of his welth, who hauing no children, he would not make his kinſfolks partakers thereof, but did build two Monaſteries or Cloiſters, neere vnto Gheertruydenberghe, the one of Chartreux Monks, the other of Saint Clare. And not content with this prodigality of his welth, he cauſed a caſtle to be built at Oſterhout, & made the towne of Viane to be walled in and dicht, as appeeres by his Epitaphe at Bruſſelles.
               
               
                  
The houſe of Polanen (as wee haue euen now ſayd) is iſſued from that of Duyuenvoorde, but it was of ſmall continuance: for Iohn Lord of Polanen hauing left one onely ſonne called alſo Iohn, hee dyed without any heires male, leauing one daughter, the ſole heire of Polanen, of Lecce and of Breda, the which ſhee brought in marriage to Engelbert Earle of Naſſau, who was the firſt Gouernor of the Netherlands for the Ladie Mary Dutcheſſe of Bourgogne, ſo as the ſayd Siegneuries doe at this day belong vnto the children of William of Naſſau Prince of Orange.
               
               That of Naeldwyck was not of much longer contynuance, whereof wee finde that one Baldwin a Knight, Gouernor of the caſtle of Windeneſſe in Weſtfriſland, a league from Horne, carried himſelfe valiantlie, vntill that for want of victualls and all other neceſſarie prouiſion, hee was forced to yeelde vppe the place. Thoſe of that houſe conuerted their goodly caſtle of Wateringhe into a Monaſterie, which was ruined in theſe laſt warres.
               I will make but one houſe of thoſe of Woude and of Warmont, for that the Siegnor of Woude tooke more delight at Warmont, which ſtands in a good ayre and in a goodly country, then in the caſtle of Woude which ſtands in a Moore, ſo as the caſtle of Woude being neglected it fell to decay, and that of Warmont floriſhed.
               This houſe of Warmont was wont to beare in a field

                  Or three Lozenges Geules, vntill that Thierry of Waſſenare, Vicont of Leyden, giuing the poſſeſſion of certaine Lands in the yeare of our Lord 1359. to Iames the foureteenth Lord of Warmont, hee ſuffred him to carrie his owne Armes, which is a band Or vpon a field Azure betwixt three Croiſants Argent, which that houſe carries vnto this daie. But thoſe of that houſe beeing partakers of the furie of Gerard van Velſen, the murtherer of Count Floris the fifth, they were for the ſafe-gard of their liues forced to abandon the countrie. But ſome fiue yeares after the death of Cont Iohn the ſonne of Floris, Iohn of Henaut beeing Earle of Holland, to whom Iames Lord of Warmont did great ſeruice at the defeate of the Biſhoppe of Vtrecht, all iniuries beeing troden vnder foote, this houſe was reconciled to their Prince, and ſo haue continued in good Eſtate vnto this daie.
               Thoſe of Poelgeeſt are alſo of a famous race the which in olde time had a caſtle of the ſame name in the quarter of Oeſtgeeſt, the village whereof was called Kerkwerve, the which by changing of the name, is now called Alcmada, I know not by what title. Cont William King of Romaines gaue the Lordſhippe of Hoochmade to this houſe: as alſo an other William Earle of Holland and Henaut, gaue them the village of Coudekerke vppon the Rhine, a League from Leyden, where there was a mightie

caſtle, the which was razed by the factions in the yeare 1489. It was before called Horne, whereof the proprietaries were called Lords of Horne; whoſe memory lies buried with their perſons; Gerard of Poelgeſt a Knight did afterwards cauſe this ruined caſtle to be repaired, (with the conſent of the Emperor Charles the fift) as faire as euer: who died to ſoone for his children.
               The caſtle of Alcmada, from the which they of the houſe take their name, is ſituated in the iuriſdiction of Warmond, whereof the ruines are yet to bee ſeene: for that which is now called Alcmada ſtanding vpon the current of Marne, was wont to bee called Poelgeeſt, as appeeres by the letters of Thierry Vicont of Leyden, ſaying that hee had giuen the inheritance thereof to Iſbrandt of Poelgeeſt. We finde that Henrie of Poelgeeſt and Floris of Alcmada bretheren by the mother, liued in the yeare 1320.
               Thoſe of Culembourg are deſcended from that Noble and famous Lord Ralfe of Boſicom, of the race of the Earles of Teyſterbandt: The towne of Culembourg is reaſonable good, ſtanding vpon the riuer of L
                        •
                     ck, two leagues from Viane, and one from Buren, it is now erected to an Earldome, belonging to the Lord of Palant.
               
               
                  Abcoude was wont to bee a famous and mightie family, the which had great poſſeſſions in the dioceſe of Vtrecht: the towne and caſtle of Wyckter Duerſ
                        •
                     ede, did alſo belong vnto them, the Lord

whereof did build the caſtle of Abcoude in the Moores, midde-way betwixt Vtrecht and Amſterdam. One Ghiſbert of Abcoude did purchaſe the Lordſhip of Gaeſbecke, who gaue it to his yongeſt ſonne Aſueres, who married a daughter of the Earle of Lygnes, by whom hee had one ſonne called Iames, verie rich and mighty in poſſeſſions, for beeing Lord of Gaeſbeck, hee was Siegnior of Abcoude, Putten and Streuen, all which are goodly Signeuries, hauing iuriſdictions. It was he which foū
                  ded the Chartreux nere vnto Vtrecht, who ſince, after the death of his ſonne & only heire, being taken priſoner in battaile by the Biſhop of Vtrecht, was to redeeme his liberty forced to yeeld him the Lordſhip, towne and caſtle of Wyck (where ſince the biſhoppes haue kept their ordynarie reſidence,) and the caſtle of Abcoude: which ſince hath beene the aboad of one of the Marſhalls of the Dioceſe of Vtrecht, and of his gard, which is there in garriſon. The houſe of Perſin is alſo an honorable family from the which are iſſued manie Knights & gentlemen of Waterlandt and the Ile of Marke, right againſt Monikendam. It is at this time wholy extinct. The caſtle of Perſin is yet ſtanding without the wood at the Hage.
               
               The houſe of Raphorſt is noble and very ancient whereof it appeeres that two bretheren had been ſlaine with their Prince Cont Floris, in the warre againſt the Friſons.
               
               That of Mateneſſe hath in like manner with many

others taken their beginning from the Lord of Waſſenare, Vicont of Leyden.
               
               The houſe of Vlyet was in old time baniſhed not as guilty of the murther of Cont Floris, but in hatred of his brother the Siegnior of Woerden, one of the cheefe conſpirators, ſo as Gerard van Vlyet going into exile was diſpoſſeſt of his lands & degraded of his armes. But afterwards by the interceſſion of the Lords of Duyuenvoorde and Li
                        •
                     htenberg (for his valour ſhewed in battaile for the Earle of Holland, where the biſhop of Vtrecht was ſlaine) he was receiued into grace, and reſtored to the poſſeſſion of all his goods.
               The honors which the houſes of Woerden & Weſſon were accuſtomed to haue, were loſt in the perſons, of Herman van Woerden for the murther of Cont Floris, whereof Gerard being the firſt author & executioner, was cruelly executed, beeing rowled vp & down in a pipe ful of nailes in the town of Leyden, where hee died miſerably; Herman his father in law, being brother to the Lord of Amſtel, eſcaped, and died poore in exile.
               The houſe of Amſtel was alſo blemiſhed with this murther, namely Ghyſbrecht of Amſtel, Lord of Amſterdam, Amſterweel and Iſelſteyn, who died in exile, poore and miſerable, beeing diſpoſſeſt of halfe his goods, and the reſt remayning to his wife & ſonne Arnold, who were beſieged a whole yeare in the towne of Amſterdam, and were in the end forced to yeeld it, vpon condition that for all their goods

they ſhould content themſelues with the towne & caſtle of Iſelſteyn, which ſince came vnto the houſe of Egmond, whereof the Emperor Maximilian the firſt created Frederic of Egmond firſt Earle of Iſelsteyn & of Leerdam. Iohn of Henaut Earle of Hollād had giuen the ſigneuries of Amstell & Woerden to his brother Guy then Prouoſt & afterwards biſhop of Vtrecht, during his life, the which hee cauſed to bee built, but after his death they were anexed againe to the reuenues of the Earle of Holland, which then was Cont William ſurnamed the good.
               The ſigniors of Schagen are deſcended from a baſtard of Duke Albert of Bauaria Earle of Holland and Henaut, who gaue this goodly Siegneury with that of Burchorne to William the firſt Lord of Schagen, and from him ſucceſſiuely to him that is now vnder the Eſtates of Holland. So the Signiory of Hoocht-wood, came from Duke William of Bauariae, called the mad Earle (for that after two battailes which hee had againſt the Empreſſe Marguerite his mother, whereof hee loſt one with eight thouſand men nere 
                     •
                  o Vlaerdingen, and the other he wonne, hee was diſtracted of his wittes fifteene yeares, and as a madde man was kept cloſe vnto his death) to whom Duke Albert his brother ſucceeded. This William gaue vnto his baſe Sonne the poſſeſſion of Hocht-Woude and Aertſwoude, which are two goodlie villages. But this line fayling, theſe two places haue paſt from one to an other; Hochtwoude
                  
belonging at this day to Cornellis Mirop Receiuer generall of Holland and Weſtfriſland, ſignior of Caelſlagen, Sweiten &c.
               The houſe of Haemſtede did begin at Witte who was the firſt Lord, and baſtard to Cont Floris. That of Horſt is of great antiquity, the which ſeemes to haue had many branches, as that of Bronckhorſt in Gelders; that of Lochorſt in the countrie of Vtrecht, and that of Raphorſt, whereof the old caſtle is yet ſtanding betwixt the Hage and Leyden: then Bockhorſt twiſe or thriſe ruined, being a league from Nortwyck, but not in that eſtate it hath beene.
               The family of Dune is alſo very ancient, the only daughter and heire whereof, married ſome thirty yeares ſince to Thierry the ſecond ſonne of the Lord of Brederode, who left the title thereof to his children, yet carrying the armes of Brederode and not their mothers: It continues ſtill in that race, who doe alſo enioy the Siegniorie of Sprangen which came by marriage from them of Wyelſteyn.
               
               The houſe of Zyle haue taken their name from a caſtle ſtanding vpon the banke of the current Zyle, which falls into a Lake thereby, ſo as there is yet in the towne of Leyden the Court of Zyle, the port and bridge of Zyle: Gerard van Zyle a Knight, Siegnior of Purmerende and of Purmerla
                        •
                     dt, hath made this houſe verie famous by his vertues.
               
                  
That of Hattinghen is one of the moſt ancient races in Holland, whereof hiſtories make mention aboue ſeauen hundred yeares paſt. Among others they make mention of one Haſting a Duke or Captaine Generall of the Normans who in the yeare eight hundred ſixty eight ſhould haue entred into the mouth of the Riuer of Loire, and ouer-run a part of Brittaine, Aniou, Turene, and Poittou, who hauing defeated Robert and Ranulphe, French Captains that purſued him, and were ſlaine in battaile, he brought his army (being laden with ſpoyles) brauely back vnto his ſhips.
               There haue bene in Holland many Abbaies, and Monaſteries, both of men and women, founded by the Nobilitie of the country, beſides Couents of begging Fryars or Bribers, which wee will omit; and treat ſuccinctly of thoſe which were appointed for Noble perſons. Firſt Thierry of Acquitane, the firſt Earle of Holland founded one all of wood for women: the which his ſon cauſed to be built of ſtone for Monkes, and bee made an Abbaie neere vnto the Village of Egmond (whereof the Abbot did afterwards weare a Miter) inricht with great reuenues, which made both the Abbot and his Monkes too idle. And ſeeing wee are diſcourſing of this Abbaie, I muſt by the way deliuer a tricke which this Abbot plaid in the yeare 1565. with the Earle of Egmond: The Prince of Orange, the Earle of Horne and the Baron of Brederode went with the Earle of Egmont to dine in this Abbaie,

where they were very honourablie entertained, when as they ſhoulde waſh, my Lord Abbot (who was but a Monke) tooke theſe three Noble men by the handes to waſh: The Earle of Egmond comming to preſent him-ſelfe, the Abbot ſayd vnto him; No, for you are my Vaſſall, it becomes you not to waſh with your better, yea he offred to put the towell vppon his ſhoulder, to giue it vnto the other Noblemen, when they had waſht, whereat the Earle of Egmond was much diſcontented, and went away curſing the Monke. One of the Abbots ſeruantes, who was then preſent, reported it vnto mee for a very truth. VVithout doubt it was a great affront vnto this Earle, who was proude and high minded, valuing him-ſelfe more then the Prince of Orange, who was iſſued from the race of the Emperours, by the Emperor Adolph of Naſſau.
               
               There were foure Abbaies for women, into the which not any one might be receiued, that was not Nobly borne, or at the leaſt that had not their Armes quartered. Theſe were Rhinſburg; Conninxſfieldt, Leuenhorſt and Loſdunen: this laſt in the end had little reſpect of Nobilitie, receiuing as well the children of Marchants as of Gentlemen, for that it was none of the richeſt: Rhinſburg tooke the name of a Caſtell which was ſituated vppon the Rhyne neere vnto the Gulph: It was pleaſantly ſeated, & a very commodious building. There is this thing memorable, that the Ladie Elburg the Abbeſſe,

cauſed a quarter of a lodging to be built for ſtrangers that ſhoulde come to ſee it. Vppon the Front whereof there were two Latin verſes, made by Doctor Adrianus Iunius, ſhewing the date of the time.
               
                  NoBILItas prob ItaſqVe IſthVC ſIbI IVre LegVnto
                  HoſpItIV M ElbVrgIs dVLCES qVod feCIt ad VſVs.
               
               
                  NObILItIe & Worth MaDe ChoICe to reſt,
                  In ELburg as a place for pLeaſure beſt.
               
               THis Abbay was founded by the Ladie Petronel Siſter to the Emperor Lothaire; wife to Floris the ſecond Earle of Holland, the which was quite ruined by the ſoldiars in the firſt troubles.
               
                  Leuenhorſt was but a League from Rhynſbourg, and fifteene hundred paces from Noortwick, in a very pleaſant ſeate: whereof Arnold of Saſſenheim was founder, who ſpent largely as well in the foundation of this Cloyſter as in an other religious houſe in Harlem, which was about the yeare 1262.
               
                  Coninx-Feldt, ſignifies a royall field, founded by the Lady Richlan
                        •
                     t, Siſter to William King of Romaines, in the ſuburbs of Delph. But in the beginning of theſe warres, for that it was too neere the Towne, fearing ſome ſurprize, it was purpoſely ſette on fire, which did conſume it vnto the foundation. Loſdunen is two myles from the Hage, whereas there are yet to bee ſeene the two Baſins in the which the three hundred

ſixtie foure children of the Lady Marguerits Conteſſe of Heneſberg were baptized, with her Tombe and Epitaph. This Abbaie hath felt the fruites of warre with the reſt, whreof we haue made mention in the deſcription of the Hage.
               
               Behold what wee could ſay briefly of theſe Abbaies, omitting ſo many other Cloyſters, Monaſteries and relligious houſes, who haue all tryed the like fortune.: And ſo wee will make an end of the deſcription of Holland (in the which is alſo comprehended Weſt-Freezeland, which they call Nort-holland) to come vnto Zealand. But firſt I may not forget that remarkeable Antiquitie, which is neere vnto Catwicke the Arcenall of the Romaines, which ſome ſay had beene built by the Emperour Caligula, whereas hee prepared to paſſe into great Brittaine with his armie. But hauing aduanced nothing but onely put forth to ſea, hee returned ſodainely, and went to land, commaunding all his Soldiers by theſound of Trumpets and Drummes, to fill all their head-peeces with cockleſhelles which they gathered vppon the ſandes, and to carry them vnto the Capitoll, in ſigne of tryumphe, and as a trophee that hee had beaten the Sea. VVhich Arcenall (whether that he built it or not) was afterwards called the Brittiſh fort or Caſtell, from whence there was a ſhort cut into England: And this it was.
            
            
               
               A Deſcription of the Brittiſh Fort called T'huis te Britten.
               THis fort in the beginning did ſerue as a Beacon to ſet a Fyar in the night for the direction of Marriners that ſhould ſaile vppon the coaſt, as we ſee at this day the Tower D'ordre or old man neere vnto Bologne in Picardie, very old alſo, the which the Emperour Charlemaigne cauſed to bee repaired, & ſo did the Emperor L. Septimius Seuerus this Arcenal or Britten fort, whreof the memory remaines yet grauen in a ſtone, brought to the houſe of the Lord of Waſſenare at the Hage vppon whoſe Territory before the Inondation this fort was built, beeing now ſwallowed a good league into the ſea, which is ſometimes ſeen, when as the wind driues back the ſea at their loweſt ebbs, as it hapned in the yeare, 1520. when as this ſtone was found with this Inſcription. Imp. Caeſ. L. Septimius Seuerus Aug. Et M▪ Aurelius. Antoninus Caeſ. Coh. XV. Vol. Armamentarium Vetustate collapſum, reſtituerunt ſub. Val. Pudente, Lec. Au. Pr. curante. Caecil. Batone Prae. This Arcenall was built of a ſquare forme, euery corner of equall diſtance, that is, foure hundred feete; each corner had two Towers ioyning together and in the middeſt from one corner to another a Tower all flanked with great broad ſtone, to reſiſt the flowing of the Rhyne, vppon whoſe banke it was ſeated: ſome fortie of theſe ſtones were digged vp in the yeare 1552.

the which were foure foote long and three broad. There was alſo peeces of bricke found a foote ſquare, on the which were theſe letters X. G. I. which ſeemes to ſignifie Ex Germania inferiori: Moreouer an other ſtone broken at both the ends, in which there did yet remaine theſe imperfect wordes, euer. Pius. An. max. Trib. Pot. XIII. ntonin. Pius. ec. Milit. Leg. I. me. Euidiorum. There wore alſo Peeces of ſiluer with this inſcription, L. Septimius Seuerus. Pertinax. Aug. Imp. Beſides there was an other ſtone all eaten with the waues of the ſea, and windes, repreſenting victory with wings, and on the left hand an Eagle, with theſe letters, Imp. Caeſ. Ant. ne. Aug. Coh. M. To. Ru. Pe. There were other ſtones, one with a ſhippe, ſuch as the Saxons vſed in thoſe times, an other with a mans face, hauing a beard and long hayre: an other hauing the figure of Hercules with his mace. Beſides an other long ſtone brokē at one end, wheras theſe wordes were comprehended. Brittanic. Germanic. Pius. Faelix. Auguſtus. Pont. Max. Trib. Pot. XVIII. IIII. P. P. Imp. III. Aram. a Diuo. Claudio. et. poſtea a diuo Seuero Patre ſuo reſtitutam: In the ſame yeare 1520. there was a Key found which they did ſuppoſe was that of the Arcenall. There were alſo found many figures, veſſels, pottes, lampes and other ſquare ſtones, where there was grauen X. Ger. Inf. There haue bene alſo found peeces of gold, ſiluer and Copper of Iulius Caeſar and others. In the yeare one thouſand fiue hundred ſixtie two,

the foundations of this Arcenall were deſcouered aboue twenty daies together, from whence the people there-about drewe many thouſands of ſtones. It hath beene deſcouered againe of late yeares, but the ſand of the ſea hath buried much.
            
            
               Zeeland, with the Iſlands, Townes and Bourroughes.
               NO man can denie, but the Danes and Normans haue ouerrunne theſe Iſlands, as well as Holland and other farther Regions; who (as it is the cuſtome of conquerers to impoſe new names to places which they haue conquered, eſpecially the names of countries and townes from whence they are come) ſome thinke haue giuen this name of Zeelandt of one of their chiefe Iſlands ſo called; in the which is the royall towne of Coppenhagen. But admit it were not ſo: and let vs drawe their beginning from the ſignification of the worde it ſelfe. Zee ſignifying the ſea, and Landt countrie, which is, a countrie of the ſea, as in truth it is.
               There is no neede then to make anie further ſearch for the Etimologie, but wee will content our ſelues with it. The countie of Zeelande which hath now more power and authoritie then it euer had, is for the moſt part comprehended in ſeauen principall Iſlands, the which are Walchren where Middlebourg ſtands; Schoven and there is Ziricxee: Zuytbeuelandt where Ter Goes is; Tertolen, where there is the towne of Tolen; Noortbeuelandt
                  
recouered from the Sea within theſe ten yeares: Duyuelandt and Wolferſdick: there are other ſmall ones, whereof we make no mention.
               Thoſe of Walchren and Schouen lye moſt open to the ſea on the Weſt part, on which ſide they be naturally defended with theſe ſandie hils which they call Downes; and where there are not any, they haue made good and high bankes, ſtrengthned with thicke turffes and wads of ſtraw, which binde them firmely together, the which they call dikes: True it is that the ordinary charge to repaire and entertaine them, is very great, and the time and toyle they imploy greater. But they obſerue a good order, with ſuch proportion, as ſuch as haue the propriety of the land adioyning, beare the charge for the entertaining of theſe dikes, euery one according to his portion. All the country of Zealand is fatte and fertile, for all kind of Tillage, but eſpecially for faire white wheat, and of a grain to die red, which is a rich commodity, and diſtributed through all Europe: There is alſo a certen kinde of turffe for fyring, which they call Dary, the which they are forbidden to cutte neere vnto the dikes, for that it is their foundation and defēce.
               Ther are none but the poorer ſort that vſe it, for that it yeelds a ſtinking ſmoake. There is generally as pleaſant and fat paſtures for cattel, as in Holland: But the better to know the whole country, we muſt begin to deſcribe the Ilands, and the particular townes of euery of them.
            
            
               
               Walachrie.
               IS in the country language called Walchren, the moſt famous and moſt rich of all the Ilands of Zeland, not for the greatneſſe, for it hath not tenne leagues circuit, but for the ſtrength and ſafetie of the Seat and the quallitie of the ſoyle, the infinite number of people that inhabit it, their great comerce and the grea
                     •
                   riches, which the Sea bringes vnto them by their nauigations: This Iland hath foure walled townes, Middelbourg which is the Metropolitaine of all Zealand, where the Court remaines, Fliſſing, La Vere, Teruere, or Camp Vere, which are all one, and Arnemuyden: Doubourg is the moſt ancient town of Zealand, but now it is but a Bourg beeing couered with the ſandes of the ſea where it is ſituated, yet it retaines ſtill the municipall priuiledge of a towne, we will then begin with Middelbourg.
               
            
            
               Middelbourg.
               SOme attribute the beginning of this towne to one Metellus a Romaine Captaine, who firſt built the Bourg, that is to ſay the Caſtle, the which is in the middeſt of the towne, whereas now the priſons are. Of which Mettellus, by this Caſtle, it hath bin called Metelli Burgam; and ſo Middelbourg in Ducth. But let vs leaue this definition, and ſay that it hath taken his name of theſe two wordes; Middel which ſignifies the middeſt, and Bourg a Caſtell, as

much to ſay as a Ca
                     ••
                  le in the middeſt, as beeing ſituated (before the Sea had gotten ſo much on that ſide) in the very center of the Iland. It ſtands in 50. degrees ¾ of Latitude: It is but a quarter of a league from Arnemuyden, vnto which it was wont to haue a narrow and crooked hauen, which went vnto their ſalt pits: But within theſe fiftie yeares they of Middelbourg haue made a new ſtraight hauen from their port of Dam vnto the Sea, the which is good and deepe, able at a full ſea to carry ſhippes of 4. or 500. tunnes. Within theſe twelue yeares they haue augmented their Towne more then halfe round about, wherin they haue done preiudice without any recompence to them that had gardens and poſſeſſions in the Suburbs: yet all this great increaſe ſerues for no other vſe but for houſes of pleaſure and gardens for Marchants, although there were place to haue built aboue 3000. good houſes, for the cōmoditie whereof they might make many chanels to paſſe frō the one to the other: but God knowes when al this voide place ſhall bee filled with buildings.
               The rampars of theſe new workes are but of earth, with mightie bulwarks flanking one another, where there is alwaies ſomething to repaire. At the ſame time when as theſe workes were made the Magiſtrate cauſed the Steeple of the Abbaie Church to bee new built vp, whereas they now keepe the Court of Zealand, they haue drawne a 
                     •
                  ell vppe into this ſteeple of eighteene thouſand

waight to ſtrike the houres on, and ſome 24. ſmall ones, which ſerue for the chyme; but this ſteeple is fallen crooked, elſe it were one of the goodlyeſt peeces in the whole country.
               The Court which was wont to bee an Abbaie is faire and ſpatious, and is the lodging of Princes when they come into Zealand. There the Councellors of Eſtate for the Countie are eſtabliſhed, as alſo for the Admiralty, the Chamber of account and the Treaſor. The Admirall and in a manner all the Councellors are well lodged there. This houſe was founded by Goudebault the three and twentith Biſhoppe of Vtrecht, and afterwardes amplyfied, and in a manner built a new by Cont Wiliam King of the Romaines, who lyes there interred with Queene Elizabeth his wife: the foundation was made in the yeare one thouſand two hundred fifty ſixe. The towne is good of it ſelfe, faire and neate and of great trafficke, which the Gallies of Spaine which came to Scluſe vnder the commaund of Dom Frederic Spinola reſtrained for a time: But ſince they haue vndertakē long voiages to the Eaſt & Weſt Indies as wel as the Hollanders, frō whence they draw great commodities, & withal ſince the taking of the Scluſe, the ſaid galleis being falne into the Eſtates handsthey are no more anoied, neither haue they any more feare on that ſide: this town alone hath the right of the ſtaple for all wines that come frō 
                  Frāce, Spain, Portugal, Candy, the Canaries, & other places by ſea: not many years ſince they purchaſed the

Towne of Arnemuyden (being then but a Bourg) in regard of their roades and the Salt-pits, the which they had good cheap from the Proprietary. But this ſale was afterwards changed, as we wil ſhew in the deſcription of the towne of Arnemuyden. In this towne the ordinary Soueraigne Iudge doth commonly remaine, they call him the Receiuer of Beuerſlerſheldt, to whom all commandements come from the higher powers for the execution of iuſtice by the ſword in his precinct. Many learned & excel ent men were borne in this towne. Among others Paul ſurnamed of Middelbourg a famous Mathematician, who for his great knowledge was called to Rome and preſently made a Biſhop. Then Nicholas Euerardi a great Lawyer, and well ſeene in matters of State, Preſident of the Prouincial Councel of Holland, and afterwards of the Parliament or great Councell of Macklin, where he died in the yeare 1532. leauing many children, all men of qualitie, & worthy of ſuch a Father. The firſt was Peter Nicholai, Doctor of Diuinity and Ciuill Law, Prelat of the Abbay of Middelbourg. The ſecond was Euerardi Nicholai, a Licentiat in the lawes, who was Preſident of the Councel in Frieſland, & afterterwardes (as the father) of the great Councel at Macklin, wher he died in the yeare 1560. The third was Nicholas Nicolai, Licentiat in the lawes, & very learned in al faculties, a good Poet, & Hiſtoriographer, which aduanced him 
                     •
                  o be Councellor to the King of Spaine, and Regiſter of the order of the golden

fleece. The fourth was Adrian Nicolai, who was Chancellor of Geldres. The fift was Iohn Nicolai, (ſurnamed the ſecond) who was an excellent Poet, giuing great hope of him, but death preuented him in his courſe.
            
            
               Veere or Camp-veere.
               
                  VEere or Camp-veere is a good Sea-towne, one of the foure of the Iland of Walchren, it retaines this name of the paſſage it was wont to haue vnto the Village of Campe in the Iland of Northbeuelandt right againſt it: Which Village within theſe ten yeares with the whole Iland hath beene recouered from the Inondation which happened in the yeare one thouſand fiue hundred twentie foure. This town was in the yeare one thouſand three hundred ſixtie eight walled in by the Lord of Borſell: Being ſince made greater, it was endowed with goodly priu
                     •
                  lidges, ſo as in the time of Maximillian of Bourgongne their Lord, it was made a Marquiſate. And for the commoditie of the feat, the goodneſſe of the hauen and of the road; it was frequented by many nations. They were the firſt that ſent vnto the Canaries, from whence they brought in the yeare 1508. a ſhippe laden with ſugar.
               They haue trade into France, where they haue priuiledge of Franche Grue, that is to ſay, free lading and vnlading: In like manner into the Eaſtcountries they had liberty to traffick, before that the townes of Antwerp and Amſterdam had any trade

thether: As alſo into Scotland; the Scotiſhmen hauing many yeares ſince held their ſtaple there, for diuers ſorts of Marchandize, as they do at this day for their cloth and frizes, and for their Salt-fiſh. This towne hath alſo the fiſhing for herring wherof there is a ſtaple, and the marke is well knowne in diuers Kingdomes, where the Bourgers trafficke moſt, as to Spaine, France and other countries, and of late yeares they haue trade to the East & VVeſt-Indies. This towne was in the old time honoured with the Reſidence of the Admirall Generall and the Admiraltie of the Netherlands. To which end the King of Spaine, as Prince of the ſaid countries, cauſed a goodly Arcenall or Magaſin for munition to bee built in the yeare 1568. wherein they laid all their prouiſion and furniture belonging to the ſea. The Inhabitants of this towne are growne ciuill and curteous by the daily frequentation of their Lordes and their Attendants, keeping their Court within an arrow ſhotte of the Towne at the goodly caſtle of Sanderburg, which is quite ruined in theſe laſt troubles, as being too neere a neighbor vnto the towne. This Marquiſat was ſold by decree for the debts of the ſaid Marquis Mazimillian, which Philip King of Spaine cauſed to be bought in his name: But when the creditors were not paid, it was ſold again and bought by the Prince of Orange: who to the great contentment of the Burgers and all the ſubiectes, receiued the poſſeſſion in the yeare one thouſand fiue hundred eighty one,

giuing them goodly priuiledges, with high and baſe Iuſtice in nine. Villages depending thereon: whereof Oest capel is one. By the death of which Prince, and by his Teſtament the moſt worthie Prince Maurice of Naſſau Gouernor, Captaine & Admiral general of the vnited Prouinces his ſon, was left heire of the ſaid Marquiſat, and put in poſſſion in the yeare one thouſand fiue hundred eighty eight, and in the yeare after of that of Fliſſinghe. Beſides other particularities, one thing is ſpecially to be noted, that the Magiſtrate of this towne neuer ſhewed any rigor againſt them of the reformed religion, yea hath alwaies fauoured and ſupported them as much as he might, ſo as in the beginning of the wars and troubles ſince, the yeare one thouſand fiue hundred ſeauenty two, they haue with all their meanes both of bodies and goodes, with them of Fliſſinghe more then any other of their neighbours, repulſt the tyrannie of the Inquiſition of Spaine in diuers exploits and enterprizes of warre both by Land and Sea: And eſpecially with their braue Captaines at Sea, in the beginning of the yeare 1578. they did before Bergen vp Zoom, aid, to defeate that mightie Spaniſh Fleete in view of the great Commander of Caſtille, which went to victuall Middelbourg, beeing ſtraightly beſeeged by the Prince of Orange, ſo as this victualling fayling them, they were forced to yeelde vnto the Prince. Afterwardes their Captaines did in the like manner helpe to

confound that feareful and inuincible ſea-armie (as they did write it) which the King of Spaine ſent in the yeare one thouſand fiue hundred eighty eight, to inuade England.
               
            
            
               Fliſinghee.
               OR Vliſſinghen is the third town of the Iland of Walchren, right againſt Flanders, and a league from Middelbourg. It is alſo a Marquiſate, belonging to Prince Maurice of Naſſau, as La Vere, not that they are two Marquiſats, but one onely, euery one apart carrying diuers armes. Fliſſinghe was in old time but a country village, and did ſerue onely for a paſſage into Flanders. But within theſe hundred yeares, Adolph of Bourgongne, Lord of La Vere and Fliſſinghe, cauſed it to be walled in, and then it began to take the forme of a good towne. So as in the yeare one thouſand fiue hundred ſeauenty one, the Duke of Alua pretending to build a Caſtell on the ditch ſide towards Ramekins, which ſhould alſo command the hauen: After that the Prince of Orange Gouernor of Holland and Zealand, had by the Earle of Marche Lord of Lumay his Lieutenant ſurprized the Iland and towne of Bryel, when as the Seignior of Wakenes, the Vice admirall pretended to put a Spaniſh garriſon into the towne, beeing fauored by the Magiſtrate, the people diſcouering it, fell to armes, forced the Arcenall, and chaſed away the Burguemaiſters and Aldermen, and being maiſter of the Ordinance and of the towne gates,

they ſhotte at fiue or ſixe ſhippes full of Spaniards, which thought to enter into the Towne, who by reaſon of the contrary tide, ſent a man ſwimming to land, to intreat them that they would not ſinke them, promiſing them to retire vpon the firſt 
                     ••
                  oud, as they did, going towards Berghen vp Zoom, whereas they could not be entertained. This town being thus freed from the Spaniſh yoake, it was in a ſhort time fortified, and in a ſhort time with the helpe of the Prince of Orange (who preſently ſent them a garriſon of Wallons) they made ſharpe wars with them of La Vere againſt Middelbourg and Arnemuyden, which were held by the Spaniards: going to Sea with their ſhips of warre, they brought in good prizes, and many good priſoners, among others the Duke of Aluas Couſin, who notwithſtanding any ranſom that he offered, could not redeem him-ſelfe from the gallowes, ſo hatefull the Spaniards were vnto the Fleſſingers in the firſt warres, as al that they took, they either caſt them ouer-boord or hung them at land, wherein the women and children tooke great delight. They had an Admirall called Captaine Worst, who did continually annoy them of Antwerp and Scluſe, and did ſet vppon all ſhips going vp to Antwerp: one day he incountred a Spaniſh Fleet
                     •
                  , in the which was the Duke of Medina Celi, who came to gouerne the Netherlands in the Duke of Aluas place. The combat was very furious neere vnto S
                        •
                     luſe, but in the end the Duke was forced to leap into a boat and to ſaue him-ſelfe

in Sluſe. It is infinit to tell what the captaines both by ſea and land, that were at time in Fliſſinghe, did againſt the Spaniards. They beſieged the ſtrong caſtle of Ramekin, (called Zeebourg▪) both by ſea and land, ſtanding vpon the Dyke betwixt Fliſsinghe and the head of Middelbourg, the which they tooke in leſſe then ten daies. At the battaile of Berghen and in all other incounters the Fliſſinghers were alwaies the formoſt. Snce they haue much inlarged their towne, eſpecially on that ſide where as the Duke of Alua had begun to build the caſtle, where there are three goodly Bulwarkes, two towardes the land, and one to the ſea, which defends the hauen on that ſide, flanking it at the port. In this inlargement they haue drawne in a new hauen and a Sluſe, capable for many great ſhippes, where they haue alſo built a new temple for the Engliſh nation: within theſe twelue yeares they haue built a faire towne-houſe vpon the market place, not in greatneſſe, but in building much like to that of Antwerp▪
                   To conclude the towne, as wel in fortifications, as in buildings is now ſo changed, as hee that hath not ſeene it theſe thirty yeares, would not now know it. It is ſecond to Middelbourg in marchandiſe, but it exceedes it in herrings, where they are barreled vp, and marked, and from thence are tranſported throughout all Chriſtendome. This important towne (to ſpeake tr
                     •
                  elie) nay rightly be termed the Key of the Netherlands for the ſea: for at all times

it cuts off the nauigation from Antwerp ſo as nothing can come vnto them by ſea: wherefore the Duke of Alua ſhould haue beene more carefull to keepe it in time, and not to haue eſteemed it ſo little, as hee did when the newes of their reuolt came vnto him: anſwering onely. Pitcilingo (ſo he called it) es nada. And in truth the Emperor Charles the fift, knowing better the importance of that place then the Duke of Alua, going laſt out of the Netherlands to returne into Spaine where hee died, vpon his departure, hee did ſecretly and ſeriouſly recommend this towne vnto the King his ſonne. But as they ſay. He that contemnes the fathers admonitions, will be deceiued, as it prooued in this towne.
            
            
               ARNEMVYDEN.
               OLd Arnemuyden (which was wont to be ſituated in an other place, not far from that where it now ſtands) was a goodly village with a good caſtle, well peopled with ritch Bourgers & Marchants, hauing a good commodious hauen, wheras many great ſhippes might lie ſafely, where at that time there was greater traffick then at Middelbourg it ſelfe. This old Arnemuyden is by Inundations quite eaten vp by the ſea, ſo as there are no reliks to be ſeene, neither can they coniecture that it ſtood in any other place, but betwixt the hauen of Middelbourg and new Arnemuyden, vpon the plaine which is betwixt S. Ioes Lands, and

the right chanel of Arnemuyden, as it is at this day.
               The greateſt breach which happened to old Arnemuyden, was in the yeare 1438 in the time of Gyles of Arnemuyden the Lord of that place, who cauſed all the Bourgers and the Inhabitants to go with their families vnto the Dyke out of the danger of the ſea, whereas now the town of Arnemuyden ſtands. The which as well for the cōmodity of Roads and Deeps, as for the ſituation vpon the ſea, hath and doth retaine vnto this day, the trade of many great ſhippes which arriue there daily laiden with diuers ſorts of marchandiſe, and from thence is tranſported into the other Prouinces of the Netherlands, except ſalt comming from Spaine, France and other places, the which remaines there to bee refined: for the which there are many ſalt-pannes' built along and vpon the toppe of the Dyke, where it is boyled and made white, and then they lade it and tranſport it to other places. And although that new Arnemuyden was not walled in vntill the yeare 1572. yet hath it beene held of all forraine nations for a towne of good eſteeme, by reaſon of the nauigation and trafficke; for which reſpect the Earles of Holland and Zeeland, did in old time eſtabliſh their towles and cuſtomes due vnto the county of Zeeland. This towne hath alwaies enioyed the like priuiledges with the towne of Middlebourg, as Bourgeſes and ſubiects thereof, vntill the yeare 1572. that they followed the Prince of Oranges
                  
partie: Soone after the Spaniards ſurprized it, ſpoiled it, ſlue ſome and the reſt fled wandring vp and downe, vntill that in the yeare 1574. the towne of Middelbourg being forced to yeeld vnto the Prince of Orange, Arnemuyden was alſo comprehended in the Accord, ſo as the Ile of Walchren beeing then freed, euery man returned to his houſe, ſo as by little and little the towne was fortefied as you ſee it at this day. For the reedefying whereof the Prince gaue it goodly priuiledges and freedomes, beeing exempt from the ſubiection of Vaſſelage, being ſubiect to Middelbourg by vertue of their contract: and cauſing it to bee walled and ditcht, hee gaue them the rights and prerogatiues that belong to a good towne, gouerned by their owne Magiſtrats, Baylife, Bourguemaſters, Aldermen and other Officers, which they of Middelbourg were accuſtomed to choſe: but now they diſpoſe of all matters concerning Iuſtice and gouernment themſelues. The towne of Arnemuyden had for many yeares a particular Lord, carrying the title of Siegnior of Arnemuyden; the laſt was called Gyles of Arnemuyden, who in the yeare 1418. was made Knight, and married the daughter of Wolphart van Borſſelle, by whom hee had two daughters, the one Mary, the other Marguerite of Arnemuyden: Mary married with Nich
                        •
                     las of Borſſele Siegnior of Brigdame, Coudekerke, Soeteland and Saint Laurence; from whom is iſſued the houſe of La Vere. Marguerite married

                  William of Vrieſe. Siegnior of Ooſteinde, from whence is deſcended the houſe of Traſigny. And as the ſayd Giles was the laſt Lord which carried that name, his houſe fell to the diſtaffe. Thoſe of this towne for the loue of him carry his armes in their ſeales and armories, which they vſe to beare, and they are at this day two Eagles Or in a field Geules, armed and encompaſſed with Azure, and in the midſt a ſand-hill riſing out of the waues of the ſea.
            
            
               DOMBOVRG.
               ALthough this bee but an open place, which is dayly more and more couered with ſand, notwithſtanding all remedies, by reaſon that the winde driues the ſand of the ſea and downes, which couers their gardins and paſtures, yet beeing eſteemed the moſt ancient towne of the Iſle of Walchren, whereof there are yet to be ſeene ſome old ruines of walles, it retaines ſtill the ancient priuiledges & municipall rights, as the beſt town of the ſayd Iſland.
            
            
               WEST CAPPELLE.
               THis place, Bourg or village, (howſoeuer you will call it) doth enioy the like priuiledges of other townes: for that the ancient Weſt Cappelle which ſtood in the ſame place, was wont to bee a good towne, and had the beſt port in al the Iſland of Walchren, which about 150. yeares ſince was carried away by the inundations of the ſea, ſo

as there remaines nothing but what wee ſee of the old buildings, hauing notwithſtanding bin inlarged with new houſes within theſe thirty yeares, the which makes it more commendable.
            
            
               SOETELAND.
               IS yet at this day a good place, ſo termed as a ſweete country, and ſo it is the ſweeteſt ſoyle and the beſt ſeat in all the Iſland, which makes the Marchants of Middelbourg and Fliſsinghe to walke thether, whereas after they haue recreated themſelues, they returne at night to their houſes.
               There are alſo in this Iſland many goodly villages, as Ooſt and Weſt Suybourg a quarter of a league one from the other, betwixt Fliſſinghe and Middelbourg: At Weſt Suybourg there is a good caſtle the which with the village, doth now belong vnto the heires of Phillippe de Marnix, Siegnior of Saint Aldegonde, the light of learned men of our age, in which caſtle the Emperour Charles the fift remained, vntill the winde prooned faire to imbarke, to make his laſt returne into Spaine, but wee may not forget the important caſtle of
            
            
               RAMMEKEN.
               OTherwiſe called Zeebourg, which about 60. years ſince, the Lady Mary Queene of Hungary, ſiſter to the Emperor Charles the 5. gouerneſſe of the Netherlāds, cauſed to be built vpon the Dyke betwixt Middelbourg, & Fliſſing, ſeruing as a bulwark

for all ſhippes that are forced for want of a good winde, to come and anchor in the Roade. This caſtle is alwaies well manned with a good garriſon, and with all things neceſſary for a place of ſo great importance, being as neceſſary to be entertained and well kept, as any other in all the vnited Prouinces. By reaſon whereof, the Queene of England deſired to haue it with the townes of Fliſsinghe and Bryele for caution of the money which ſhee did lend vnto the vnited Eſtates ſome twenty yeares ſince.
            
            
               SCHOWEN.
               IN Latin called Schaldia, a Flvuio, Schaldi, of the riuer of Eſcault, in old time a great Iſland, but the tempeſts and breaches of the ſea haue wonderfully dyminiſhed it. It hath yet at this day aboue eight leagues in circuit: and it was in thoſe daies ſo nere vnto the Iſland of North-beuelandt, as the Inhabitants did talke together from one banke vnto the other; whereas ſince there hath beene a great diſtance. But within theſe twelue years that the ſayd Iſland of North-beuelandt hath beene recouered, they are nee
                     •
                  er. This Iſland is as fertill and plentifull of all things, as any other in Zeeland, and therefore it holds the ſecond ranke at the Eſtates of the ſayd Prouince, in the which the ſoueraigne Iudges of the Eaſt of Zeeland do commonly reſide, whom they call the Receiuer of Be
                        •
                     oſterghelt▪
                   who hath all power of cryminall

cauſes in that quarter; the cheefe towne whereof is.
            
            
               ZIRICZEE.
               THis towne is held for the firſt and moſt ancient of the countie of Zeeland, and as ſome ſay, it is found in the Annales of the Netherlands that it was built in the yeare of our Lord 849. by one called Zyringus, whoſe name it carries: in ancient time very famous for the trade of Marchandiſe, wherevnto it was verie commodious by reaſon of their goodly port, which the marchants did vſually frequent; But the ſands hauing in tract of time ſtopt vp the hauen, it is now leſſe frequented: within theſe twelue or fourteene yeares the towneſmen haue made a newe hauen which goes directly vnto the ſea, the which is faire, large and commodious, notwithſtanding ſince that Middelbourg grew ſo famous, it cannot recouer the accuſtomed trafficke touching nauigation, yet is it good, faire and ſtrong, retayning their ancient trade for ſalt and graine to die withall, with the fiſhing for herring. In this towne the Receiuer of Beooſterſchelt doth commonly remaine, who is (as I haue ſayd) chiefe Iuſtice for the countie of Zeeland, to whom (as to him of the Beversterſchelt at Middelbourg,) all commiſſions are directed, comming from the ſuperiors, to put them in execution euery one in his iuriſdiction. In this towne was borne that famous Amandus Ziricxeus, a relligious man of the order of Saint Francis, who hath written many goodly

Poems; as may be ſeene in the Library of Cornelius Geſnerus. From thence alſo came Leuinus Lemnius Doctor of Phiſick, & a man of great knowledge, as his workes do witneſſe: whoſe ſonne called William of the ſame profeſſion was called to be Phiſition to the King of Sueden. Pe
                        •
                     rus Pe
                        •
                     kius was alſo borne in this towne, a man of rare learning, who hath written many printed bookes.
            
            
               BROWERSHAVEN.
               IN this Iſland of Schoue
                        •
                     
                   two ſmall leagues from Zi
                        •
                     icxee, is that great Bourg of Browerſhauen more inhabited by fiſhermen then any other: and yet there was borne one Petrus, carrying the ſurname of his towne, a learned man, who writ many bookes in diuinity. This towne did ſome-times belong to Maximilian of Bourgogne, Lord of Beueren Admirall of the ſea: thus hauing fallen vnto him with many other goodly Siegneuries by the Ladie Anne his Grand-mother iſſued from the Noble houſe of Borſſele: which familie hath fayled long ſince for want of lawfull heires; which Maximiliam died alſo without children in the yeare 1558. whoſe ſucceſſion fell to the children of the Earle of Boſſu, who had married one of the Siſters of the Lord of Beueren, and to the children of the Siegnior of Cruminghen, who had married the other Siſter, from whome is iſſued the Siegnior of Cruminghen, who keepes commonly at the Hage in Holland.
               
               
                  
In this Iſland of Shouven, there are many caſtles and villages, belonging to certaine Gentlemen and other priuate perſons, amongſt the which is the village of Bomene ſeated at one end of it, verie famous for the great loſſe of Spaniards which the great Commander of Caſtille had entring into the ſayd Iſland, the which in the end hee tooke by force, and ſlue all that were in the fort, except one man who eſcaped dangerouſly, but let vs paſſe to the other Iſlands.
            
            
               ZVYT-BEVELAND.
               THis Iſland is ſo called for that before it was rampared with Dykes, it trembled (for Beuen ſignifies to tremble, and Beuelandt a trembling country) as if it had no firme ſeat and foundation. This Iſland is the greateſt of all thoſe of Zeeland, and at one time it had twenty leagues circuit: but by reaſon of the tempeſts and inundations of the ſea, and the contynuall flowing and ebbing of the riuer of Eſcault, which runnes with a violent ſtreame betwixt Romerſwael and Berghen vp Zoom, it is halfe conſumed. In this Iſland of Zuyt
                        •
                     euelandt there was in old time three townes of Marke, the chiefe whereof was Romerſwal, then Borſſele, which ſtood towards the South: but in the yeare of our Lord 1432. the Dykes were broken by the high tides and great tempeſts and it drowned, with the countrie depending thereon, which they called the Siegneury of Borſſel.
               
            
            
               
               ROMERSWAL.
               HEld in that time the firſt ranke among the townes of the ſayd Iſland, looking towardes Berghen vp Zoom vpon the Eaſt, from the which it is not aboue a league diſtant, but the ſame tempeſts and inundations (wherewith Borſſele was ſwalloed vp) diuided this towne from Zuytbeuelandt, leauing it a part in a ſmall Iſland, beeing forced to defend it ſelfe continually with great toyle, coſt and amazement, for feare of the ſea and the riuer of Eſcaut, againſt the which they muſt fight continually, as a cittizen of that towne, a man of great knowledge doth wittely ſhewe by theſe verſes following, which hee planted at his doore in the yeare of our Lord 1549▪ when as Prince Phillippe, (afterwards the ſecond of that name, King of Spaine) came thether to receiue the othes of the countie of Zeeland, and to take poſſeſſion thereof as followeth.
               
                  Vidimus aſſueto priuatum lumine Solem,
                  
                  pallida turbato vidimus aſtra die:
                  Vidimus vndantes horrendos aequoris aeſtus,
                  nos miſeros Belgas, cum obruit Oceanus.
                  Vidimus aſt poſtquam te gloria noſtra Philipe,
                  
                  Caeſareaproles, ſemi-deumque decus:
                  Cuncta refutamus tranſacti triſtia ſaecli,
                  quod praeſens noſtrum teſtificatur opus.
                  Sit licet exiguum, ſit pro ratione voluntas,
                  nil facit ad vaſtum parua catena fretum.
               
               
                  
                  We haue beheld faire Sol depriu'd of ſight
                  pale ſtarres at noone, and nooneday like the night:
                  We haue beheld the furious waues make way,
                  through all the ſtrengths of wretched Belgia.
                  
                  But when we but beheld that face of thine,
                  great Phillip, glorious bud of Caeſars line:
                  It clear'd our hearts frō woes, our eies frō ſhowres:
                  witneſſe this preſent monument of ours.
                  Which be it ſmall, our loues muſt be our pleas:
                  ſmall chaines cannot ore-reach the broadeſt ſeas.
               
            
            
               GOES.
               WHich is otherwiſe called Tergoes, is the onely places which is left ſtanding on the Northſide, vpō an arme of the Eſcault, called Schenge. It is now a good towne, beeing ſince theſe laſt troubles much inlarged and fortefied with large rampars, and goodly bulwarkes, there is reaſonable good-trade, eſpecially of graine for diars, wherewith the countrie abounds. There growes alſo the beſt wheat of all Zeeland, more then they need for their owne vſes, tranſporting the ſurpluſage into the other Iſlands. Their hauen is long and ſtraight, at the mouth whereof there are two forts, one of either ſide, ſo as nothing can paſſe without deſcouery. Not farre from this towne is the village of Cloetinghen, belonging to the ſonne of the deceaſed Floris of 
                     〈…〉
                   heire apparent to all that houſe: a little farther off is the village of Barlandt, where that learned man Adrianus Barlandus, who hath

carefully written the chronicles of Brabant, and a ſommarie of the Earles of Holland. Then Cruyningen, Zeaetſkerke, Hynckeſandt, Capelle, Cattendyke which are all villages, and many others. In this Iſland of Zuytbeuelandt there are yet ſome pleaſant groues and buſſhes fit for hunting for there are many hares found in the Iſland, and great ſtore of wild foule.
            
            
               TOLEN.
               IS one of the Eaſt Iſlands of Zeelande, belonging to the countrie, it is now wholie enuironed with good trenches and ſome forts betwixt, fearing the irruptions of the Spaniards, who haue twiſe or thriſe attempted to get footing, for there is but one chanell to paſſe vpon Brabant ſide: It is verie neere the Dyke of Saint Martin, for there is but one little chanell which diuides them, and therfore ſome affirme (as it is likely) that in former times they were two Iſlands, although in effect it be but one, in the which are two good little townes, both well fortefied with bulwarkes, rampars and counterſcarps, whereof the firſt is called by the name of the Iſland.
            
            
               TOLEN.
               THis towne ſhewes the effect by the name, beeing the towle or cuſtome of marchandiſes due vnto the Prince, and now vnto the Eſtates of the countrie, who chooſe the Officers of Iuſtice, as Bayliffs, Sheriffs and others.
            
            
               
               Saint Martins Dyke.
               IS a pretty town, ſome times belonging to Adolph of Bourgogne, Siegnior of Beuren, the which came afterwards to the houſe of Buren, and now belongs to Philip of Naſſau, Prince of Orange, Earle of Buren by his mother. In this territory is the village of Saint Annelandt, which is as much to ſay, as a good Bourg, belonging alſo to the ſayd Prince: Ioyning vnto it is a little Iſland called Philips Landt: theſe are the foure principall Iſlands with the
                     •
                  r townes.
            
            
               Noort-Beuelandt.
               THis Iſland was drowned (as wee haue ſayd) in the yeare of our Lord 1532. in which inundation there periſhed the townes of Coortgeen and of Cats, the villages of Campen, Wele, Emeliſſe, Haemſte and others, beeing alſo the patrimonie of the Prince of Orange, which Cont Philippe of Hohenloo his Brother in lawe within theſe tenne yeares, by an agreement made betwixt them, hath recouered from the ſea, and fortefied it rounde about with good bankes, ſo as at this daie it is a good countrie both for tillage, and paſture, likelie to bee ſoone built againe with goodly villages, as it was wont to bee.
            
            
               
               WOLFERS-DYCK.
               SO called by the name of the Lord Wolphart, as much to ſay, as the Dyck of Wolphart; it is the leaſt of all theſe Iſlands aboue mentioned, in the which there are but three villages, Wolfers Dyck, Sabbinghe and Hogerſdyck, but there is good paſture for cattel, the Inhabitants being moſt giuen to fiſhing.
               There are moreouer in Zeeland ſome other ſmall Iſlands, which are daily recouered from the ſea, riſeing firſt like bankes of ſand, ſo as ſeeing them thus riſe by little and little and to beare graſſe, they ſend their ſheepe ouer to feede there, whereas the ſhepards haue little lodges, and for their cattell they make great barnes or ſtables, where they lie drie in foule weather, and there the owners prouide them haye before winter.
               It ſeemes alſo that theſe Iſlands of Zeeland haue beene recouered from the ſea, long before Charles Martel Duke of Brabant, father to King Pepinne of France: wherein the Danes laboured much, who in thoſe daies had continual war againſt the French and great Brittanie: for they did chooſe theſe ſandhills, as a ſafe retreat for their Incurſions vpon the neighbour countries, which they made their Rendezvous, making it the magaſin of their ſpoiles. Firſt they ſeazed vpon the Iſle of Walchren, the which they did fortefie as well as they could againſt the violence of the ſea: before which enterpriſe they made many high mounts of earth as are

yet to be ſeene, heere and there, which remaine vnprofitable, ſome neere vnto townes, applied to the vſe of Gardens: vnto which mountes (being any extraordinary tide) they did driue their cattel, and retyred thether them-ſelues, vntill the waters haue falne, and then they returned to their lodgings. Theſe Danes or Noortmans hauing thus recouered the country, began to Tille it, eſpecially after the deſcent of their great Captaine Duke Rollo: who was head of the Norman Nation in France: But in the end the Danes being expelled out of great Brittaine, they were chaſed alſo out of theſe Ilandes: the which in ſucceſſion of time were peopled and made ciuill: And ſo after many Accidents, reuolutions & quarrels in theſe watery parts, in the end they were by force made ſubiect to the Earles of Holland, being giuen vnto them long before, & made a County by the Emperour Lewis the gentle: as the Emperor Charles the bald his father had made Holland a County and giuen it to Thierry the firſt Lord of theſe two Earldomes. But after that the Emperor Henry the third of that name, had giuen vnto Baldwin Earle of Flanders, this Iland of VValchren and other ſmal neigbour Ilands, there fell great warres betwixt the Flemings and the Hollanders: eſpecially that furious battaile in the yeare one thouſand two hundred fifty three: wheras Floris brother to Cont VVilliam King of Romaines, and the Prince of Cleues defeated the Ladie Maguerit Conteſſe of F landers neere vnto VValchren before the King came, in

which defeat (as hiſtories report) there were fifty thouſand Flemings ſlaine, as many drowned, and almoſt as many priſoners, whom the victors intreated ignominiouſly, ſtripping thē naked: among the priſoners were the two Commaunders, Iohn and Guy of Dompierre, ſonnes to the Conteſſe Marguerite; with Thybault Earle of Guiſe, Geffrie Earle of Bar, and aboue 230. Noble men, Knights and men of accoumpt: King William being puft vppe with this victory, hauing ſuch priſoners, would not giue eare to any conditions of peace, but ſuch as he propounded to the Conteſſe, which ſhee would not yeeld vnto. But the King beeing ſlaine two yeares after in Freezeland, a peace was made betwixt the Conteſſe and Floris Brother to the deceaſed King, Vncle and Gardien to his ſonne, who was Earle of Holland and Zealand, named Florens the fift. By the which peace it was ſaid that all priſoners ſhould be ſet at libertie, paying great ranſomes: And that the young Cont Florens ſhoulde marry Beatrix Neece to the Conteſſe Marguerite, Daughter to Cont Guy her eldeſt ſonne. By which Accord and marriage, the Flemings did tranſport and giue in marriage to the ſaid Beatrix all ſuch rights and pretenſions as they might haue in the Conties of Zealand and in the Conty of Alost. But this was but a counterfet peace, and of ſmal continuance: for that Guy of Dompierre, being Earle of Flāders could not indure that the Earles of Holland ſhould inioy this Iland of Walchren, but began to make warre to his great diſhonor

and preiudice, the which could neuer haue any end vntill that all th
                     •
                   Seigneuries of Henault, Holland, Zeland and Friſland fel to the houſe of Burgonne, at one inſtant in a m
                     •
                  nner with the Dutchy of Brabant, vnder the good Duke Philip.
               
               The Eſtates of the conty of Zealand, which wee haue deſcribed, conſiſts of the Nobilitie, and of the townes of the Ilands of Walchren, Schouuen, Zuit-Beuelandt, Tolen, Noort beuelandt (newly recouered from the Sea) Duyuelandt, VVolferſdick, and Phil
                        •
                     ipslandt; wherof Prince Maurice is Gouernor & Admiral general: which Eſtates hold their general Aſſē
                  blie in the town of Middelbourg, wheras commonly the colledge of their Deputies do reſide who Aſſē
                  ble euery day to treat and determine of all occurrents touching the Eſtate, or otherwiſe in ſtead of the Court of Zeland, in the ſaid town the which was wont to be the Abbay of S. Martin: At which Colledge doth firſt appeare by his Deputy the ſayd Prince Maurice, in quality of Marquis of La vere, the firſt Gentleman of Zealand ſpeaking for the whole Nobility of Zealand, then the Treaſoror generall of the country; then the Deputies of the townes of Middelbourg, Zirczee, La-Vere, Fliſſinghe, Tergoes & Tolen, which are the ſix principall townes (the reſt hauing no voyce nor acceſſe vnto the ſayd Eſtates) with their Recorder and Secretary. Behold wherin the Eſtates of Zeland conſiſt: In that Court there doth alſo remaine the Councel or College of the Admiraltie of the ſaide Contie, conſiſting

for the moſt part of the Deputies of the ſayd Eſtates, with an Aduocate 
                     •
                  ſcall and a Secretarie in which Counſell all Sea-cauſes are determined.
               The County of Zealand hath drawne vnto it ſelfe as wee haue ſaid before the chamber of Accoumptes, touching the demaines, and of all the reuenewes proceeding as well from cuſtomes, Impoſts, rents, collections and contributions, as other dependances of the receits, concerning the whole Eſtate, which was wont to be intreated of and decided ioyntly with the Contie of Holland and VVestfreezland, for which three there was but one chamber of Accoumptes at the Hage. This Chamber of Zealand hath a Preſident, Maiſters, Auditors, Regiſters, Vſhers and other Officers. The ſaid Conty of Zealand, hath now a particular coyne, eſtabliſhed in the Court of Middelbourg, which they were not accuſtomed to haue no more then Weſt-freezeland; hauing but one Mynt thirty years ſince for al three in Dordrecht the capitoll towne of Holland, where it remained long and was much priuiledged during the raigne of the Emperor Charles the fift. As for their gouernment and religion, it is al one with the vnited Prouinces their Confederats: Eccleſiaſtical cauſes, as wel for their diſcipline as otherwiſe, are referred to their Synodes, whereas ſome Deputies of the Eſtates do aſſiſt.
               All Appellations in ciuill cauſes, be the ſentences prouitionall or definitiue of all the Townes, Bailywiks and Iuriſdictions in the Conty of Zealand
                  
(Notwithſtanding the Eſtates of this Prouince haue ſought to ſequeſter them-ſelues) reſort to the Prouincial Councell at the Hage in Holland: Except they of Middelbourg, who by a ſpecial priuiledge haue choyce to appeale to the ſaid Prouinciall Councell or to the great Councell, which is alſo at the Hage, like vnto that at Macklyn: whereof there is but a reuiſion before the Councellors deputed out of the vnited Prouinces. The ſentences of which reuiſors are held for holy and inuiolable decrees. But criminall ſentences are executed without Appeale, by euery officer in his Iuriſdiction. They haue alſo in Zealand their Dickgraues, as in Holland, which are Iudges, hauing their Iuriſdictions apart, with certaine aſſiſtants or Sheriffes whome they call Geſwooren, that is to ſay Iurats, to heare & determine of all controuerſies concerning the entertainment of dikes, Sluſes, large ditches, waies, fludgates; which Dickgraues & Iurats are in the Iland of Walchren, in manner of a Colledge, the which conſiſts of the Marquis of La Vere, or his Deputie of the townes and of the Deputies of the beſt proprietaries in the Iland of Walchren. The like is obſerued in the other Ilands of the Conty of Zealand, euery one according to his priuiledges.
            
            
               The Contie of Zutphen.
               THis Conty hath taken his name of the Capitol Towne of the countrie, which is Zutphen, ſtanding

vpon the right banke of the riuer of Iſſel, by the which the riuer of Berckel doth paſſe, which falles into Iſſell. This towne before the firſt troubles, and that the Duke of Alua did exerciſe his cruelties, was rich, well traded, faire and great, with a goodly Bridge to paſſe towardes the towne of Arnhem in Geldres, the which was broken by the Spaniards, part of the towne burnt, and the Inhabitants miſerably intreated; which were the firſt fruites of the Spaniards gouernment: Since it hath been twiſe or thriſe taken and re-taken by the one and the other partie, hauing continued ſince the yeare one thouſand fiue hundred ninety one, vnder the vnited Eſtates. Although that this towne and the Iuriſdiction therof be numbred for the third member or quarter of the Dutchy of Geldres, it hath yet a long time beene a Conty of it ſelfe, hauing a particular Earle, the laſt whereof was the Earle Gerlache, who left no other heires but one Daughter, the which was marryed to Otto Earle of Naſſau and of Geldres, who brought him the ſaid Earldom of Zutphen for her Doury: by meanes whereof he augmented his Demaines: Since which time the ſaid Towne with the Iuriſdiction hath been incorporate to the Dutchy of Geldres, ſubiect to one Chancerie, Gouernment, Chamber of Accoumptes, and making one member at the generall Eſtates of both Countries, which as we haue ſaid before are held in the towne of Arnhem: whereas they of the ſaid Towne and

Contie haue their Aſſiſtants and ordinary Deputies, who aſſiſt in the Aſſemblie of the general Eſtates of the Vnited Prouinces, that is to ſay of euery one of the ſaid quarters and of the Nobility of Geldres; who change as the Eſtates of the Prouince ſhall thinke it fit.
               The Townes and Iuriſdictions of the ſaid Contie are theſe which follow., after the cheefe Towne; Doesbourg, a league and a halfe from thence, Dotecome, Bronckhorſt, Lochom, Groll, Bredeuoerd, Keppel, Bourg, Sherenbourg, which are or haue beene heretofore walled Townes, beſides many good Villages. So as this Conty hath larger limmittes, and is richer then that of Namure: Wherefore it merites to bee held, as it hath alwaies beene, and as the Emperour and King Philip haue carryed it in their Titles, for one of the ſeauenteene Prouinces of the Netherlandes: And at this preſent one of the eight vnited and confederate. There is in this Contie a generall Officer called Droſſart, which depends vpon the Chancery of Arnhem: Whoſe Iuriſdiction extendes cheefly to the champian country▪ who is bound to bring all Offenders to Arnhem, or to the other townes that haue right to take knowledge thereof: The townes are gouerned by their Gouernors, Councell and other ordinary Officers.
            
            
               
               DOESBOVRG.
               IS an ancient Town which ſome call Druſiburgum, other moderne writers will haue it the ſame towne which Tacitus names Aſciburgum. It is ſeathe at the mouth of Foſſa Druſiana or Druſus ditch, the which is a chanell which Druſus (to keepe his ſoldiers from idleneſſe) made them to digge at Iſſeloort, drawing it out of the Rhyne, and carrying it into the Riuer of Iſſell at Doesbourg, the which hee made to haue a ſhorter paſſage to make warre againſt the Friſons, then if he ſhould haue beene forced to haue gone downe the riuer of Rhyne, and ſo entring into the Brittiſh ſea, to haue compaſſed about all the country of the Battauians, and ſo to haue entred into Friſland by the riuer of Flye. It is a good towne and well peopled, the which during theſe wars hath not felt ſo many alterations as many other townes.
               In the yeare one thouſand fiue hundred ninetie eight the Admirall of Arragon Lieutenant of the Arch-duke Albert hauing taken the Towne of Berck vppon the Rhyne, and paſt his armie there, he reſolued to beſiege this towne; But Prince Maurice raizing his camp out of the Ile of Geldre (which they call Gelderſcheweert) he went and put himſelfe into the ſaid towne lodging part of his troopes in a little Iland right againſt it, in the middeſt of the Riuer of Iſſel, and the body of his armie lay intrencht without the towne towards the fields, whereas the

Admiral thought to make his approches, to beſiege it, but finding ſuch lettes, hee durſt not affront the Prince, who attended him long in battaile, but retyred, and went to winter vppon the Territory of the Empire: where he carryed himſelfe as you haue heard in the hiſtory of the Netherlands.
               
            
            
               DOETECVM.
               THis towne ſtands in ihe Champian country, a League from Doesbourg▪
                   vppon the old Iſſel, it is a reaſonable good towne, with a double wall, yet none of the ſtrongeſt. The Admiral of Arragon hauing paſt the Rhyne to beſiege Doesbourg, he went firſt before it, and tooke it by compoſition within three daies. But the Admirall beeing retyred, Prince Maurice went and beſeeged it againe, the which was as eaſily yeelded to him as to the Spaniard, remaining at this day vnder the obedience of the vnited Eſtates, as it had beene aboue thirty yeares before, except thoſe few daies the Admirals men held it.
            
            
               BRONCKHORST.
               IT is within a league of Zutphen, ſeated vppon the right ſide of the riuer of Iſsel, erected to a Contie, hauing a particular Earle. The familie of Bronchoorſt is ancient, from the which are iſſued the houſes of Battenbourg, Anholt, Megen and others. The towne hath beene much ruined during theſe warres: But the Caſtle which is of

a reaſonable ſtrength) ſtands ſtill, where there is a continuall garriſon for one party or other.
            
            
               LOCHEM.
               IS a good little towne▪ two leagues from Zutphen, well fortified for the importance thereof, beeing very neceſſary during the troubles: for holding the States partie in the yeare one thouſand fiue hundred eightie two, the Duke of Parma ſent Charles Earle of Manſfeldt to beſiege it in the King of Spaines name: But the Prince of Orange knowing that three of his Nephewes Herman, Frederic, and Adolph vanden Berghe, ſonnes of his Siſter and of Cont Van Sheeren Berghen were within it, hee ſent the Earle of Hohenloe with an armie to raiſe the ſiege, as he did, and freed them; forcing Manſfeldt to retire with loſſe: Since which time the ſaid town hath continued conſtant vnder the obedience of the Eſtates, vntill that in the yeare 1605. the Marquis Spinola Lieutenant to the Arch-duke Albert of Auſtria, beſieged it, and tooke it by compoſition, but ſoone after it was recouered by Prince Maurice, and continues as before.
            
            
               GROLL.
               IN old time was a good Borrough, but by theſe laſt warres within theſe thirtie yeares, it hath beene walled in with rampars and Bulwarks hauing

broad and deepe ditches, fortified with caſemats and counterſcarps. Being held by the Spaniards Prince Maurice went and beſieged it for the vnited Eſtates: Whereof Peter Earle of Manſfeldt Lieutenant for the King of Spaine by prouiſion, beeing aduertiſed, he ſent Collonel Mondragon Captaine of the Caſtle of Antwerp, with a ſmall Armie, to raiſe his ſiege, or at the leaſt to cut of his victuals. The Eſtates beeing ill informed of the ſtrength of this Spaniſh armie, which was made greater vnto them then it was, they commanded Prince Maurice to retyre as he did: But hearing what Mondragons forces were, who retyred towards the Rhyne to paſſe at Berck, hee purſued him beyond the town of VVezell, in which purſuite Cont Philip and Ernest of Naſſau Brethren, Couſins to the Prince, and Cont Erneſt of Solms, beeing too farre aduanced contrary to the Princes order, after they had defeated two Cornets of Spaniards, were them-ſelues in the end put to route, and the two Earles Philip of Naſſau and Ernest of Solms ſlaine, and Cont Erneſt of Naſſau was taken priſoner: Where-vppon the Prince leauing his purſuit brought backe his Armye and Mondragon repaſſing the Rhyn, returned with his into Brabant. But two yeares after, in the yeare 1597. the Prince went agayne to beſeege it, in the which Cont Frederic Vanden Berghe commanded with 1200. men who finding him-ſelfe very hardly preſt, he yeelded it by compoſition: Since in the yeare 1605. the

Marquis Spinola recouered it (although it were held very ſtrong) beeing yeelded vppon an honorable compoſition: It is two leagues from Breefort.
               
            
            
               SHEEREN BERGHE.
               A Towne and Caſtle erected to an Earledome, wherof the laſt Earle was called William, whom King Philip the ſecond made Earle: he had to wife the Prince of Oranges ſiſter, by whome he had many ſonnes, the eldeſt called Herman is now Earle: Hee with two of his bretheren being beſeeged in Lochem, were deliuered by the dilligence of the Prince their Vncle: But ſoone after abandoning him vngratefully, they followed the Spaniards partie: yet the Eſtates ſeazed vppon the towne in the which they had their garriſon: vntill that the Prince paſſing that way in the yeare 1597. the Conteſſe their mother obtained of him that the town ſhould remaine neuter▪ and that ſhe and her daughters liuing in the caſtle ſhould bee freed from garriſon: The like ſhe obtained from the Arch-duke Albert: It is a little towne of ſmall importance, a League and a halfe from Dotecom.
               
            
            
               BREDEFORT.
               IS but a ſmall Towne with a Caſtle ſituated in a Moore, to the which there is but one paſſage to come vnto it vppon a Cauſey, ſo as it is of hard acceſſe: yet in the yeare 1597. Prince Maurice
                  
ſurmounting all difficulties, did beſeege and batter it, and hauing cauſed it to be ſummond, the Burgers hauing a diſpoſition to yeeld, yea the women and children falling on their knees vppon the Rampar, and crying for mercy, the Captaine who commanded them being reſolued for to hold it, the Prince cauſed an aſſault to be giuen, and took it by force, commanding the ſoldiars to ſpare the Inhabitants. The Captaine like a coward fled with his ſoldiers into the caſtle, and hid him-ſelfe: The Prince cauſed certaine peeces of Ordinance to bee brought to batter the Port, which the ſoldiers ſeeing, they yeelded vpon condition that they ſhould be all taken to ranſome. This braue Captaine was found hiddē in a ſeller, yet he was no worſe intreated then the reſt: only he indured many affrōts for his cowardly brauery. This town lies two leagues from Anholt: ſince it hath bene well fortified by the vnited Eſtates.
            
            
               KEPPEL.
               IS a little towne of ſmall importance, as al other Land-townes be▪ it ſtands vpon the old ſtreame of Iſſel, halfe a league from Doesbourg.
               
            
            
               BVRG.
               IS not much better then Keppel, ſeated vppon the ſame torrent, a League from Doeſbourg.
               
               Heere you may ſee tenne townes as well great as ſmall, ſtrong as weake, in the Contie of Zutphen,
                  
beſides Boroughes, Villages and Caſtles, whereof there is good ſtore, which make this Prouince to haue a large Iuriſdiction: It hath indured much in theſe laſt warr, but now they begin to take breath, whereof they haue great need as well as diuers others, but wee will content our ſelues with this deſcription.
            
            
               The Prouince and Seigneiurie of Vtrecht.
               
               THis Eſtate and Seignieurie in old time belonging vnto a Prince and particular Prelat, whom they called the Biſhop of Vtrecht, was firſt giuen by the meere liberalitie of the Kings of France, vnto S. Wildeboord the firſt Biſhop, and afterwards by the Emperours to his ſucceſſors, all vnder a coullor of pietie, which Eſtate did conſiſt of two Dioceſſes: the one called the lower Dioceſe, where are the capitol Towne of Vtrecht, Wick-ter-Duyrſted (called Batauodurum) Amerſfort, Rhenen, and Montfort, with aboue ſixtie Boroughs and villages. The other was called the high Dioces, which contained all the country of Oueriſſel, where there are fourteene or fifteene townes, wherof the three Imperiall and Hans townes are Deuenter Campen and Swolle: the which together with the reſt, now make a Prouince a part: which wee will deſcribe hereafter. The lower Dioces is good and fertill, better manured then the vpper, a higher ground

and much dryer then Holland, which is neere neighbour vnto it, to deſcribe which we wil begin with the cheefe towne.
            
            
               VTRECHT.
               WAs firſt (as ſome write it) called Antonia or Antonina, of one Antony a Romaine Senator, who (flying Neros tyranie) retyred into that quarter, and did begin this place. Others ſay that Marc Antony was the founder, from whome it tooke the name: Some alſo maintaine, that it was ſo called of Antoninus Pius. But be it what it may: it is moſt ſure (as many affirme, and as it may bee gathered by Medalles and other Antiquities) that this towne of Vtrecht was for a long time called Antonina, whereof there are yet ſome markes to be ſeene vpon the Town-houſe. After that the Wiltes had taken and ruined it, they built a Fort which they call Wiltenbourg, the which was taken by Dagobert ſonne to Clotaire King of France, who did fortifie it more then before, and called it Traiectum, for it was a trauers or paſſage whereas an Impoſt was paid (which in many places in France they call Le droit de Travers, the due or right of trauers or paſſage) for all Marchandiſe, that was carryed and recarried on either ſide: and it retaines at this day the name of Traiectum. It ſtandes vppon the head of the Rhyne, the which paſt directly there, before that they forced it (in making a Scluſe

at Wicter-duyrſted ſome eight hundred yeares ſince) to caſt it ſelfe into the riuer of Leck: paſſing through which towne, it did pierce through Woerden, Oudwater and Leyden, and did ingulph into the Sea at Catwick; yea ſince it had an other courſe: the waters and chanels which paſſe by the ſaid townes, are at this day called the old Rhyn: It is an admirable thing, that this towne is ſo ſituated that they may go to what towne they pleaſe of fiftie, which lye round about them in a day, the which being ſhewed viſible to Philip the 2. King of Spaine, being vppon the place, he tooke a wonderful delight. And it is moſt certaine that there were ſome Noblemen which layed great wagers for the tryal thereof, and found it true. Moreouer in one of the longeſt daies in Summer, if one parts early in a morning from Vtrecht, he may dine at any one of 26. townes, where he pleaſe, & return to his own houſe to ſupper: the Emperor Charles the 5. in the yeare 1542. cauſed a caſtle to bee built neere vnto S. Catherins port, to keep the town in awe, when as by the ceſſion of the Biſhop of that place, he was put in temporal poſſeſſion of the ſaid town & the dependances: the which hee called Vredenbourg, that is to ſay a Caſtle of peace. The Cittie is great & mighty, wel fortified with ten good Bulwarks flanking one another, with their counterſcarps and diches al of Maſons work, and the rampars in like manner: ſome Bulwarks are alſo of ſtone, the reſt only of earth: there are goodly buildings, furniſhed with caues & vauted ſellers.
               
                  
There are alſo goodly churches, among the which there are fiue, that haue chanoins: The firſt which is the cathedrall church, is called Saint Martins, the ſecond Saint Sauiour neere vnto it, but now pulled downe: the 3. Saint Peter the 4. Saint Iohn, and the 5. of our Ladies, founded by the Emperor Frederic Barberoſſa, hauing bin enioyned therevnto by the Pope, to expiate the fault which he had committed in ruining the towne and all the churches and monaſteries of Milan: But aboue all, the cathedrall church is ſtately, hauing a faire high goodly tower, tranſparent: in the which the ſayd Emperor Charles the 5. did celebrate the order of the golden fleece, in the yeare 1546. the old temple was pulled down by the biſhop Adelbold, for that he held it to bee too little, and did reedefie it in the eſtate we now ſee it. This new temple was conſecrated in the yeare 1023. in the preſence of the Emperor Henry the 2. by 12. biſhops. There are alſo in the ſame towne two commanders, one of the knights of Malta, and the other of the order of the Teutons, vnder the great Maiſter of Pruſsia, both hauing churches and very ſtately lodgings, either of them hauing his commander. Hee of Malta is called the Bayliff of S. Catherins, and the other carries the name of commander or great Prior of the Prouince, by reaſon that he hath vnder him many ſmall commanderies, and great poſſeſſions in many places of the Netherlands. They hold an honorable ranke and doe good to many which are entertained by the bounty of

theſe men, as chanoins, abbayes and monaſteries which are in the ſayd towne, who (although there be no other publicke exerciſe then of the reformed religion) hold their prebends and entertainments, the cloyſters within precinct of the towne ſtanding as they did, except the houſes of begging Friars which are applied to other vſes: Of which abbaies and cloiſters there is that of Saint Paul of the order of Saint Benet, and two of gentlewomen. There were alſo three of gentlewomen without the town, but theſe laſt warres haue beene the cauſe of their ruine, fearing to leaue lodgings for their enemies, beeing to neere the towne, but the Nunnes enioye their entertainement; and when any Monke or Nunne dies, the Eſtates of the Prouince put others in their places, to eaſe the poorer ſort of the gentrie. The cittizens of this cittie are courteous, ciuill, induſtrious and ritche amongſt whome there are, and haue alwaies beene men that are vertuous and of great valour; and aboue all Pope Adrian the ſixth of that name, firſt of all a Doctor of both lawes, whereon hee hath written goodly workes, and withall hee was a great Mathematician. Hee obtained in the vniuerſitie of Lovaine, (where hee ſtudied long) without ſeeking it, diuers degrees of honour, and not without profit; and ſo ſparing his reuenues, hee founded and built a colledge which at this day doth honour his memorie: whoſe fame was ſo pleaſing to all men, as hee was choſen to bee Scholemaſter

to the Emperour Charles the fifth in his Infancie: by whoſe Maieſtie hee was ſent Ambaſſador into Spaine, to the King Don Fernando of Arragon, who for his merittes made him biſhoppe of Tortoſo. Beeing afterwardes recommended to the Pope by the Emperour Maximilian the firſt hee was made Cardinall. The King Don Fernando and the Archduke Philippe his Sonne in law beeing dead, cardinall Adrian was choſen for a time to be Gouernor and Viceroy of Spaine in the name of Prince Charles who was ſoone after Emperour.
               In the end on the ſixth day of Ianuary in the yeare of our Lord 1522. hee was choſen Pope, the newes, whereof being carried him into Spaine, hee made no ſhew of ioye; beeing anoynted hee would not change his name as others did; hee liued but twentie monethes and ſome daies after, in continuall trouble of minde and griefe: Amongſt all his Epitaphes this agrees beſt with him. Hadrianus ſextus hic ſitus eſt, qui nihil ſibi infelicius in vita duxit, quam quod imperaret. Heere lies Adrian the ſixth who thought nothing had happened vnto him more vnfortunate in all his life, then that hee had commanded. Hee cauſed a goodly houſe to bee built in Vtrecht the place of his birth, which they call at this day the lodging of Pope Adrian.
               
               In this cittie reſides a Prouinciall councell to the which all the appeales of the towne, country and

Siegniory of Vtrecht do reſort: In which councell there is a preſident and nine councellors, a receiuer of the Prouince, Regiſters, and other Officers. This Siegneury was greater in the time of King Dagobert, who ioyned the temporalty to the ſpiritualty, giuing it to Saint Willebrord, who was an Engliſh man borne, and the firſt biſhop, to whome ſucceeded Boniface, in whoſe times this cittie was in great reputation, hauing the title and dignitie of Archbiſhop, but Boniface hauing beene martired by the Friſons, this preheminence and authority, was with the conſent of the chapter (then much afflicted by the Danes, and Normans) conferſed to the biſhops of Cologne who haue euer ſince retayned this dignity: notwithſtanding Pepin and Charlemayne Kings of France reſtored this cittie, who not onely eſtabliſhed the Epiſcopall dignitie, but to the end the biſhoppe might defend himſelfe from his aduerſary, hee did ſo augment his iuriſdiction, as his Siegneury did extend it ſelfe in a manner ouer all the country of the Battauians: And although the Friſons, Danes and Nortmans did ſpoyle and burne it often, yet they did ſoone recouer their former eſtate and gather new forces: To confirme that which wee haue ſayd, it ſhall not bee from the purpoſe to inſert here ſome Latin verſes though ill polliſhed ſauoring of the harſhneſſe of the ſtile in thoſe daies, the which were written in two great tables of wood, hung vpon two pillers before the Quier of the ſayd cathedrall church, written in

great Letters, halfe worne out by continuance of time, thoſe of the right ſide were.
               
                  Circumquaque fluens Hollandia gurgite Rheni,
                  
                  cingitur Oceano fluminibuſque maris.
                  In qua cum muris vrbs Antonina nouellis,
                  tempore Neronis aedificata fuit.
                  Hanc deuaſtauit fera Slauica gens, et ibidem
                  caſtrum Wiltorum conditur inde novum.
                  Turribus excelſis, quod adhuc plebs Abroditorum,
                  
                  funditur euertens dirruit vſque Solum.
                  
                  Hinc Traiectenſe caſtrum cum maentbus altis,
                  conditur a Francis Chriſticolis; ſed idem
                  Vulgus Danorum confregit humo tenùs, omnes
                  cum clero ciues, inſimul enſe necans.
                  Denique Baldricus Praeſul noua maenia ſtruxit,
                  quae modo ſubſiſtunt auxiliante Deo.
                  Sic Hollandenſi terrae veraciter omni,
                  
                     Traiectum conſtat vrbs capitalis adhuc.
               
               
                  The famous Rhine through Hollands boſome glides
                  and (with the ſea) enguirts it on all ſides.
                  Here, Vtrecht ſtands, firſt built (as authors ſay)
                  in Neroes time, and called Antonia.
                  
                  Theſe walles the Slauons raz'd, vpon repaire,
                  of which, the name of Wiltenburch it bare.
                  Then came the Abrodites, a nation wood,
                  and leuell'd it euen with the place it ſtood.
                  In place whereof the chriſtian Frankeners came
                  and built a fort cal'd Vtrecht: but the ſame
                  Was by the Danes made a rude heape of ſtones,
                  
                     
and they that held it ſlanghtered all at ones. ſtand yet,
                  But biſhop Baldrick ſince repaired it,
                  and raiſ'd thoſe walls which (God bee thankt)
                  And thus remaines it Vtrecht ſtill, of all,
                  the land of Holland, firſt, and principall.
               
               On the ſecond piller on the left hand hung theſe verſes.
               
                  Tempore Francorum Dagoberti regis in iſto,
                  preſenti fundo conditus ecce decens.
                  Primitus Ecclaeſia Sancti Thomae prope caſtrum
                  Traiectum, quam gens Friſica fregit atrox.
                  Sed prior Antiſtes, Dominus. &c.
               
               
                  This church which men S. Thomas-his do call,
                  vpon this plot was founded firſt of all.
                  When Dagobert rul'd France, nere to the towne
                  of Vtrecht: the fierce Friſons raz'd it downe.
                  But the firſt prelat, Lord. &c.
               
               The reſt of theſe verſes were ſo worne as it was not poſſible to read them.
            
            
               WYCK-TER-DVYRSTED.
               IT appeeres by the ancient Hiſtories, that this towne of Wyck-ter-Duyrſted, hath in ancient time beene a great and ſpatious towne, in the which they write were 32. pariſh churches. It was before this towne that the Rhine was dambde vp, and forced (ſome 8
                     •
                  0. yeares ſince) to leaue his right courſe and to caſt it ſelfe into the Lecke, as we haue ſhewed before. But they ſet not downe the cauſe why

they cut it off in this place, and made it take the courſe it now holds. The which happened, for that when as the winde was at the Norweſt, and blew hard, the riuer of Rhine being driuen backe, and not able to paſſe out by his gulfe at Catwyck into the Britiſh ſea, was forced to diſperce it ſelfe ouer all the conntries of Holland, Vtrecht and the Betuve, which is of the Dutchy of Geldres. The which happened often, whereby they ſuſtained great loſſes, wherfore the Eſtates of theſe 3. Prouinces aſſembling together, they conſulted how they might preuēt it, & in the end reſolued to turne the Rhine from his right courſe, which was to the Norweſt, and to giue it an other, which ſhold fall, crokedly into the ſea, as it doth at this preſent: for the effecting wherof they dambd it vp, drawing it by little & little into the Lecke which is nere vnto it making high bancks of either ſide, ſo as in ſucceſſion of time it is become a good nauigable riuer, falling into the Meuſe beneath Dordrecht, and ſo enters into the Ocean ſea before Bryele. This towne of Wyck is verie ancient; Whereon Cornelius Tacitus a Knight and Romaine Hiſtoriographer makes honorable mention, calling it Batauodurum. It was ruined by the Danes and Normans, but afterwards built againe: yet nothing ſo bigge as at the firſt, notwithſtanding it hath alwaies beene, as it is at this preſent, for the commoditie of the ſituation▪, a good and a ritch towne, hauing a verie ſtrong caſtle, whereas the Princes, Biſhoppes of

                  Vtrecht did for a long time keepe their court, when as they would lie in the lower dioceſe, as they did at the caſtle of Vollenhof Gheelmuyden in Oueryſſel, a league from Campen, when as they kept in the higher Dioceſe. This town had in former times a priuat Lord, who was alſo Siegnior of Abcoude; But the biſhops of Vtrecht would neuer be quiet vntill they had gotten it, this houſe declyning as wee haue ſhewed in the chapter of the Nobility of Holland.
               
            
            
               AMERSFORT.
               THis towne was in olde time built at twiſe, for there is a little towne al walled about in the very mideſt of an other greater, the which at this preſent is verie ſtrong with rampars and bulwarks flanking one an other, and large ditches. It is three leagues from Vtrecht ſtanding vpon a little riuer which they cal Do. It hath beene often taken and retaken by the Geldrois, the laſt was in the yeare 1543. when as Martin van Roſſen Marſhall of the Duke of Geldres army tooke it by force: but he ſodenly yeelded it againe according to the accord made in the towne of Venlo, betwixt the Emperor and the ſayd Duke. To ſpeake the truth it is a faire and a good towne, well peopled for a land towne; the inhabitants are courteous and of good conuerſation, among the which there are many learned men and louers of muſicke, who in certaine daies of the weeke meet togither in honeſt company to make muſicke: for the which they haue certaine gardins and faire chambers of the ſworne companies, as

pleaſant in ſommer as can bee ſeene in any place wherſoeuer, and in winter they make choiſe of ſome of their houſes: Maiſter Iohn Fouck Prouoſt of our Ladies church in Vtrecht, was borne in this towne, he was honored with other degrees and Eccleſiaſtical dignities, a learned and vertuous man, and therefore he was called by the King into Spaine, and there made Preſident of the councell of the Netherlands, for the affaires of Flanders. In this towne was alſo borne that great perſonage, Iohn of Oldenbarneuelt Knight, Siegnior of Tempel and Groeneuclt, firſt councellor and aduocate for the county of Holland and Weſt-Friſland, a man of great Iudgement and experience, vpon whom the affaires of Eſtate do chiefely depend, not only for the ſaid coū
                  ty, but alſo of the generall Eſtates of the vnited Prouinces, which remaine not at the Hage in Hollād.
               
            
            
               RHENEN.
               SO called for that it is ſituated vpon the banke of Rhine fiue good leagues from Vtrecht, & as much from Arnhem in Geldres, whereas they doe moſt commonly dine, going or comming from one of theſe two townes vnto the other, which is a great paſſage towards Deuenter, Zutphen, Doeſbourg and other places, as well in Geldres, as Cleues, or to Cologne or any place where they pleaſe in Germany. This towne hath towardes Vtrecht a large country, the ſoile whereof is fit to make turfes to burne, but not ſo good and durable, neither make they ſo good a cole as thoſe of Holland: And a league frō thence,

there hath beene within theſe 60. yeares, a village built, more for the making of theſe turfes, then for any other reaſon. There remaines yet ſome forme of a caſtle in this towne, the which is little and of ſmall importance, if this great paſſage were not, which makes it to be frequented. It conſiſts moſt of Innes and Tauerns. It hath alſo ſuffred much during the warres againſt the Geldrois.
               
            
            
               MONTFORT.
               THis towne hath a particular Lord at this day▪ who writs himſelf Vicont of Montfort, it ſtands vpon the riuer of Yſſel, a league in equal diſtance frō the townes of Woorden, Oudewater & Iſelſteyn. The place is little but ſtrong, founded by Godfry of Rhenē
                   biſhop of Vtrecht, to ſerue as a bar & fronter againſt Holland, who did alſo build againſt the Geldrois the caſtle of Horſt, againſt the Traiectins the towne of Woerden, and againſt the Friſons, Vollenhouen in the contry of Oueryſſel: the which appeeres ſufficiently by his Epitaph.
               
                  
                     Godefride tui Rhenanam prouidus arcem
                  donaſti iuris▪ aereque mox proprio,
                  Quatuor en patriae, largus munimina noſtrae,
                  Horſt, Woerd, et Monfort conſtruis et Volenhoe:
               
               
                  Wiſe Godfrey firſt with Rhenen did enlarge
                  our ſtate, and then at his owne coſt and charge.
                  He Montfort, Venlo, Horſt, and Woerdt, did reare,
                  the foure chiefe forts that keepe our foes in feare.
               
               
                  Lambertus Hortenſius, a learned man who hath compoſed

many good bookes, was borne in this twon.
            
            
               Of the Eſtate of Vtrecht in generall.
               THe Biſhoprike and Eſtate of Vtrecht was in former times very great and powerfull, the which Charles the Bald King of France did with the temporalty make an Earledome, wherevpon there grew great and long warres, betwixt the biſhops of Vtrecht & the Earles of Holland, for that the biſhops ſought to recouer by fauour of the Emperors, all their ancient demeins, granted vnto them by Dagobert, and Charles the Bald: And the Earles of Holland ſeeking to maintaine, yea to augment that which had bin newly giuen them, were ſupported by the Kings of France. I ſay that this Eſtate was in old time ſo great and their territories ſo large, (as Aeneas Siluius otherwiſe called Pope Pius the 2. doth write) as the biſhop or prince therof, might at need, put 40000. armed men of his owne naturall ſubiects to field. And although they had continuall warres againſt their neighbors (wherof they themſelues were euer the firſt motiues) as the Hollanders, Friſons and Geldrois, yet they made head againſt thē all, as well as they could, as appeered by Godfrie of Rhenen. But in the latter age Charles of Egmond duke of Geldres, a proud Prince, warlike and fierce, made ſuch ſharpe warres againſt the Biſhops of Vtrecht, as he reduced them to great extremitie, & eſpecially Henry of Bauaria, brother the the Cont Palatin of Rhine from whom hee tooke a great part of his

Siegneury, as well of the higher as the lower dioceſe. Moreouer the cittizens of Vtrecht were grown ſo proud by reaſon of their freedomes and preuiledges, and ſo inſolent by reaſon of their welth, as they grew into factions among themſelues, cauſing many diſorders in their towne, and attempting againſt their biſhops; they did often reuolt againſt them, & if they were not choſen according to their humors, they would not accept them, but did them a thouſand indignities, yea killing their Officers, & taking ſome priſoners before their faces, not without danger to the biſhoppes owne perſon, who was forced (to eſcape their fury) to fly to his caſtles of Wyok or Horſt. The laſt reuolt and affront which they did vnto their Prince and biſhop, was vnto the aboue name Henry of Bauaria, who had enioyed this dignitie foure yeares, beeing incenſed againſt him, hauing beene one day abroad in the country, and returning home at night, they ſhut the gates againſt him, and would not ſuffer him to enter into the towne: and (which was worſe) ſoone after they receiued Martin van Roſſen, Marſhall of the campe to the Duke of Geldres, into the towne with a garriſon of Geldrois, who from thence did wonderfully annoy the Hollanders, and at one time made an incurſion as farre as the Hage, the which they ſpoyled, and retired ſafely with their bootie to Vtrecht. Biſhop Henry ſeeing himſelfe thus braued by the Geldrois, and by his owne ſubiects, reſolued to caſt himſelfe into the armes of the

Emperor Charles the fifth and to tranſport vnto him all that he held of the temporaltie: to the end hee might ſuccor him, to preſerue that which belonged vnto the ſpiritualtie in this towne and ſtate. And for that the Emperour was then in Spaine, hee did impart it to the Lady Marguerite his Aunte, who was Douager of Sauoy and Regent of the Netherlands: ſo as in the end it was concluded, that on the 15 of Nouember 1
                     •
                  27. he ſhould come in perſon to Schoonhouen, whether the Emperor ſhould ſend ſome men of account on his behalfe▪ amongſt which were the Earles of Buren & Hochſtraten, the chancellor of Brabant and the Preſident of the Prouincial councel of Holland: where being arriued at the day appointed, after many conſultations, they concluded that the Biſhop ſhould yeeld vp, reſigne & tranſport, all the rights, intereſt and pretenſions, which hee had to the temporall iuriſdiction in the dioceſe of Vtrecht, and the country of Oueryſſel, to the benifit & profit of the ſayd Emperor, of which rights he did put his Imperial Maieſty in poſſeſſion, as Duke of Brabant & Earle of Holland, (not in quality of Emperor) as well for himſelfe, as for his ſucceſſors deſcended of his bloud: whervpon the Earls of Buren and Hochſtraten, the chancellor and other deputies, did promiſe vnto the biſhop in the Emperors name their maiſter▪ and did bind themſelues to make war againſt his enemies, and to ſettle him in his Epiſcopal ſeat, and make him duly to enioy his ſpirituall dignity. The Duke of Geldres beeing aduertiſed

of this treatie and accorde, hee made ſharper warres then before, and ſo incenſed the cittizens of Vtrecht againſt their Biſhoppe Henry, as they ſought by all meanes to depriue him of his Epiſcopall dignitie, chooſing in his place (by the Dukes inſtigation and councell) the Earle of Bilg, a chanonine of Cologne. Thē did there grow a furious warre betwixt the Emperor and Biſhop▪ 
                  Henry, againſt the Duke of Geldres and the comunalty of Vtrecht, holding the Dukes partie▪ and their new Biſhops: So as after much bloud ſpilt, and many ſpoiles done in the country; there were ſome citizens of Vtrecht well affected to Biſhop Henry, who brought the Emperors men into the towne the 1. of Iuly 1528. who entred early in a morning by ſurprize, where there was ſome little oppoſition, & the Earle of Maeurs (lieutenant to the Duke) was taken priſoner, with many of the chiefe of the towne, and ſome chanoins. Three daies after the biſhop entred, and cauſed ſome of the mutines to bee executed by the ſword, yea he made two chanoins to bee put into a ſack and caſt into the riuer, and he would haue taken a ſharper reuenge without the interceſſion of the Earle of Hochſtraten: eight daies after he aſſēbled the three Eſtates in the publick place, by the which he was acknowledged to bee their biſhop & Prince, all ſollemnly ſwearing fidelity & obedience vnto him. Afterwards the biſhop hauing conferred againe with the ſaid Eſtates, hee propounded vnto them, how that being in the town of Schonhouen, he

had let them vnderſtand his reſolution to ſubmit the temporalty of his Siegneury to the Emperour, ſhewing them how neceſſary it was, for their quiet and publike preſeruation, to the end that this Eſtate being vnder the gard and protection of ſo mighty a Monarke; it ſhould bee defended and preſerued from all enemies which did enuiron it; intreating them to like well of that which he had reſolued, and to yeeld vnto it. The matter being diuerſly debated after many allegations on either ſide, in the end (for that they could not auoide it, the Emperors men being already in poſſeſſion of the town) ſeeing they had cōmitted an error, and that their opppoſition would auaile them nothing, but incenſe the Emperor & their Prelat, they yeelded vnto it. That is, that the citty of Vtrecht, with the iuriſdiction and limmits of al the townes, villages, borroughes, forts, territory, champian country, mountaines, woods, foreſts, riuers, pooles, lakes, mills, rents and reuenues to conclude all that was of the temporall demeins, of the ſayd Eſtate and countrie of Vtrecht, together with all the right, title and intereſt, which hee had to the high dioceſe, that is to ſay, to the country of Oueryſſel, and ouer the town of Groning, the iuriſdiction of the Groningers and the Omelands, with all their rights, ſhould be vnited and incorporated to the demeins of the Dukes of Brabant and Earles of Holland. The which hauing beene agreed vpon and concluded, the Traiectins were abſolued of their othe of fealtie which

they had taken vnto the ſayd biſhoppe, who freely diſcharged them, vpon condition that they ſhould take the like othe, and doe homage to the Emperour, and to his lawfull heires iſſued of his bloud, Dukes of Brabant and Earles of Holland: The Biſhop reſeruing nothing for himſelfe and his ſucceſſors, but the ſpirituall iuriſdiction and reuenues, and that ſumptuos Palace in the towne, ioyning to the cathedrall church, built by Charles Martel Duke of Brabant, father to Pepin King of France, who gaue it to Gregorie the third Biſhop of Vtrecht. All things being thus concluded betwixt the Biſhoppe Henry of Bauaria, and the Emperor; Charles Duke of Geldres finding his forces to weake to incounter ſo great a Monarke, hee purchaſed a peace with his Maieſty, the which was concluded the firſt of October following: And the 21. of Nouember the Earle of Hochſtraten, as gouernor of Holland for the Emperor, was ſent by the Ladie Marguerite Regent into the ſayd towne of Vtrecht, who tooke a ſollemne poſſeſſion in his Maieſties name (as Duke of Brabant and Earle of Holland) and receiued their othes and homages: the like hee did at Amerſfoort, Wyck-ter-Duyrſted, Renen, and Montfort, (as for the ſoueraigntie this laſt towne hauing a particular Lord and Vicont of that place) returning back to Vtrecht the chiefe towne of the country; he diſpoſed of the Eſtate & gouernment. And as al things were well ſetled vnder the Emperors authority, biſhop Henry had a deſire (for ſome reaſons) to retire into

                  Germanie to his other Biſhoppricke of Wormes choſing for Biſhop & ſubſtituting in his place William of Enckwoort borne at Boiſleduc Cardinall and Biſhop of Tortone, as Pope Adrian the ſixt had beene before hee was Pope, who reſigned the ſaid Biſhopprike vnto him before hee came to the Popedome. This Enckwoort was a Courtier at Rome, and came not to his Biſhoprike of Vtrecht (making Iames Vte
                     
                        •
                     engen his Vicar) vntill he died in the yeare 1533. In the meane time Pope Clement the ſeauenth hauing ſeene the Contracts and Inſtruments of the ceſſion and tranſport made by the Biſhop Henry of Bauaria to the Emperour of the temporaltie of Vtrecht, and the appourtenances, hauing had therein the aduice and conſent of the Colledge of Cardinals, they did approue and ratifie all, decreeing that this ceſſion and tranſport ſhould be of force, and take full effect. But for that this Eſtate and Seignieury is a fee of the Empire, and doth hold of the Imperiall Chamber, the Emperour was forced to demand the Inueſtiture of the ſaid Chamber in his owne priuate name, as well for him-ſelfe as for his ſucceſſors lawfully deſcended from him. The which he did eaſily obtaine. And by this meanes the Citties, Townes, Territorie and Iuriſdiction of the Eſtate and Seigneiury of Vtrecht (which had bene gouerned by their proper Princes and Biſhops; aboue nine hundred yeare) came vnder the obedience of the Emperor Charles the fift, and after him to his ſonne Philip the ſecond King of Spaine, Duke of

                  Brabant, Earle of Holland &c. Of which Eſtate of Vtrecht (being two Dioceſſes) the Emperor made two Eſtates, reducing them into two Prouinces, which make the number of ſeauenteene in the Netherlands; that is, into the prouince of Vtrecht, & that of Oueryſſel: That of Vtrecht making the fourth in ranke of the confederate Belgick Prouinces, vnder the generall Eſtates, and that of Oueryſsel the fift, hauing their voyces and ſuffrages in that order in their Ceſſions.
               The Eſtates of which Prouince of Vtrecht conſiſt at this day, as in former times, of three members; the Clergie of fiue Colledges that haue Chanoins, the Nobility, and the townes: Of which Colledges the Deputies are indifferently choſen, to aſſiſt daily in their Aſſemblies, with them of the Nobility and townes; who haue their Secretaries and other Officers.
               This Seigneury of Vtrecht hath (as we haue ſaid) a Prouincial Councel, from which at this preſent there is no appellation, as had bin heretofore to the Imperial Chamber at Spier, at ſuch time as it was meerly a member of the Empire: but ſince that the Emperor Charles the 5. did vnite it to his demaines, excluding the ſaid Imperiall Chamber, hee made it ſubiect to the great Councel at Macklyn: vntil that the Eſtates of the ſaid country and of Oueryſſel, hauing within theſe thirty yeares recouered their libertie, it hath bene diſcontinued. Notwithſtanding in caſe of remiſſion they may haue their recourſe

vnto the Eſtates of the Prouince; where as the reuiſion is made by the ſame Acts: In which Prouincial Councel there is a preſident, ſix Councellors, an Attourney general, and a Regiſter. The Chamber of accoumpt, is kept by the colledge of the Eſtates, wheras the Treſorers as well generall as particular are bound to come and yeeld vp their Accoumpt. The ſaid Seigneury hath alſo a particular Mynt, as it hath alwaies had; the which is alſo ſubiect to the general of the Mynte for the vnited Eſtates. The gouernment and Religion is generally maintained as in other Prouinces their confederats. There are foure Marſhals for the whole Seigneury, euery one of which hauing charge in the quarters that are aſſigned them, where they are to command their Archers to apprehend all vagabonds and other offenders which they ſhall meet in the country. The deceaſed Prince of Orange of famous memory, was Gouernor of this Prouince, as of Holland and Zealand, placed there by King Philip, before his laſt returne towards Spaine; after the violent death of the ſaid Prince, the vnited Eſtates did ſubrogat Prince Maurice of Naſſau his ſonne, Marquis of La Vere, and Fliſsingue, making him more ouer their Captain General and Admirall of all the vnited Prouinces, as he is at this preſent.
            
            
               FRISLAND.
               NO man can denie but this Friſon Nation is very ancient, as it appeares by the ancient greeke and latin writers, as Strabo, Ptolomey, Plinie,

Tacitus and others: for it retaines at this day the ſame ſeat and the ſame name, which they gaue them and had before them▪ Seeing that in a manner al other Nations of Germany haue either quit their old abodes, or elſe haue receiued new names: the which needes no farre fetcht proofes, ſeeing their neereſt neighbours do verifie it. For the names of Holland, Vtrecht, Oueriſſel, Weſtphalia and others, were neuer knowne by any of the aboue named Authors: neither was the name of Geldre euer in vſe (the Inhabitants whereof, and of Cleues, Iuilliers, Monts, & Berghe were then called Sicambres) but eight hundred ſeauenty eight yeares after the Natiuitie of our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST. That which they now call the country of Saxony, was not the abode of the ancient Saxons, wherof Ptolomey makes mention. So as it is hard for moderne writers to iudge (by reaſon of the alteratiō of names) if thoſe which be at this preſent neighbours vnto Friſland, bee the ſame Nations which in ancient time were wont to be, or whether they bee now more remote. But as for the Friſons there is no diſpute nor doubt, wherof to giue more firme and ſolide reaſons both of the name and of the Antiquity, the Reader ſhal vnderſtand that the ſucceſſion of their Princes, the families, the foundation of townes, caſtles and villages, may in their regard, bee drawne, if not farther, yet with more certainty then any other Nation of Germany. The Danes although they bee very ancient, and equal touching their beginning with the

                  Friſons, cannot make a true extraction, nor giue a reaſon of the time, but ſince their King Frotho the third; during whoſe raigne our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST was borne. The Franconians likewiſe although they bee very old (whatſoeuer they pretend that their freedome was purchaſed in the ſeruice of the Romaine Emperours) yet are they in doubt of their firſt beginning, iſſue and denomination: ſo as they cannot decipher their true and continned Chronologie, but ſince Charlemaignes time. But the Friſons hauing to this day alwaies kept one name and one dwelling, may directly and by a plain computation of times, report their geſtes from the beginning vnto the ending: ſo hauing taken beginning 313. yeares before CHRIST, and ſince that time foure times made proofe of the change and Eſtate of their Common weale: they may by a cleer computation of yeares, ſhew how long they were vnder princes, then vnder dukes▪ after vnder Kings, vnto Charlemaigne, and ſince vnder Podeſtates, vntill their Anarchia; how long alſo vnder the Factions vnto the reſignation which George Duke of Saxony made vnto the Emperour Charles the fift, and how long vnder the houſe of Auſtria vntil their Emancepation and liberty, which they inioy at this preſent, prouing from the beginning of their Princes the foundation and building of the towne of Staueren, which then was the cheefe of al the Realme of Friſland. By reaſon of which Antiquity this town hath had a prerogatiue from the Kinges of Denmarke,
                  
that in paſſing the ſtraight of the Sonde; their ſhips haue priuiledge to go firſt before all others, either going or comming out which muſt attend their turnes, but not thoſe of Staueren, which muſt bee preſently diſpatcht by the Impoſt gatherers.
               To deſcribe the queſtions which are betwixt the ancient and moderne Authors, to find out the truth from what place Friſo and his two bretheren Bruno and Saxo are firſt deſcended, were in my opinion a tedious and endleſſe labour, ſeeing they can determine nothing that is certaine, no more then of the Anceſtors of theſe three princes; which ſome maintained to be deſcended from Ragau, ſonne to Sem, the ſonne of Noe: But it appeares plainely that they were of the reliques of the Macedonian Armie, hauing ſerued Alexander the great in his conqueſt of Aſia and the Indies, who placed them in garriſon in the Emodian Mountaines. But the Indiens after the death of Alexondar, beeing perſwaded by Sandrocotus to rebell; Friſo with his two bretheren and all their friendes imbarked in three hundred ſhips in the yeare of the creation, 3642. & before the Natiuity of Chriſt, three hundred twenty one, & ſo put to ſea, ſailing from one country to another, ſeeking ſome new dwelling, but they wandred vp and down eight yeares and could not bee receiued: In the end of ſo many ſhips (whether that the Seas had ſwallowed them vp, or ſpoyled with age, or otherwiſe loſt) there were but fifty foure which arriued at a ſafe Port, wherof eighteen landed in Pruſſia, twelue

in Ruſſia, and twenty foure (in the which were Friſo and his bretheren) entered by the Flye about Autome into theſe quarters of Friſland without any let or oppoſition of the Suedens, who at that time (for feare of tempeſts and Inondations) where retyred into the higheſt part of the country.
               Hauing taken land they preſently built a Temple to Iupiter, which in their language the called Stauo▪
                   and there they built a towne, which of the name of their God they called Stauora, which is now the towne of Staueren ſtanding vpon the Friſons ſea, the which they fortified: wherby they defended themſelues not only againſt the Suedens, but alſo againſt the Danes, Brittons and others, getting their liuing as well of pyracie at ſea, as by tilling of the ground, vntill the people beeing multiplied, and queſtions growing daily among them by reaſon of the ſtraitnes of their country, which was not ſufficient to feed al their cattel: Prince Friſo fearing that this cō
                  tention of the Commons (he being the elder of his brethren) might breed ſome diſlike betwixt them three, propounded a meanes to maintain loue & amity betwixt them; who hauing imparted it vnto the people; this was found the moſt expedient: That Bruno and Saxo with their families (leauing this part of Friſland) ſhould ſeeke forth ſome new habitations neere vnto it, as well for themſelues as for their ſucceſſors: So as beeing neighbours one vnto an other, they might not onely entertain themſelues in the Diſcilpine and Inſtitution of

their Anceſtors, but alſo ſuccor one another with their common forces, againſt all incurſions of their enemies So three hundred years before CHRIST, Saxo and Bruno parted from Staueren, and paſſing by the Flye, they ſayled towardes the Eaſt, vntill they came to Haldr
                        •
                     cht, or Saxony, neere vnto the Germaine Sea, whereas entring into the gulph of Albis, they landed by little and litttle, and hauing chaſed away the Inhabitants by force, they wonne a great country. Bruno (for that hee would not diſcontent his brother) went towards the Weſt, by the Viſurge or Wezer, where hee founded a Cittie of his owne name called Brunſwick. (VVhat this word of Wick ſignifies wee haue ſhewed before) the which although it hath beene often deſtroyed, built againe and augmented, yet when as the poſterity of Bruno came once to faile, it hath alwaies retained the title of a free towne: So as in the time of Charlemaign it was wholy deſtroyed, but in the yeare eight hundred ſixtie one it was re-edified againe by Bruno Duke of Saxony, ſonne to Ludoph; wherof I thought good to make mention, for that Albert Crantz doth maintaine, that the towne of Brunſwick was firſt founded by this Bruno ſonne to Ludolph. Touching the geſts of Bruno and Saxo, and of their ſucceſſors Saxons and Brunſwickains, wee will leaue them to ſuch as haue written the hiſtories of Saxony and Brunſwick, and will onely ſpeake of our Friſo: who beeing the firſt Prince of the Friſons, after the departure of his Bretheren, retained al Friſland for his

inheritance, the which did extend it ſelfe along the North-ſea coaſt, from the riuers of Flye and Ems (or Ameris) on the Weſt ſide on the riuer of Zidore to the Eaſt, which is the length and breadth from the North and the Brittiſh ſea, vnto the Battauians or Hollanders, and to the Sicambrians: which are the Geldrois on the South ſide. Al which country Bruno diuided into ſeauen parts, according to the number of his ſonnes, which he called Zeelandts, for that they are all vppon the ſea, moſt part Ilands or Peninſules ioined to the continent: his ſons were Adel his eldeſt, and the ſecond Prince of Friſland, Witto, Hetto, Hayo, Scholto, Gailo & Aeſgo: to whom he gaue by his Teſtament certain precepts of that which they ſhould do or not do to entertaine amity and correſpondency with their neighbour Princes: he him-ſelf left vnto his ſons their portions in writing, and alſo a certain treaty of allyance which he made with the Princes of Germany: who by a cō
                  mon Accord and conſent made him and his ſucceſſors Gardiens of the North ſea, to defend the whole country from the Inondation of the ſea, as alſo of the publike waies againſt robbers and theeues, to that end that Marchants might paſſe and trafficke freely vnto the Rhyne: and in this reſpect he was allowed to take cuſtomes & impoſts of marchādiſe at diuers paſſages: he had alſo an Immunity of Armes granted him, which was a priuiledge, whereby neither he nor his were bound to go to the war when as the other Princes and Prouinces went to defend

the liberty of Germany. The Friſons had many other good priuiledges, of their liberty & freedome, the which were giuen them by Ceſar Auguſtus, Charlemaigne and other Emperors, and ratified by Charles the fift, which they haue alwaies maintained.
               Theſe ſeuen parts of Friſland called Zeelādts, were diuided & compaſt in by certaine riuers, wherof betwixt Eldere and Flye were fiue▪ that is, Lanwer, Eems, Wezer, Elbe, and Iadua. Betwixt the Flye and Eems there were three of theſe Zeelandts, very wel peopled vpō the South ſide, for that the North part was not habitable by reaſon of the lakes, moors, & bogs, which were inacceſſible, & for want of banks to defend them from the Inondation of the ſea. wherfore the places moſt frequēted were that of Staueren, the ſeauen foreſts, Steenwick, Twent, Drent, a part of the Territory of Groning, Benthem and Oldenburch, all which lay togither vpon the maine land: All which vntil Charlemaignes time was called High Friſland, as it may appeare by the writing of ſome Saints which haue preacht the Word of God there. But 120. years before CHRIST, Friſo the yong (whom they alſo cal Friſius) ſon to Grunnius who was founder of Groning, ſon to Gaylo the ſon of Hago the 4. ſonne of Friſo the firſt Prince of the Friſons, made a new Collony of Friſons not far from the reſt; hauing had to wife the daughter of Vbbo third Prince of Friſons who was named Frou, which ſignifies Lady, by which name Oppianus ſaith, the Emperor Seuerus wife was called. This Friſo obtained from his

father and father in law, a troupe of men, with the which hee paſt the Flye on the VVeſt part, into an emptie Iland, where hee ſtayed, and there made his aboad, calling it new Friſland, whereof the Inhabitants were called Friſiabenes: And on a certain place (where as ſince the towne of Alcmar was built) he ſeated a towne which by his wiues name hee called Frougaſt: But as in the Friſon tongue as wel as in the Germaine, they do vſually pronounce a V. conſonant for an F. In ſucceſſion of times this word is changed into Vrougaſt or Vroulegaſt, with which word Geyſt there are many places end in Friſland. This towne of Vrougaſt became afterwards, great, and of good trafficke: The which the Romaines making warre againſt the Battauians and Friſons, for the affinitie which this name had with their towne of Verona in Italie, they alſo called it Verone. Of this VVeſt-Friſland is that to be vnderſtood which Tacitus writes was done by the Friſons for their neighbourhood with the Battauians. In this Eſtate was Friſland maintained ſince the comming of Friſo their firſt prince the ſpace of one hundred ninety three yeares, wherof Staueren was the chiefe town, whereas the Princes kept their Court, gouerning the other quarters called Zeelandts by their Lieutenants. This Towne of Staueren grew ſo proud by their wealth and Nauigation, as they ſeemed all gold, gilding the poſts of their houſes, and their vanitie was ſo great as a rich widdow hauing commaunded the Maiſter of her ſhippe to bring

her the beſt Marchandiſe hee ſhould finde in the Eaſt Countries: For that hee brought nothing backe but Wheat, which hee held to bee beſt; This vaine woman commaunded the Maiſter, that if hee had laden it on the larboord ſide, hee ſhould caſt it into the Sea on the ſtarboord ſide▪ which hauing done, God ſent a tempeſt which did ſo moue the ſandes of the ſea, as in the ſame place where the Wheat had beene caſt forth, there did riſe a barre or banke of ſand, which hath euer ſince ſpoyled the Hauen of the ſaid Towne, which hath depriued them quite both of their Nauigation and wealth, ſo as ſince the Inhabitants (hauing beene often ſpoyled) are now growne more modeſt.
               All that Prince Friſo had left in writing, was not done in the Friſon tongue, but in Greeke letters: hauing raigned ſixtie yeare hee died, two hundred twenty ſeauen yeares before Christ▪ Adel his eldeſt ſonne ſucceeded him, who raigned ninetie foure yeares, and dyed one hundred thirty one yeares before Chriſt. After him came Vbbo his ſonne who gouerned eighty yeares, and died fifty one yeares before Christ. Friſo or Friſius ſon to Grunnius who built the towne of Groning (as wee haue ſaid) marryed the Ladie Frou; To whome ſucceeded his ſonne Aſniga Aſcou 4. Prince of Friſland, who raigned 82. yeares, and died 31. yeares after the birth of Christ: Diogarus Segon was 5. Dibaldus Segon 6. & Tabbo 7. al which together liued 443. yeares: thē
                  
had they as many Dukes, whereof Aſcon was the firſt, who had foure ſonnes, whereof Adelbold the eldeſt ſucceeded him, and was ſecond Duke of Friſland; dying without children hee left his brother Tito Bocaial his ſucceſſor, who dying alſo without children, had Vbbo ſonne to his brother Richold, Nephew to Aſcon for his heire, who was 4. Duke of Friſland: To whome ſucceeded his ſonne Haron fift Duke, who dyed in the yeare of Chriſt three hundred thirty fiue. After him came his ſon Odibald ſixt Duke, then Vdolph Haron ſeauenth and laſt Duke. For after him vnto Charlemaigne Friſland had nine Kings. Theſe ſeauen dukes altogether raigned two hundred ſixty two yeares. Then came Richold Vtto who was firſt King of Eaſt Friſland. (wee call it ſo in regard of VVeſt-Freezeland, into the which Friſo the young ſonne of Grunnius ledde the firſt Collonies.) To him ſucceeded Odibaldus, ſecond King of Friſland: Then Richold third King. And after him Beroald ſonne to Valck fourth King of Friſland, in the time of Clotaire King of France, and by him ſlaine in battaile. Adgil was fift King of Friſland: Radbod the firſt of that name, 6. King of Friſland: After whom came Adgil the 2. the 7. King who had three ſons, Gombauld the 8. King of Friſons Iohn called the Prieſt, & Radbod: Gōbauld was a good Chriſtian, & went to ſerue Charlemaigne, where he was ſlain with Rolland and other peeres of France, at the battaile of Ronſeual. Iohn called the Prieſt (ſo called for his holynes of life) followed Charlemaigne
                  
in his voyage to Ieruſalem: from whence (as Suffridus Petri a Friſon writer ſayeth) hee paſt on with a Collonie to the Eaſt Indies, where hee erected a Kingdome, the which was called by his name, the Kingdome of Preſtre Iean: whoſe ſucceſſors which came afterwards into Affricke, into the Kingdome of the Abiſſens, are at this day called Preſtres Ieans. Radbod the third ſon of Adgil, the ſecond of that name, was King of Friſland, a great perſecuter of Chriſtians, he was twiſe vanquiſhed by the French. It was he which retyred from the font, being ready to be baptized, vppon a fooliſh anſwer which the Biſhop of Soiſſons made him, going to baptize him. He did great ſpoyles vnto Chriſtians, as farre as Vtrecht
                        •
                     , the which hee ruined▪ aud deſtroyed the Temple of S. Thomas, which King Dagobert had built. He raigned fifty yeares; and with him ended the Kings of Friſland; the Realme beeing after that anexed to the Crowne of France.
               
               Wee haue before made mention of Friſo the yong, who led the firſt Collony into Weſt Friſland: let vs now ſpeake of the ſecond, who was brought into that quar
                     •
                  er which is now called Waterlandt, which hapned in this manner: wee haue before ſaid that Aſcon firſt duke of Friſland, had four ſons, Adelbod, Tito, Richold & Radbod: that the two firſt were dukes ſucceſſiuely, and that Vbbe the ſon of Richold, was the 4. Duke of Friſland; there then remained Radbod the 4. ſon of Aſcon: hauing taken a wife out of Weſt-Friſland, of the race of Friſo the yong; hee

had by her one ſon, called Thierry, who in the 300. yeare of CHRISTS natiuity, which was the 2. of the raign of Haron the 5. duke of the old Friſons his couſin, led a Collony into that quarter of Weſt-friſland, with the help of the ſaid Haron, and other four of his couſins, the which at that time by reaſon of the multitude of Ilands, Moores, Lakes, and other ſtil waters, was not yet inhabited: yet with that aid and the intereſt he had by his wife, he made this ſecond part (which at this preſent is Waterlandt) habitable and fertil, in the which are Edam, Monikendam, Purmerends, Woormer, Ryp, Graft and other good villages, ſo as of theſe two parts ioined togither, with that which he added afterwards on the weſt part, he made an Eſtate, and built a Pallace at Medenblike, which he made the cheefe town of the whole country. VVho pretending to make it a Kingdome, Haron his Couſin, Duke of Eaſt Friſland hindred him, for the which they were long in controuerſie, til in the end Haron forced him to content him-ſelfe with the title of a Duke.
               This Thierry Duke of Weſt-Friſland had one ſonne which ſucceeded him, named VVilliam the firſt, who had Dibauldi, Dibauld had VVilliam the ſecond, who had Elim, hee dyed without heires male, and in him fayled the lyne▪ of this Thierry: Hauing before his death adopted Beroald (beeing but ſeauen yeares old) the ſon of Richold the ſecond of that name, the third King of Friſland: ſo as al theſe Dukes of Weſt-Friſland ſucceſſiuely raigned

two hundred thirty three yeares, fiue and twentie yeares after the death of Elim, in the yeare of Chriſt fiue hundred thirty three. Beroald after the death of Richold his father did inherit the Realme of Eaſt Friſland. Thus were the two Friſlands vnited together; the which Beroald inioyed ſixtie yeares: whereof he was afterwards depriued, and of his life alſo, by Clotaire the ſecond of that name King of France, father to Dagobert: Notwithſtanding Adgill the ſecond ſucceeded him, and after him Gombauld, then Radbod the ſecond, whome Charlemaigne vanquiſhed, and freed the Friſons from the yoake of Kinges: reſtoring them to their liberty, to whome hee gaue goodly priuiledges, the which they haue long maintained with the priſe of their bloods.
               Since the Friſons were long vnder an Ariſtocraticall Gouernment, ſometimes vnder Poteſtates whom they did choſe them-ſelues, and not able to agree vppon the election by reaſon of dangerous factions, the Earles of Holland hauing in ſucceſſion of time and long warres, ſeazed vpon that part which they now call Weſt-Friſland and Waterlandt, the which the Hollanders will haue, (but the Inhabitants of the country cannot indure it) called Northolland. On the other ſide, the dukes of Brunſwicke, the Hans townes of Breme and Hambourg, the Earle of Oldenbourg, Schowenbourg and Embden haue vſurped much of Eaſt Friſlād, euen vnto the Territory of Groning: the which although it be an Eſtate & territory apart, is cōprehended notwithſtanding

vnder the territory of that which hereafter we will ſimply call Friſland, incloſed betwixt the Flye and Ems, to diſtinguiſh it from Eaſt-Friſland held by the Earles of Embden, and Weſt-Friſland, anexed to the county of Holland.
               
               That then which we will ſimply call Friſland, and the Inhabitants Friſons, as Tolomcy and Tacitus tearme them, ſaying that they are Germaines, and people from beyond the Rhine, whom Pliny calls Cauches, the great and the leſſe, are Aborigines, or originally come from that place: who aboue all the people of Germanie retaine their ancient appellation, keeping in their ancient and firſt ſeat, hauing the ſame language they haue alwaies had. True it is that in the chiefe townes they vſe the Dutchtongue, but in the champian country they keepe their Friſon language, which the gentlemen take pleaſure to entertaine in regard of the antiquitie. Although I bee well acquainted with the high and low Dutch tongue, yet I muſt confeſſe that in this ancient Friſon language I vnderſtand nothing.
               Wee haue ſayd before that the Friſons did for a time entertaine themſelues vnder factions, wee muſt therefore relate ſuccinctly the beginning thereof: which was that in the yeare of our redemption. 1390. there did riſe two factions in the country of Friſland, the one Vetcoopers, which ſignifies in their vulgar tongue, marchants of greaſe, that is to ſay, marchants of fat oxen, which they hold for an honeſt kinde of marchandiſe, and of

                  Schyeringers, which are butchers and ſellers of tripes, which is a baſe kinde of trade, which factions they ſay came from Eaſt and Weſt Friſland. The firſt ſpring and beginning thereof was; that all theſe marchants of cattell and the butchers beeing togither at a publick banket according to their cuſtome, there was a gueſt to chooſe a Prouoſt, a Deane or a King amongſt them, whoſe charge ſhould bee to looke that no diſorder ſhould bee committed, which might trouble the companie. There was amongſt them of either of theſe two companies, one that exceeded the reſt, and both equall in wealth, in reſpect and loue towards all the gueſts. Whom both the one and the other partie contended to choſe, their Deane, Prouoſt or King: the one and the other maintayning that this dignity & authority at the table, was moſt befitting him that had the honeſteſt trade. Wherevpon a queſtion grew among them, which of thoſe two marchandiſe was the honeſteſt: the one preferring the marchants of cattell, the other the butchers. Vpon which diſpute their braines being het with wine, in the end they fell from words to blowes one againſt an other, party againſt party, euery one with his Allies and Kinſmen, meaning to maintaine the one quarrell or the other: ſo as in the end there was a great fight, in the which many were either hurt or ſlaine. In reuenge whereof, either party holding it ſelfe wronged, they began to make factions, and to bandie one againſt an other: ſo as this canker eating

more and more; ſtrangers (who had no intereſt, nor were any way wronged) ingaged themſelues, vpon hope of bootie of the one or the other partie: euerie one wreſting what hee could from his Aduerſarie, without either lawe or iuſtice (ſo confuſed were things then and full of diſorder) but ſuch as they made by the ſworde, where as the ſtrongeſt carried it. The fruits of theſe factions were ſuch, as they not onely rained amongſt priuate perſons, but amongſt whole fam lies, villages, bourrougs and townes, yea among whole Prouinces, ſo as the whole country was ful of thefts and murthers, and no man was free from their inſolencies. In like maner about that time Hollād was afflicted with the factions of Hoecks and Cabillaux that is to ſay, the Hameſons and the Merlus, wherof we haue made mentiō heretofore: which was, that the one party (as the Merlus or Coddes bee fiſhes which prey) did threaten to deuower the other: and they of the Hameſons did threaten to take the others by the throat: which to ſpeake truth were quarrels ſcarce fit for children. And at that time were the factions of Gelphes & Gibelins in Italy: Of the diuerſity of colloured caps in Flanders, & of thoſe of the ſtarre in France, al which were factions raiſed from the diuill. This miſchiefe proceeded ſo farre in Friſland, as from the leſſe it came to the greater, and from Marchants and Bourgers to the Nobility and Clergie: The gentlemen ruining the houſes & caſtles one of an other: and the Abbots and Monks doing al the miſchief they could one vnto an other:

So as to appeaſe theſe factions, and to reconcile the Noblemen, the Emperor Maximilian the firſt, ſent Otto van Langen to perſwade them to chooſe a Poteſtat amongſt them, which ſhould gouerne the country according to their preuiledges, vnder the authority of the Empire. But their ſplene was ſo great, as euery one ſeeking to chooſe one of their faction, the ſayd commiſſioner preuailed nothing, but returned as hee came. So as the Emperour to force them to an accord, tooke occaſion to giue the gouernment hereditary of all Friſland and Groning to the houſe of Saxony, to hold it in fee of the Empire.
               For the attayning whereof, the Dukes of Saxony hauing ſpent a great part of their means with ſmall profit, finding this people ſo impatient of a ſtrangers yoake, in the end Duke George reſigned all his intereſt vnto the Emperour Charles the fifth who enioyed it quietly, as his ſonne Philip King of Spaine alſo did, till within theſe thirty yeares that they freed themſelues by their adiunction vnto the generall vnion of the confederate Prouinces of the Netherlands. Thus much we haue thought good to ſpeake of the beginning and Eſtate of Friſland in generall; Now wee will deſcribe the townes in particular.
            
            
               LEEWARDEN.
               IS at this day (as in old time Staueren was wont

to bee) the chiefe towne of Friſland, ſituated almoſt in the center of the countrie, called in ancient time during the Paganiſine, Aula Dei, and in the vulgar tongue Godts▪hoff▪ that it to ſay the court of God, in the which was a colledge or ſchole for the Druides, Philoſophers and wiſe men of that time, which were come out of France to plant their colleges there. In witneſſe whereof, there are yet in this towne two Temples, the one named the ancient court, the other the new, whereof the gentlemen of the country were in former times called Hovelingen, that is to ſay courtiers, for that they were conſtituted publike defenders of this houſe of God taught by the Druides. And in truth this towne hath more gentlemen in it, then any other in Friſland. Of this ſchoole of the Druides, Synard the wiſe, a diuine and councellor to Radbod the laſt King of the Friſons was Rector, whom hee councelled to perſecute the Chriſtians; hee cenſured and cauſed Tullies bookes of the nature of the Gods to bee burnt, condemning them as full of errors and contrarie to the doctrine which they taught, of the falſe Gods of the gentills. This towne in proceſſe of time hauing taken the name of Leewarden, and the country beeing conuerted to the chriſtian Religion, this ſchoole of the Druides was changed into a cloiſter of Nunnes, by Vboalt in the yeare 1233. the which Dodo the fourth Abbot of Fleurencamp, would haue alſo called, Aulam Dei, for that he would not haue the memory of that

name loſt. But in the vulgar tongue it hatth beene called Nyen-clooſter, that is to ſay a New cloiſter. They of Leewarden haue alwaies continued (as it appeeres by all ancient and moderne writers) and entertained their ſchoole in good learning: which hath euer beene the chiefe of all Friſland. Vntil that within theſe 20. yeares, the Eſtates of the Prouince haue erected an vniuerſity in the town of Franiker, two leagues from thence; for the entertainement of which ſchoole, as at this preſent of the vniuerſitie, and of the learned profeſſors which are there, in all faculties, the magiſtrates of Leuwarden haue neuer ſpared any charge.
               In this towne is the court of Parliament for all Friſland, which doth determine of all cauſes both criminall and ciuill: whether all cauſes come and are to bee decided according to the ſincerity of the Romaine lawes, the which are obſerued there with the like purity as they were made by the Emperor Iuſtinian, and as they are taught in vniuerſities, hauing not aboue twenty municipall lawes or cuſtomes, derogating from the written law. All proceedings and other publike acts are made in the Dutch tongue, their ſtile of writing, and the forme of their letters and caracters, as wel printed as written, are as pure and neate as in any other courts of Brabant, Flanders, Holland, Vtrecht, and other places of the Netherlands: So as the naturall Friſons as alſo the Brabanſons, Hollanders, Flemings and other Dutche, may eaſilie execute all Offices of Magiſtrates,

Secretaries and Notaries, as well in one countrie as in an other, depending vpon writing, bee it of Iuſtice, Pollicy, Account, Treaſure or otherwiſe.
               This town of Leuwarden is ſeated in the quarter of Oſtergoe, being great and ſpacious, and conteyning in circuit neere halfe a French league; the ſtreetes are faire, large and ſtraight, in the which it is not lawfull to leaue any filthineſſe, euery houſe hauing a boate, into the which they caſt it; the which beeing full, they tranſport it by barkes into the fieldes: the towne beeing ſo diuided by nauigable chanells (whereon there are manie bridges) to ſerue as well for the trafficke of marchandiſe, as for other commodities, ſo as moſt houſes maie bring their prouiſions vppe to their doores, or not farre from them: The which doe alſo ſerue greatly for the clenſing of the ſtreetes, the raine waſhing awaie all the filth (if any remaines in the ſtreetes) into the chanelles. The ayre is cleere, but ſome-what brackiſh by reaſon of the exhalations of the ſea which is nere: which is the cauſe that it doth not lightly ingender any putrifaction, neither is it often infected, with any contagious diſeaſe.
               It ſtandes in a verie pleaſant countrie, full of goodlie Medowes, euen vnto the towneditches, beeing a pleaſant ſight on Sundaies and Feſtiuall dayes, to beholde the Bourgers walking and ſupping vppon the greene graſſe

by troupes. It hath alſo many pleaſant villages round about the towne, which ſeeme as walkes for the Inhabitants. The ſituation is (as we haue ſaid) in the mideſt of Friſland, ſo as on a ſommers day they may goe either in wagon, or horſe-backe or on foote on which ſide they pleaſe, either to Oſtergoe Weſtergoe, or the Seauen Foreſts, out of the country, where they haue good meanes to goe and tranſport their marchandiſe by ſhipping either great or ſmall.
               In regard of which commodities and the goodneſſe of the ſeat, Albertus Duke of Saxony and George his ſon, hauing obtained the hereditary gouernment of Friſland from Maximilian the Emperor, did there ſettle the Parliament for the whole Prouince, which the Emperour Charles the fifth and his ſonne King Philippe, haue ſince allowed and confirmed; moreouer Friſeland hath good hauens on euery ſide, by the which they may commodiouſly and ſpeedely bring all ſorts of marchandiſe and commodities vnto the town, which makes it cheape lyuing there.
               This towne hath vnder his Griteny, that is to ſay, Baylewicke or Iuriſdiction, which they call Leewarderadeel ſeauenteene good villages depending thereon: for in all the quarter of Oſtergoe, whereof this towne is the chiefe, there are ten Gritenies, euery one of which hath his villages depending thereon, ſome more, ſome leſſe, conteyning alltogither one hundred thirty and two villages

in the ſayd ten Gritenies▪ beſides the towne of Dockum which is the ſecond towne of that quarter of Oſtergoe, wherof we will preſently ſpeak.
               In this towne doth commonly reſide the colledge of deputies for the Eſtates of the whole Prouince, conſiſting of the nobility and townes, which gouerne the whole Eſtate, as well for matters of policy and warre, as for religion, who with the voices of the Gritenies, diſpoſe of all Eſtates and Offices, both of Iuſtice, treaſure and demains, as alſo of captaines places, and others concerning the war and the Eccleſiaſticall Eſtate.
               There is alſo the minte for money for the whole country, both for gold and ſiluer according to the order which the deputies for the Eſtates ſhall fet downe: the which notwithſtanding is ſubiect to the generalls of the mints of all the vnited Prouinces, when need requires.
               The people there are as courteous, humble and affable, yea more then in any other towne of the whole Prouince, or in Holland & Zeeland, although the Friſons haue beene held to bee ſome-what rude and inciuill; the which appeeres contrary by the frequentation of learned men of the court of Parliament, & by the exerciſe of learning: for that there is not a Bourger, if he haue any means, but he ſends his children to ſchoole: The which is ſeene at this day by many learned men, whom I wil not now flatter, for that they are yet lyuing, as alſo by thoſe which for their knowledge haue beene of great

authority: Amongſt which was George Ratalder, councellor to the King in the great councell at Macklin, doctor in the lawes, and a good Poet, who in the yeare 1566. was ſent by the Dutcheſſe of Parma, Gouerneſſe of the Netherlands, in Ambaſſage to the King of Denmarke, for the affaires of the ſaid countries. And ſince in regard of▪ his vertues and ſufficiency, he was choſen Preſident of the Prouinciall councell at Vtrecht.
               
               A league from this towne is the village of Zuychem, famous at this day by the memory of Viglus Aita Zuychemus, in his life time Preſident of the councell of Eſtate for the King of Spaine at Bruſſels, whoſe wife being de
                     •
                  d, he was made a Biſhop and Prouoſt of Saint Bauon at Gant: where hee built a goodly houſe, where one of his heires liues whom I haue viſited within theſe ten yeares: Hee alſo erected a free ſchoole for a certaine number of poore children and a ſchoolemaſter, and beſide s it an Hoſpitall for old men and women of that village, the which are well lodged and entertained according to the capacity of the foundation.
            
            
               DOCKVM.
               IS the ſecond towne in all that quarter of Oſtergoe, hauing a chanell which goes vnto the ſea, and an other which leads vnto Groning, which is fiue leagues diſtant from thence, and eight from Franiker, whereas commonly the councell or colledge

of the Admiralty for the whole Prouince of Friſeland doth remaine. This towne hath ſuffred much during the firſt troubles, as well in the Duke of Aluas time as afterwards, being ſometimes forced to obay the one party and then the other; ſo as yet to this day there appeere ſome ruines of this inteſtine warre. I haue not beene in any towne in Holland, whereas they liue better cheape in their Innes then here, wherby we may Iudge how the Burgers do, which make their prouiſions at the beſt hand. I haue found there learned men and very courteous, and it is famous for that it is the place where-Gemma Friſius was borne, whom in my youth I knew at Louuain a great Phiſition and Mathematicien, whereof his workes giue ſufficient teſtymony. He died at Louuain in the yeare 1555. leauing one ſon called Cornelius Gemma Friſius, of the ſame profeſſion that his father was. In this town is carefully kept and with great reuerence, the booke of the holie Euangeliſts, written by Saint Boniface himſelfe, who was before called Winfrid, hee who after Saint Willebroard (otherwiſe called Clement) did greatly augment the faith of IESVS CHRIST in Friſland, where afterwards he was made a martir, with 52. of his companiōs, in Weſtfriſland: where they ſay there are yet ſome of that race which maſſacred thē, who from their birth carry a white marke, or rather a tuft of white haire on their heads. They may go eaſily from this towne by boat vnto all the townes of Friſland, and by ſea to all parts of the world.
            
            
               
               FRANIKER.
               THis is one of the moſt ancient and renownedſt townes in Friſland, in the which not farre from the port of Harlingen, there is a little caſtle, in the which Henry ſonne to Duke Albert of Saxony was for a time as it were beſieged by the other townes of Friſland, which hee tooke ſo diſdainefully., as hee reſigned all his intereſt in the ſayd countrie to his Brother George, who ſince ſold it to the Emperour Charles the fifth. Although that the caſtles of Leuwarden and Harlingen, were during the warres ruined, yet this beeing of ſmall importance ſtands ſtill; for that it hath no meanes to anoy the towne, hauing no paſſage without it wherby they might giue entry vnto the enemy, but doth onely ſerue for a gentlemans lodging. The towne is ſeated in the quarter of Weſtergoe, which is the ſecond part of Friſland, in the which beſides Franiker there are eight townes more, which are, Harlingen, Bolſwaert, Sneck, Ylſtt, Worcum, Hindelopen, Staueren and Sloten, vnder which quarter there are eight Gritenies or Baylewycks, the which one with an other haue 125. villages depending on them. It is a good towne, being three quarters of an houres circuit, in which many gentlemen of the champian country make their reſidence, and ſome lyuing in the country during the Sommer, retire thether in the Winter.
               
                  
The Eſtates of Friſland deſiring to prouide for the inſtruction of their youth, haue within theſe twenty yeares erected an vniuerſity in the ſayd towne, with great priuileges, the which maks it the more famous, in the which they entertaine many profeſſors in al faculties, with good penſions, which drawes many ſchollers thether from all parts, euen out of Poland and France: whereas the Eſtates of the country haue a ſworne printer. They of the Magiſtracie haue of late yeares built a faire towne houſe. It is two leagues from Leuwarden, and one from Harlingen, whether they may goe in Sommer both by water, and by wagon, but in Winter onely by boate.
            
            
               BOLSWAERDT.
               IS a free Hans towne, ſituated in the third diuiſion of the quarter of Weſtergoe, in a good countrie, a league equally diſtant from Sneck, Ylſt and Worcom, a league and a halfe from Hindelopen, and two leagues from Staueren, Sloten, Franiker and Harlingen: three from Leuwarden, and fiue from Dockom, and ſo enuironed in a manner by all the townes in the countrie. It is a good towne, with a chanell which goes to all theſe other townes and villages: whereby the ſtreetes are alwaies cleane from filthe, by reaſon that the rayne doth clenſe them: it is equall with Sneck in bigneſſe. The Inhabitants for the moſt part liue of their handiworkes,

marchandiſe, and nauigations, traffiking for the moſt part with the Hamburgers. It hath a paſſage vnto the ſea by the Sluſe of the village of Mackum, a league from thence, whereas the ſhippes of the ſayd towne lie as ſafely as in a good hauen. The Gouernors of the Eſtate of this towne are called Bourguemaſters, Aldermen and Councell. The Bourguemaſters and Aldermen haue the adminiſtration of Iuſtice, beeing ſixe in number. Two which are of the councell haue care of the works, reparations and entertainement of the fortifications and gates of the towne, and meddle not with the Iuſtice, but their charge is alſo to looke vnto all crimes that are commited, and to deliuer the offenders to the Officer, to bee puniſhed according to the exigence of the fact: which Regents and Adminiſtrators receiue their authorite and commiſſion yearely from the Gouernor and councel of the Prouince. There was in old time three Monaſteries in the town. The pore haue good entertainmēt, the Orphins founded by Rheine, Bourguemaſter of the towne, the which was indowed with more lyuing by Hyde the daughter of Hero, being a widow.
               Then the ritch Hoſpitall, whereas many poore people are fed all at one table, with their lodging. Then the poore Hoſpitall, whereas many poore old people haue euerie one a chamber a part and are entertained there with bread, beere, butter and firing, from whence the poore people of the towne haue once a weeke releefe. This towne is

ſince the yeare of our Lord 1572. much increaſed, and well fortefied as well in portes, rampars, bulwarkes, as otherwiſe. The Burgers haue endured much, as well in their trafficke at ſea, as in lodgging of ſouldiars. This towne hold a market euery Saterday, whether the inhabitants of all the nereſt townes and villages, Greteines or Baylewycks come and bring their marchandiſe and victualls, with greatſtore of wild-foule & veniſon: they want no fiſh alſo, both from the freſh water and ſea. The Bayliff of Wouſeradeel comes thither euery marketday, to hold his ſeat of iuſtice, and to do right to all men of his iuriſdiction, where the G
                        •
                     ieteman or Bailife doth preſide, with his Aſſeſſors & Iurats, hauing vnder them 29. villages, and two monaſteries, that is the Abbay of Fleurecampe of men▪ and one of women called Oogecloeſter, now ruined in theſe laſt wars, & their reuenue applied to the cōmon cauſe. Nere vnto this town is a village named Womels, famous for the birth of that learned man Cyprianus Womelius a doctor of the law and a great Poet, councellor in the Imperiall chamber at Spyer. Theſe of this towne of Bolſwart did many years ſince ioyne thēſelues to the Hans towns o
                     •
                   
                  Germany, with whom they are confederate, and are regiſtred among the members thereof, inioying the like priuileges freedomes and exemptions of impoſts and cuſtomes, as the other townes of Denmarke, Sueden, Norwaie, Liuonia, Pruſsia, Eaſt country, and other Principalities and common-weales.
               
                  
Hauing alſo their chamber or lodging of Eſterlings in Antwerp, and at the Stylliard in London, the which is now out of vſe, which priuiledges the inhabitants of the ſaid towne inioye, bringing onely a certificate of their Bourgeſie vnder the ſeale of the towne of Bolſwaert: The which was wont to yeeld them great profit in nauigation and traffick: It was practiſed generallie throughout all the Hans townes, the better to entertaine their commerce, and mutuall correſpondencie, and to traine vppe their youth in the trade of marchandiſe, from one Prouince to an other, no married men beeing admitted in thoſe places of London and Antwerp, onelie young men doing their owne buſineſſe or their Maiſters, ſo as they bee members of this companie. As for the foundation of this towne of Bolſwaert wee finde that it was built by the Ladie Bolſwine daughter to Radbod King of Friſland, in the yeare 713. which Ladie was married to the Siegnior of Teekenbourg, iſſued from the Noble houſe of Dockenburg, the which of a caſtle was made a towne, and is now called Dockum. This Ladie being a widowe, retired her ſelfe from Teekenburg, into this quarter of Friſland whereas King Radbod her father gaue her a houſe of pleaſure, and there ſhee built a ſmall towne, which ſhee called by her owne name Bolſwaert, for that it was ſeated in a halfe Iſland: the which the Danes and Normans did often ruine, yet in the end it became a good towne of trafficke.
               
                  
Beeing in that towne it was told mee that at that time of the foundation, the ſea came vp vnto it, but ſince the land hath wonne much of the ſea, ſo as it ſtaies at the village of Mackum.
               
            
            
               STAVEREN.
               IT is the moſt ancient, and was in former times, the cheefe towne of all Friſland, wherof we haue ſufficiently diſcourſed, of the ſame ſociety and company, but more ancient then that of Bolſwaert, whoſe priuiledges (eſpecially their precedence at the Sond in Denmarke before all other ſhippes) wee haue made mention of before, being needleſſe now to make any further repetitiō: it ſtands vpon the ſea on the South ſide, on the entry of the gulph of Zuyderzee, at the point which lookes towards Holland, almoſt oppoſite to the paſſage of Enchuyſen, halfe a league from Hinderlopen vppon the ſame ſhoare. It ſeemes that this is the place whereas time the people kept, whome Plinie cals Sturi, of which name all Friſland was ſometimes called Regnum Stauriae: Which Kingdome did extend to Nymegen, where was wont to be ingrauen on the Eaſt Port, hic limes Imperii, Heere is the bounds of the Empire, and on the Weſt gate, Hic finis Regni Stauriae, Heere is the end of the Stauriens Kingdome: ſo as there is no doubt but heretofore it hath been a rich and mighty Towne, but the tempeſts and Inondations of the ſea haue often annoyed it, and driuen it farther into

the country, beeing told mee when I went to view it, that the old towne was a League nerer to the Sea, and now in the bottome of the Sea: Beſides certaine barres of Sand haue ſtopt the Hauen, and taken away their nauigation, as wee haue formerly obſerued. There was wont to bee a ſtrong Caſtle at the end of the towne, looking towardes the Sea and the Hauen: But during theſe laſt troubles, the Captaine which was put in gard there with a garriſon, beeing beſeeged by the Eſtates, growing wilful and reſolute to keepe it, his ſoldiers hauing ſmal hope of any ſuccors, yeelded vp the place, and deliuered their Captaine to the Eſtates; who cauſed it to bee preſently raized, as wee may ſee by a great part of the ruines. The towne is long and narrow, inlarged and fortified with rampars and bulwarks, but of ſmall importance and ill intertained, as beeing held at this preſent time not greatly neceſſarie: The houſes in the great ſtreete are reſonable faire and well built, the Inhabitants liue by their handy-workes and by the Sea, but not of ſuch nauigation and trafficke as they were wont to haue.
            
            
               HARLINGEN.
               IT is now a good and ſpatious towne, and of good trafficke, ſince that Gaſper Robles Lord of Billy, Gouernor of the country of Friſland and Groning, for the King of Spaine cauſed the bankes

behinde the Caſtle, to bee repayred and inlarged, with great labour and coſt, which doth now defend it from the tempeſts and waues of the ſea which beate againſt it, which worke the Inhabitants (notwithſtanding the hard gouernment of the ſayd Robles) cannot ſufficiently commend.
               The Eſtates of Friſland hauing ſince theſe laſt troubles reſumed their liberty, haue cauſed the ſaid Caſtle to bee ruined ſo farre as it did ouerlooke the Towne, retaining the fortification which lookes towards the Sea and the Bankes, hauing in the ſame place where the ditch was drawne a goodly new Hauen into the Towne, which paſſeth vnder a great draw-bridge, to go vnto the Port and not farre from it, whereas a great number of Shippes may lye ſafely. The reſt of the Towne that is inlarged, is fortified with good rampars and Bulwarks. There are two chanells which comming from the ſea to the olde hauen, paſſe through the towne, whereof the one goes to Franiker a league from thence, from whence at all houres of the day Boates doe go with paſſengers, at an eaſie rate. This towne being thus ſituated vppon the Sea, hath the beſt hauen and neereſt vnto the ſea of any other in all Friſland, where they are rich Marchants, who beſides their ordinary trade in the country, aduenter much in long voyages, for the which they make goodly ſhippes.
            
            
               
               SNECK.
               IS a good little country Towne, ſeated in a plaine three leagues from Leuwarden, and one from Ilſt: the which hath Deputies alſo at the Eſtates of Friſland: Heretofore it had goodly Cloyſters, both within and without the town, the which at this day are all ruined and applyed to other vſes, and their reuenues imployed to the common cauſe, or to ſome workes of Hoſpitality, Piety or Schooles. It is honoured for that it is the place where Doctor Hopperus was borne, who hath written many goodly workes with great credit, and hath ioyned practiſe & wiſdom to his knowledge: for which reſpect he was firſt of the Priue Counſell for the King of Spaine at Bruſſels, and from thence was called into Spaine to ſupply the place of Tiſeuach Preſident of the Counſell of Eſtate for the Netherlands.
               
            
            
               SLOTEN.
               A Little towne neere vnto the gulph of the Zuyderzee lying on the South part vppon the ſea, a league and a halfe from Staueren; it hath no other trade then Nauigation, and that which depends on the ſea.
            
            
               ILST.
               STandes vppon the VVeſt, halfe a league from

                  Sneeke, and vppon the Nortweſt a League from Bolſwaert, on the South ſide as farre from Sloten: It is an open towne, yet hath it municipal lawes, it is inuironed with a large ditch, which may defend it from the incurſions of the enemies, or of any other inſolent perſons. It conſiſts of two long rankes of faire houſes, from the Eaſt vnto the Weſt: through the which doth paſſe a chanell, the which on either banke is planted with high trees, which do beautifie the towne. There is but one Pariſh Church, which was wont to be a Couent of Carmelites; being ruined in theſe laſt troubles, but the Temple ſtands ſtil.
               It appeares by the Antiquities of Friſland, that in the yeare one thouſand two hundred ſixty three, this town was one of the moſt ancient of the country, famous for their Nauigation and trafficke. Now it is the Store-houſe for ſhip-timber, for ſuch veſſels as paſſe from one place vnto an other within the country, more then to any other towne in Friſland. Albert Duke of Saxony, according to the Donation made vnto him by the Emperour Maximillian the firſt of the Hereditary gouernment of Friſland, tooke poſſeſſion of that towne, as the whole Iuriſdiction of VVestergoe▪
                   and moreouer being neere vnto that of the ſeauen Foreſts, after that hee had raized the ſiege and freed his ſon at Franiker, hee became in a manner Maiſter of all Friſland.
               
            
            
               
               WORCVM.
               TO ſpeake truly, is but a good Bourough, yet hath it the priuiledges of a Towne ioyning vppon the ſea, entering into it by a great Scluſe which pierceth the banke, a League fom Bolſwaert, from whence I haue gone thether both by water and by land. It hath alſo a Chanell from one end vnto an other which goes vnto the ſayd Scluſe. According to the ſituation it is a place which hath good meanes to liue in, and good cheape. It is gouerned by Bourguemaiſters and Aldermen, but for all matters of Iuſtice it reſorts to the Prouinciall Councell at Leuwaerden.
               
            
            
               HINDELOPEN.
               SO called by reaſon of the retreate of the wilde beaſtes (at ſuch time as Friſland was halfe Foreſt) which they doe call Hinden in their countrie language, and Loopen which is to runne, which is as much to ſay, as the courſe and recourſe of Stagges and Hindes: it was firſt a place for hunting, then by a little and a little made a Village, and the Sea eating vp to it, which gaue it a good roade it became a Bourough, well knowne at this daie, for their Nauigation, which is the peoples cheefe practiſe.
               
                  
Hauing deſcribed the two principal quarters of Friſland, that is Oſtergoe and Weſtergoe, with their townes: we muſt now ſpeake of
            
            
               THE SEAVEN FORESTS.
               THis quarter ſo called by reaſon of the ſeauen Foreſts which were wont to bee there, but now turned for the moſt part into paſture and land for tillage, which make the third quarter of Friſland, conſiſting of eight Gretenies or Baylywicks, all which together haue ſeauenty fiue villages, among the which there are good Borroughs, the which ioyntly haue their Deputies (bee they Gryetmen or others) at the ordinary Aſſemblie of the Eſtates of the ſaid Prouince, in the towne of Leuwaerden. Theſe names ſhould bee troubleſome to the Reader, by reaſon of the ſtrangeneſſe therof. to ſet downe in writing the appellations of all the Gretenies of the three quarters of Friſland, beeing in number 28. the which I cannot terme more properly, then Bailywicks, & their Grietmen Bailiffs.
               There are ſome Ilandes depending vppon Friſand, among the wich Amelandt & Schellinck are the chiefe, the firſt belonging to a particular Lord, who during the troubles hath held it free and neural paying ſome contribution vnto the Admiralty, of Dunkerke, ſo as the ſhips of the ſaid Iland might ſaile freely to al places, as alſo the Dunkerkers might go and refreſh them-ſelues in the ſayd Iland.

there are three good Villages in the ſaid Iland, beſides Amelandt (whereas the Seignior hath his lodging) recouered from the ſea▪ The Eſtates of the ſaid country haue alſo within theſe thirty yeares a good portion of ground which they call the Bildt, which is now wel defended with Dikes, and is made the fertileſt quarter in al Friſland, where they haue appointed a Bayliffe or Receiuer, for it is of great proffit and reuenue.
               There are in diuers parts of Friſland turfes▪ ſome hard and firme, others more light, which make not ſo good coale as the firſt: and wheras they haue no turfes, the Peaſants vſe the dung of their cattel, with which they cutte reedes very ſmall, and mingle it together, and then they dry it for the Winter: they ſay that bacon dryed with this fire, is more firme then any other. This Country yeeldes many good and ſtrong Horſes, which are tranſported through all Europe: as alſo great Oxen and very fatte. Their Kine are very fertill, the which do often bring forth two calues at once; & the ewes two or three lambs, and ſometimes foure together, where the Sheepe are very bigge of bodie, but not ſo ſweete and ſauory as thoſe of Berry, Arthois, Cempenie in Brabant, which haue a dry feed, and are leſſe.
            
            
               OVERYSSELL.
               THis Conty of Oueryſſell in former times vnder the Principallitie of the Biſhops of Vtrecht,
                  
was then called the high dioceſe, But ſence that the Emperor Charles the fifth obtained from the biſhop the temporality of both dioceſes the higher and the lower; hee made two Prouinces, one of Vtrecht and the other of Oueryſel, the which are numbred among the 17. Prouinces, and now vnder the vnion of the Generall eſtates of the confederate Prouinces: who by armes haue ſhak't of the Spaniſh yoake, and haue purchaſed their liberty, which they enioy at this day. This country is ſo called for that it lies beyond the riue of Yſſel: this Duch word Ouer, ſignifying beyond, and in Latin Trans, ſo as it was called Tranſiſſalana. On the north ſide it hath Friſeland, and a part of the country of Groning; on the South the Conty of Zutphen: to Eaſt the country of West-phalia, and vpon the Weſt the Zuyderzee. It is watred by many riuers, the Yſsel, Vidre, Regge, Dan-noire and Wahal, beſids the chanels which are kept in by the Sluce: A good and fertill ſoyle, and fat paſtures, where they doe yearely feed many fatte cattell. There is abundance of good butter and cheeſe and all other ſorts of victuall.
               The whole Prouince is diuided into three great Baylywicks; that is of Salandt, of the old Saliens: of Tuent, ſo called of the ancient Tubantins: and of Vollenhouen, which is in the mideſt of the other two, whereof the one bends to the North and the other to the South. The quarter of Salandt comprehends vnder it many good townes among the

which are theſe three Imperiall Hans townes. Deuenter, Campen and Swolle: the leſſer are Haſselt, Couoerden, Genemuiden, Ommen, Hardenbourg, Wilſon and Graff-horſt: That of Tuent hath the townes, of Oldenzeel, Otmarſon, Enſchede, Ghoor, Diyepenham, Delden, Riſſen, and Almeloo: The quarter of Vollenhouen hath a towne of that name with a Caſtle which was wont to be the Biſhop of Vtrechts Pallace when they came into the high dioceſe: then the towne of St
                        •
                     enwicke, to which the Cuyndert did belong, which was wont to be famous for the ſtrength of the Caſtle, the which was ruined in theſe laſt warres.
               Among the fortefied townes, beſides the three Imperiall Hans townes of Deuenter, Campen and Swolle, are thoſe of Haſſelt vpon Vidre (to diſtinguiſh it from Haſſelt a good towne in the country of Liege) Oldenzeel, Steenwick, Otmarſom and Enſcheede. There are alſo a great number of caſtles and aboue 120. Borroughs and villages.
               The ſouerainty of this Prouince, before the troubles in the Netherlands, did belong vnto Phillip the ſecond King of Spaine, who ſucceded the Emperor Charles the fift his father, who had the intereſt (confirmed by the Pope) from Henry of Bauaria Biſhoppe of Vtrecht, vpon certaine conditions, the cheefe whereof was, that hee ſhould maintaine their priuiledges; for want whereof and to free them from the oppreſſion of the Spaniards, they haue (as all the other vnited Prouinces) freed

them-ſelues and recouered their liberty: whereof the people (as well as the Friſons) are wonderfully deſirous, and impatient to beare the yoake.
               The ſayd Prouince hath neuer acknowledged but two members in their gouernment, that is, the Nobility, of the which are choſen the particular gouernors, and high officers, and they three Imperiall townes, Deuenter, Campen and Swoll, and no others. By the voices & ſuffrages of which two members, all difficulties in the Eſtate are decided: And whatſoeuer hath bin decreed by them according to the conſtitutions of the country, ſhall remaine firme and ſtable: And as the nobility in precedence yeeld not to any; no more do the towns, but in their order and degree: whereof Deuenter is the firſt, then Campen, and laſt Swoll: euery one of which townes iudge by decree as well in ciuill as criminal cauſes; and either of them hath priuiledge to coine money. Let this ſuffice for a breefe deſcription of the Eſtate of the country of Oueryſſell: Let vs now come to a particular deſcription of the townes▪
               
            
            
               DEVENTER.
               THE firſt of the three Imperiall Hans townes is ſeated vppon the right banke of the riuer of Yſſell three leagues from Zutphen, and foure from Swoll. It was a goodly great town, and of great traffick before the laſt troubles: But the two ſieges which they haue beene forced to endure with

in theſe thirty yeares by the vnited Eſtates, hath much decayed it. The firſt time in the yeare 1578. when it was yeelded to the Earle of Reneberg, Lieutenant for the ſaid Eſtates and the country, ſince the earle of Leceſter gouernor for the Queene of England Protectreſſe of the vnited Prouinces, gaue the Gouermnent thereof to Sir William Stanley an Engliſh Collonel, who ſold it to the Spaniard: So as it remained ſubiect to the Spaniſh inſolencies, from the yeare 1587, vnto the yeare 1591. when as Prince Maurice went to beſeege it with the ſaid Eſtates, in the which Cont Harman Vanden Bergh, Couſin german to the Prince commanded, whome hee forced to yeelde by compoſition, after a great battery; the ruines whereof will not be eaſily repaired in many yeares, eſpecially towards the kaye.
               But whereas the cannon could not anoy them, it is well built, with faire high houſes, the ſtreets broad and cleane with a faire market place, in the mideſt whereof is the houſe of the ſworne companies, whereas a gard is kept day and night, before the great Collegiall Church is the townehouſe which they call Raed huys that is to ſay, the councell houſe, whereas the Bourguemaſters and Senators doe aſſemble dayly to doe iuſtice to euery man. The Magiſtrats there ſhew them-ſelues modeſtly graue, and the Burgers ciuill, among whome there are rich Marchants, by the trafficke which they haue of all ſorts of Marchandiſe, as

of marchandiſe, as well by Land into Weſtphalia and other places of Germany, as by the riuer of Yſſel, which on one ſide mounts vp the Rhin vnto Cologne, and deſcends downe before Campen to the Zuyderzee, vnto Amſterdam, Horne, Enchuyſen and other Towns of Holland and Friſeland, Since it was laſt yeelded, it is wunderfully fortified with rampars and good Bullwarkes, beſides that it hath alwaies had a double wal of Bricke round about it. In ould time when a matters ſucceeded not well in the dioceſe of Vtrecht, the Biſhops retired themſelues to Deuenter, as we reade of Biſhop Baldric, who to fly the fury of the Normans and Danes which ruined the towne of Vtrecht, retired with all his clergy to this towne: then the Danes being chaſed away, he returned and repared the Cathedrall Church, which they had made a ſtable for their horſes. In this towne doth vſually reſide the Droſſart (or great Bayliffe) for the quarter of Salandt, whereof this is the chiefe towne, and in the which there is great ſtore of gentlemen.
            
            
               CAMPEN.
               THis is the ſecond of three Hans townes in the Prouince of Oueryſell, although it be not like to all the reſt, on the other ſide of the riuer of yſſel, but on Gelders ſide, it is a faire great towne, of more length then breadth, the which after that it had beene yeelded vnto the Earle of

                  Reneberg in the name of the Eſtates, it was much better fortified then before. It hath agoodly bridge vpon the riuer, at the end whereof they did then build a good fort to defend it; by which bridge they may goe both on horſe-backe, Wagon and foote, to all the townes of Oueryſel, Friſeland and Groning, or elſe if they will by the chanells which rune through the country. Hauing paſt this bridge, going towards Vollenhouen & Geelmuyden, you enter into a goodly great and ſpatious paſture, full of diches, which they cal Maeſter brouk, which yeelds as good butter and cheeſe as any part in Holland: beſides, that in a ſhort time it fats a great number of goodly Oxen. This paſture hath at the leaſt foure leagues in circuit, from the bridge of Campen vnto Geelmuyden along the riuer of Vidre, paſſing before the towne of Haſselt, then paſſing on to Swolle, it returnes from thence to Campen, which circuit is a halfe dayes iorny. It is good cheape lyuing in this towne, there is aboundance of freſh water fiſh and good cheape, as Salmon, Sturgion, Carpes, Barbels and Pikes. I did once buy three Carpes there, either being a foote and a halfe long for ſixe Patars a peece, the which tide to the barke, and ſwimming in the Zuyderzee, I brought a liue to Amsterdam, All ſorts of victuall are good cheape there, eſpecially foules and Ducke and Mallard. This towne is full of Gentlemen and learned men: the houſes are faire and high built, and ſtreets very cleane. It is much inlarged and beautified

within theſe twelue or thirteene yeares. The Magiſtrates are affable and the people ciuill and courteous, whereas thoſe that are fled thether for relligion are kindly entertayned, yea they are drawne thether to ſet vp their trades, being very fit for it, for that the Marchants and workemen may goe in one night with a good wind to Amſterdam, and going from thence at night, after the diſpach of their buſines, they may bee the next day againe at their owne houſes, which is a great commodity. This towne hath priuiledge to coyne mony, and they carefully entertaine a free ſchole.
            
            
               SWOLLE.
               IS a land towne, of a round forme, ſituated vpon a little Brooke running into the riuer of Vidre, and from thence by the blacke water into the Zuyderzee: It is held to bee ſtrong, hauing euer had double walles and double diches: ſince theſe troubles it hath beene fortified with new rampars and Bulwarks. In former times it was wont in time of daunger to bee the retreat of the Gouernor and of the Councell of that country, who made his reſidence at Vollenhouen. It is good cheape liuing there, but the ſtreets are not ſo cleane kept as at Campen, by reaſon of the Cattell which they keepe within the towne and the great multitude of Wagons which come thether

from all parts; for it is of greater trafficke then Campen. It hath not bene any way anoyed by ſiege during theſe troubles, like to Deuenter and Campen, being fallen into the Eſtates power, by the preuention of the well affected Burgers, who chaſed away them of the Spaniſh faction, whereby they are become rich. It hath two chanels which paſſe through it, vpon the greateſt of them ſtands the Market place, which is faire and ſpatious, and ioyning vnto it the great Temple of Saint Michel; then a little lower, is our Ladies Church. In honor of this Town theſe foure latin verſes were made.
               
                  
                     Swolla diu celebris meruit virtutibus arma,
                  Quae populum fortem nobilitare ſolent:
                  Inde ſalutifera vetere p
                        •
                     etate, fid que,
                  In Tripolim recipi faedere digna fuit.
               
               
                  
                     Swolls vertue whilom got theſe armes, that grace,
                  the vndanted troop that won them and their race:
                  And for hir faith and Martial brood, 't was ſhee
                  was only held fit guard for Tripoli.
                  
               
               For that it is the third imperial Hans Town of this Prouince of Oueryſſell, hauing priuiledge to coine both gold and ſiluer, as the two others, wee haue deſcribed theſe three chiefe Townes: let vs now come vnto the leſſer, but ſtrong and wel fortified.
            
            
               
               STEENWYCK.
               IS ſituated vpon a brooke called Blockerzyel, comming out of the country not far from the towne, and falls nere vnto Vollenhouen into the Zuyderzee; In leſſe then twenty years it felt two ſieges, the one by Charles Earle of Manſfeldt for the Prince of Parma, who was forced to retire, the towne beeing victualed by Count William, Lewis of Naſſau, Philippe Earle of Hohenloo and Generall Norris. Being afterwards ſurpriſed by the Spaniards, Prince Maurice went to beſiege it in the yeare of our Lord 1592. the which hee did ſo importune both by batterie and myne, as (notwithſtanding the great loſſe of his men, he himſelfe being alſo ſhot, in the cheeke,) hee forced them to yeeld by compoſition. It is not ten yeares ſince the Spaniards made an other enterpriſe, but it ſucceeded not. It was much defaced by theſe two ſieges, but it now begins to recouer it ſelfe.
            
            
               HASSEL.
               THis town is called Haſſel vpon the Vidre, to diſtinguiſh it from Haſſel nere vnto Tongre in the country of Liege: it is two leagues from Volenhouen, in ancient time a good and ritch towne by reaſon of the commoditie of the riuer of Vidre which runnes into the Zuyderzee, at Gheelmuyden,
                  
beeing mingled with the two little riuers of Regge and Veecht. It is at this day reaſonably well fortefied, but it hath no ſuch trafficke as it it was accuſtomed, yet it is a prettie towne and well gouerned.
            
            
               OLDENZEEL.
               IS the towne which they call in Latin. Veteres Salij, from whence ſome will maintaine (but without any great ground) that the lawe Salike comes. It hath alſo felt the fruits of their laſt warres, hauing beene beſieged in the yeare of our Lord 1605. and yeelded to the Marquis Spinola, for the Arch-dukes Albertus and Iſabella of Auſtria, Dukes of Brabant Earles of Flanders &c. It is a reaſonable great towne and of good trade, where they make great ſtore of fine lynen cloth, which they ſell in the Netherlands, and is ſent into Spaine.
               
            
            
               OTMARSVM.
               IS called in Latin Veteres Marſii, which are the old Marſians whom Pliny and Titus Liuius doe often mention, being ſeated in the country of the Tubantins, which at this preſent is Tuent, a quarter in the Prouice of Oueryſſel. It is a little towne and of ſmall importance, yet hath it thriſe taſted the fruites of warre, as well by ſiege as otherwiſe: Beeing vnable

to endure a long ſiege by reaſon of the weakneſſe thereof, lying in an open country, whereas either partie (being Maiſter of the field) might eaſily cut off their victualls. In the yeare 1592. Prince Maurice tooke it in leſſe then foure and twenty houres, where as the Siegnior of Famas, Generall of the artillery for the Eſtates was ſlaine, a gentleman much lamented by the Prince, and of all men of warre of his partie: within theſe three yeares the Marquis Spinola recouered it with as much eaſe. To conclude this towne and Oldenzeel are ſo weake, as they muſt yeelde to the firſt enemie that comes with any force for to beſiege them.
            
            
               ENSCHEDE.
               THis towne is of reaſonable good traffick, ſituated in the open country, in the quarter of Tuent, a league from Oldenzeel, and two from Otmarſum: it felt in the yeare 1597. the waight of Prince Maurices forces, to whom it was forced to yeeld by compoſition, at the ſame time when as Grolle, Brefort, Lingen and others were taken.
            
            
               VOLLENHOVEN.
               VVAs not 30. years ſince a good town, lying vpon the gulphe of the Zuyderzee. two leagues from Steenwyck. It was wont to haue a faire, great

and pleaſant caſtle, which was the court of the Princes, Biſhoppes of Vtrecht, when as they came into the high dioceſes, and therefore it was a town renowned, where there was good commoditie of victualls, brought thether both by water and by land: And moreouer after that the temporall Eſtate of Vtrecht came vnto the Emperor, the Gouernor of the Prouince and the councell made their reſidence there. But the laſt troubles haue greatly impayred it, and the caſtle is ruined.
            
            
               GHEELMVYDEN.
               HAth runne the ſame fortune that Vollenhouen, from whence it is a league diſtant, and as much from Haſſel, that ſtands vpon the Gulphe of Vidre, towards the Zuyderzee, hauing towards the land the pleaſant paſtures of Maeſterbrouck, in like manner a league from Campen. The caſtle wherein the King of Spaine was wont to keepe a garriſon, hath beene alſo ruined.
            
            
               MEPPEL.
               THis towne is ſeated vpon a little brooke, which neere vnto Gheelmuyden falls into the Vidre. It was neuer of any great importance, and now it is in a manner all ruined.
            
            
               
               HARDENBERG.
               WAs in ancient time a good towne vpon the ſame riuer of Beecht, where there was wont to bee a good caſtle, whereas the Biſhops of Vtrecht tooke great delight, for that it ſtood in an open country. It is mid-way betwixt Coeworden and Ommen, both the towne and caſtle are to this day almoſt ruined by theſe laſt warres.
            
            
               COEWARDEN.
               BEfore the laſt ſiege which Prince Maurice of Naſſau laied before it, the which hee tooke by compoſition, it was but a little baſe towne, commanded by a great and ſtrong caſtle. The Droſſart hearing of the Princes approach, cauſed the ſayd towne to be burnt and ruined, to the end the enemy ſhould haue no commodity to lodge there: yet hee did ſo preſſe this towne both by battry and myne, as the Droſſart was forced to yeeld it; ſome two moneths after the taking of Steenwyck by the ſayd Prince, lying in the ſame countrie of Oueryſſel, in the yeare 1593. Cont Herman vanden Berghe and Verdugo went to beſiege it, but when as they ſaw, they could not preuaile any thing, neither by battery nor myne, hauing changed their firſt reſolution, and thinking to famiſh it in time, they ſtopt vp all the paſſages with forts, ſo as nothing could

enter into it: yet the Princes men that were in garriſon within the caſtle, maintained themſelues with great conſtancy and reſolution a whole winter; vntill the Spring, when as the Prince came with a good army to victuall it in deſpight of all theſe forts: which Cont Herman and Verdugo ſeeing, abandoning all their forts or burning them, they retired: wherefore the Prince hauing victualed it at eaſe, and ſupplied it with freſh men, the ſame Sommer, being in the yeare 1597. hee went to beſiege the towne of Groning, the which hee tooke, as wee wil ſhew hereafter. Since the Eſtates haue giuen order for the repayring of the towne, for that it is a good paſſage to goe by land into Friſland, the countries of Groning, Weſtphalia, Breme and other places.
            
            
               RYSSEN.
               IS ſeated vpon the riuer Regge, the which runnes into Vidre at Heſsel, and paſſing from thence before Gheelmuyden, it falls into the Zuyderzee. It is ſo little and at this day ſo deformed, as it merits not the name of a good towne.
            
            
               DIEPENHEM.
               VPon the ſame riuer of Regge, it is a league or little more from Ryſsen, and two leagues from Enſchede. At this preſent it is but a Bourrough,

although with all the ſmall townes, it hath the priuiledges of a towne.
            
            
               GHOER.
               IS a Borrough ſtanding vpon a brooke which runnes into Regge at Diepenhem, from whence it is a league diſtant. It hath during theſe warres had a great fort, which was alwaies taken, when as eitheir party was maiſter of the field.
            
            
               DELDEN.
               THis was wont to bee a good towne, and of trafficke but now is much decaied by reaſon of the laſt warres; hauing beene ſubiect to the paſſing and lodging of ſouldiars of either party, for (as I haue ſayd) hee that was maiſter of the field, was alwaies maiſter of thoſe petty places.
            
            
               AMELOO.
               IS built vpon a brooke comming from Oldenzeel, the which two leagues from thence falls into the Vidre, it is at this preſent but a Bourg.
            
            
               WILSEN.
               IS at this daie but a village, ſeated vppon the waie as you goe from Campen to Swolle,
                  
yet hath it the priuiledges of a towne, and is numbred among the leſſer townes.
            
            
               GRAFFHORST.
               IS ſituated vpon the gulfe of the riuer of Yeſſl, entring into Zuyderzee, halfe way betwixt Campen and Gheelmuyden. It is but a ſmall village, not ſo good as Wilſen, yet hath it the title and rights of a towne.
               All this is comprehended in the country of Oueryſſel, which is the ſeauenth in ranke of the eight vnited Prouinces of the Netherlands, which haue recouered their liberty by armes, and acknowledge at this day no Soueraigne Prince but the generall Eſtates of the ſayd vnion: which eight Prouinces are, the Dutchie of Geldres, the Earledomes of Holland, Zeeland and Zutphen, the Siegneuries of Vtrecht, Friſland, Oueryſſel and Groning. Weſt-Friſland (whereof they might make a Prouince by it ſelfe) is comprehended vnder the county of Holland, who giue it the name of Noort-holland; which the Weſt-Friſōs wil not willingly heare of▪ for they haue their particular Eſtates, Admiralty, Officers and Mynte. Prince Maurice of Naſſau hath this Prouince of Oueryſsel, vnder his gouernment, with Geldre, Holland, Zeeland, Zutphen and Vtrecht.
               
               The aſſembly of the Eſtates of the ſaid Prounice, both generall and particular is diuerſly made, according to the ancient cuſtomes & preheminences

of euery quarter, not tied in that regard to any townes, but according their order and ranke; the deputies changing often. I haue ſeene them held in a country houſe. Wherefore wee cannot ſpecefie any certaine place of their aſſembly, by reaſon of their often change. Yet there remaines a certaine forme of a colledge of Eſtate in the towne of Deuenter: But it cannot reſolue of any affaires of importance, which muſt bee referred to the aſſemblie of the Eſtates for the whole Prouince, whereſoeuer it ſhalbe held. Yet when as the affaires ſhall tend to the good or preiudice of the generality of the vnion, they muſt referre them to the aſſemblie of the generall Eſtates of all the vnited Prouinces, the which is commonly kept at the Hage in Holland.
               
            
            
               Groningue with the Ommelands.
               THe Eſtate of the towne of Groningue, and the Ommelands (which are country iuriſdictions conſiſting of many good Borroughs Villages, Abbaies and Monaſteries) are ſituated betwixt the riuers of Ems and Lanwers, and make a Siegneury or Prouince, which is numbred among the 17. of the Netherlands, and the eight in ranke of the vnited Prouinces: which are repreſented and gouerned by the common conſent of the Eſtates of the ſayd Prouince. Before that we treat of this Eſtate in general, we wil firſt ſpeake of the town of Groningue, which giues the name vnto the whole Prouince:

which name ſome hold was giuen it by Grunnius, iſſued from the bloud of the Kings of Friſland, who was the founder, and not that Troian of whom Sebaſtian Munſter ſpeakes. This towne is ſeated in a pleaſant ſoyle, enuironed with goodly paſtures, ſome thinking that it hath taken the name from the greenes thereof; this worde of Groen ſignifying greene, Ingen being as an adiectiue which makes vppe the word, wherof there are many both in this and other Prouinces of the Netherlands, as Huſinghe, Finelinghe & others in the country of Groeningue; Harlinghe in Friſland, Vlaerdinghe in Holland, Fliſsinghe in Zeeland, Poperinghe in Flanders and others els where.
               This towne with the dependances, was heretofore giuen to the Biſhops of Vtrecht in the yeare 1057. by the Emperor Henry the third and others going before him, and by their ſucceſſors, (ſince that the Normans deſtroied the towne of Vtrecht): whereof they gaue letters of Eſtate to the ſayd Biſhops, of the which they haue alwaies made vſe, vntill the end of the laſt age. The which notwithſtanding was often taken from them, as well by the Groningers themſelues, as by the Princes which haue ſeazed vpon that Siegneury: amongſt others Albert and George Dukes of Saxony, who had the gift from the Emperors Frederic and Maximilian, and Edſard Earle of Embden, whom they accepted for their Lord, all which did not acknowledge the Biſhops of Vtrecht. This towne is inricht with two

ſmall riuers, Huneſo and Aha, comming out of the countrie of Drenthe, through the Ommelands the which compaſſing about the towne, meete in the ſuburbes which is called Schaytendyep, from whence paſſing by the towne of Dam, with other ſmall brookes which ioyne there, they fall by the Sluſes of Delfzyele into the Dullart, which is of the riuer of Ems: by the which all ſhips both great and ſmall take their courſe, to ioyne with the greater, which anchor vpon the Dullart, and ſo to goe from thence to ſea whether they pleaſe. There were wont to be twelue churches in this towne, whereof three were pariſh churches: the firſt was Saint Martins, the ſecond Saint Walburge (which Temple hath the forme of a Moſquee, which they ſay was built by Pagans, the Pariſh beeing now annexed to that of Saint Martin), and the third is that of our Lady, ioyning to one of the Market places. Other fiue are Monaſteries, and the foure which remaine Hoſpitalls: among the cloiſters that of Franciſcains, being in the mideſt of the town, is conuerted to a colledge for ſchollers, for the ſtudy of humanity, wherof at my being there, doctor Vbbo Ems was Rector, the other cloiſters & monaſteries are applied to better vſes, then to feed idle bellies. The foure hoſpitalls are entertained, whereof the firſt, which is great like a pariſh, is called of the Holie Ghoſt, the ſecond Saint Gheertruyde: the third Saint Iames, and the fourth Saint Anthony.
               
               There are in this town two goodly market places,

the one for the greatneſſe, was called Dat-brede marckt, very great and ſpacious, the like whereof is not be ſeene in any other towne, beginning from Saint Martins church-yard, going toward the weſt, at the end whereof is the towne-houſe: nere vnto it is the other market-place not much leſſe, which goes to our Ladies church, which they call Ter Aha, or fiſh market; At which two market places (which is a goodly thing to ſee) there meet 17. of the greateſt ſtreets of the towne: whereof ſix go to ſeueral gates, (being eight in al) that is to Poel port, Ooſter port, Heren port, Ter Aa port, Botteringe port, & Ebbing port, which gates are called by the name, of the ſaid ſtreetes: The Spaniards in the Duke of Aluas time did builde a Cittadell at Heren port, which the Burgers did ruine, when as Gaſpar of Robles, Lord of Billy, a Spaniard, Gouernor of the town, was deteined priſoner by his owne ſoldiars and the towne reduced vnder the vnion of the Eſtates, but afterwards it was trecherouſly yeelded vnto the King of Spaine by George of Lalain, Earle of Rheneberg, with the murther of the Burgue-maſter and ſome Burgers: vntill the yeare 1594. that Prince Maurice of Naſſau did force it by a ſiege and furious battery to ſubmit it ſelfe vnder the obedience of the ſayd generall Eſtates, as it continues vnto this day with the Ommelandes. This towne hath betweene Poel port and Steeneille port, a goodly ſuburbes with a chanell, where the ſhippes arriue which come from Dam, Delfziell and other places

of the country, with turfes and al ſorts of prouiſion, neceſſary for the towne which ſuburbes are ſo fortefied as the Inhabitants thinke themſelues as ſafe there as within the towne: it is called Schuytendiep. Within theſe ten yeares the generall Eſtates (for ſome ielouſie which they had of the ſayd towne) as well for feare of intelligences of ſome Burgers with the Spaniards, as alſo to take away all occaſion for Enno Earle of Eaſt-friſland to attempt againſt the ſayd towne, cauſed a cittadell to bee built, in the which they entertained an ordinary garriſon the which kept the mutins in awe.
               There is yet an other ſuburbe rampared like vnto a fort, at the Port Ter Aa; an other at the Port of Botteringe, and an other beyond the Cittadell, all which ſuburbes haue much endured during the ſiege, and in the laſt warres; as many goodly houſes of pleaſure, as well of gentlemen, cittizens, as ritch farmers, moſt part ruined doe yet ſmart for it. Finally the ſituation of this towne is ſuch, that as they may carrie and tranſport whatſoeuer they pleaſe by water: ſo may they alſo doe by land at all ſeaſons of the yeare, by the Drenth and other neighbour places to the fronters of Germany, which brings great proffit to the towne.
               As for the Ommelandes, that is to ſay, the champian country thereabouts, which conſiſts of many good Bourges and villages, although they bee not ſubiect to the towne, yet by a mutual accord, there is ſuch vnity among them, as in many things, they

haue yeelded vnto the towne; as the right of the market, the ſtaple of marchandiſe ſold by great or by retaile, to ſell no ſtrange beere nor ale throughout all the country, but only ſuch as they doe brew within the towne: the which is ſet downe at large in the letters of the ſtatute, in the yeare of our Lord 1455. renewed and augmented in the yeare 1482. And the chiefe point wherein the Ommelands haue yeelded vnto the towne, the which they haue enioyed for theſe many yeares, is touching matters of Iuſtice, by the which the wiſe men of the country are gouerned, Inferior Iudges kept in awe, the iuriſdiction maintained, the pride of the ritch and mighty reſtrained, and the Edicts belonging to the common-weale, concerning their authoritie publiſhed. For the which the Magiſtrate or Senate of the towne chuſe fiue honorable perſons fit for thoſe charges to bee renewed euery yeare, if for their ſufficiencie and merittes they bee not continued two or three yeares, theſe are called Hoftmannem, they are ſeldome choſen if they haue beene Bourgue-maiſters, Senators or of the councell.
               Theſe fiue Hoft-mannem tooke knowledge of all things were it by themſelues alone or ioyntly with the Senate. Their Court was called, their iudiciall chamber, their authoritie was great ouer all the champian country: which by little and little did extend beyond the riuer of Lan
                        •
                     vers: and then into Oſtergoe and Weſtergoe, two chiefe Cantons of Friſland,
                  
wheerby there grewe great quarrells betwixt the Groningers and Friſons: yea among the Friſons themſelues, diuided into thoſe two curſed factions of the Schyeringers and Wetcoopers. To pacefie the which the Emperor Frederick the 3. ſent Otto van Langhen a Chanoine of Ments and his councellor into Friſland: but hee returned without any effect, by reaſon of the wilfulneſſe of the Schieringers. The Emperor Frederick dying ſoone after, Maximilian the firſt his ſon, ſucceeded in the Empire, who ſent the ſame Otto van Langhen again into Friſland, with an ample commiſſion, giuing them authority (as they had before time) to chooſe a Poteſtate, (which is as much to ſay as a Prouinciall Gouernor) and to ſettle the Friſons in their ancient liberties: whereby the Groeningers had beene excluded from the confederation which they had with them of Oſtergoe and Weſtergoe. But although the Friſons were well inclined to this Election of a Poteſtate, (wherein they proceeded ſo farre, as there was one choſen of the chiefe of their Nobilitie and well qualified) yet one of the factions held him for ſuſpect, either partie deſyring to haue one of his league, where-vpon their hatred did ſo increaſe, as Otto preuayled no more then at the firſt, which made the Emperour Maximilian to giue the gouernment Hereditarie of Friſland and Groningue to Duke Albertus of Saxonie; as wee ſhewed in the deſcription of Friſland.
               
               
                  
Duke Albertus hauing afterwards broken this confederation betwixt them of Groening and Friſland; ouer whom hee held himſelfe halfe Maiſter, ſeeking to diſpoſe of all things at his pleaſure, as well within the towne of Groening as in the Ommelands, where hee pretended an abſolute ſuperioritie: which they beeing vnwilling to yeeld vnto, hee went to beſiege the towne of Groening, the which after a long ſiege, hauing endured many Indignities from Duke Albertus, and fearing in the end a badde iſſue of this warre, they did call in and receiue for their Protector Hereditarie, Edſard Earle of Embden, or rather of Eaſt-Friſland (Lieutenant at that ſiege to the Duke, but diſcontented with Collonel Vyt) vppon certaine conditions, amongſt others, to build a fort or blockhouſe, the which was done.
               The Duke ſeeing himſelfe deceiued by the Earle, and diſapointed of ſo goodly a prey, ment for the recouery thereof to imploy all his meanes, holding the Friſons to bee halfe vanquiſhed. The Groeningers ſeeing the Emperour to imbrace the Dukes quarrell, and that there was a proſcription ſent out by the Empire againſt Cont Edſard, who could hardly free himſelfe, & much leſſe protect them: rather then to fal vnder the proud gouernment of the Saxons, they called in Charles Duke of Geldre, a Prince that was ſtirring & high minded to vndertake their protection, & vpon the ſame conditions that they had receiued Cont Edſard onely the fort

which he had built ſhould be razed, the which the Geldrois (to augment his Signeuries) would not neglect, ſending the Seignior of Oyen to take poſſeſſion: and thus the towne and ſtate of Groning fell into the hands of the Geldrois which was the cauſe of great warres betwixt the two Dukes of Saxony and Geldres.
               
               The Geldrois being put in poſſeſſion of the towne in the yeare, 1518. and of the Ommelandes, 1521. (as ſuch an actiue ſpirit cannot containe him-ſelfe within his bounds) hee began ſoone after to attempt as well vp on the rights of the towne as the preuiledges of the Ommelandes, The Groningers hauing diſcouered his practiſes with Captaine Meinard van Ham, for the King of Denmarke, vpon the towne of Dam, which is of their iuriſdiction, the which hee pretended to fortefie to keepe Groening in ſubiection, and then to doe all things at his pleaſure. They ſeeing them-ſelues thus circumuented, and knowing the dukes intention, grew cold in their affection which they did firſt beare him, turning it to the houſe of Bourgongne, where-vpon hauing reſolued with the conſent of the Ommelands they did write vnto George Schencke, Baron of Tautenburg, knight of the order of the Golden-fleece, gouernor of Friſeland for the Emperor Charles the fift according to the reſignation which the Duke of Saxony had made vnto him, to which effect the ſayd Seignor Schencke (hauing receiued commiſſion from

the Lady Mary Queene of Hungary, ſiſter to the Emperor) marched with all the forces hee could thether, where he entred in Iune in the yeare. 1536. and there receiued their oth of fidelity, in the Emperors name, as Duke of Brabant, Earle of Flanders, Holland, Zeeland, &c. Lord of Friſeland and Oueriſſel, but vpon certaine conditions, that the members and ſtate of the Seigneury of Groning ſhould hold their priuiledges, right and ſtatutes, as they had receaued them from their anceſtors: that the towne ſhould hold their ancient Preture and the foraine: that they ſhould build a pallace in the towne for the Emperor fit for a Prince, but without any fortification: the forts in the country ſhould be razed, & noe new built, if neceſſity did not require it for the defence of the country and of the towne, out of whoſe reuenues there ſhould be yearely payed vnto the Emperor & to his ſucceſſors 12000. crownes, vpō which conditiō 
                  Phillip K▪ of Spaine was receiuedin Ianuary. 1550. Among all the priuiledges of the ſaid towne, they haue one very notable, which came from their anceſtors, with an inviolable contynuation, which is; That noe King▪ Prince, Eſtate nor commonweale, can call any Bourger or Cittizen of that towne into iuſtice, nor cauſe him to bee cited or adiorned before any court, but onely before the Senat or his ordinary iudge: more-ouer that noe man might appeale from any ſentence that were giuen, either in ciuill or cryminall cauſes, neither from the court of Hoffmans or iudiciall chamber,

in that which concernes their iuriſdiction, from the which no man of what quality ſo euer may decline▪ moreouer the towne is Lady and miſtriſſe of her owne lawes and ſtatutes, the which by a ſoueraigne power they may make and vndoe, create and abrogate without the authority of any perſon. The Eſtates of the Ommelands haue alſo the like authority in their regard. The towne hath had a priuiledge to coyne ſiluer and copper for theſe foure hundred years, and gold ſince the yeare. 1474.
               The Magiſtracy of the towne conſiſts as it hath done time out of mind, of foure Bourgue-maiſters and twelue Senators (but of late daies, for before they were wont to haue 16.) which are the head of the common-weale, all hauing equal voices, but not equall in dignity and authority. This Senat takes knowledge of all that concernes the towne: they haue power to chooſe the Hoftmans or Pretors of the country & to ſend ambaſſages wher need ſhould require: to conclude, their duty is to prouide both in general & particular for the good of the common weale. Their charge is for two yeares and they are created with ſuch order as euery yeare eight are depoſed, and other eight ſubrogated in their places, among the which I comprehend the Bourguemaiſter.
               After the Senat and Hoftmans, there is within the towne a colledge of 24. men, choſen out of the beſt families, which they cal the ſworne councellors for that from yeare to yeare they binde them-ſelues by oth to the Common-weale of Groning, without

whome the Senat cannot reſolue of any matters of importance, concerning the whole common-weale as to vndertake a warre, or to giue it ouer; to contract alliances, make lawes or to breake them, build new forts or other publike workes: change their mony; bring the towne in debt or chtage it with rents otherwiſe: To treat of which things, the ſenat cauſeth them to be called, which haue beene depoſed, whom they call the old ſenat: and ſome-times they call ſome of the beſt cittizens of the towne, as the Deans or maiſter of the cheefe trades, men of great credit among the people. This colledg of foure and twenty ſworne men, hath as it were a triumuirat, which ſpeakes for them all, and bind themſelues by oth vnto the Senat, to procure the townes good, and to make a faithful report of all, the which may properly bee called Tribunes of the people.
               There are many other offices in the towne, ſeruing for the entertainment and preſeruation thereof: as Prouoſts of the wacth, Maiſters of quarters: Heads, Captaine or Deans of the ſworne companies, whom the Senat doth chooſe for life: Maiſters of workes, ouerſeers of the waights and meſures for bread and beere. To conclude, it ſeemes there wants nothing for a well gouerned common-weale.
               The manner of choſing the Magiſtrat in that towne is as followeth. One halfe of the councell which are ſixeteene and of the twenty foure ſworne men are yeerely depoſed, whoſe places are filled by fiue perſonages well qualified among the twenty

foure Iurats whome the Gouernor of the Prouince doth name, which fiue do chooſe out of all the towne eight new councellors, to fill vp the places of them that are depoſed, which eight newly choſen, with eight old remaining, choſe foure Bourguemaiſters, more-ouer the Gouernor names (beſides the twenty foure ſworne men) fiue other men who chooſe twelue among the commons of the towne, to fill vp the place of twelue that were depoſed, ſo the twelue new Iurats with the tw elue of the old remayning, make vp the number of tw enty foure, all which together chooſe the three Tribunes.
               There is alſo in that towne an ordinarie free ſchole or rather a colledge, which is very famous by reaſon of Doctor Vbbo Emmius, an excellent Hiſtoriographer, who was Rector and go uerned it: of whoſe writing we haue for the moſt part made vſe, in the deſcription of Freeſeland.
               
               The Ommelands are diuided into three quarters; the Feuelingo, Himſing, and the weſt quarter, euery one hauing their preuiledges written in diuers Seigneuries, as places of iudgement, which they call Redgerrechten, Gretenies or Baylewiks, whereof the bourguemaſters, and councel of the towne haue ſome, and the Nobles or proprietaries of the ſaid towne and Ommelands haue the reſt: in the which the Redgers, Gryetmans or Bayliffes take knowledge both of ciuill and criminall cauſes, and determine of them according vnto equity and iuſtice, from which ſentences in euery iuriſdiction & Seigneury,

touching the right thereof duties, Inheritances, morgages by writing or otherwiſe, they may appeale before the aſſembly, which they cal Varwen, compoſed of a Lieutenant, foure Capitoux, with their Aſſeſſors, Redgers, Nobles, Proprietaries, Grietmans or Bayliffs. In other cauſes not concerning the matters aboue ſpecified, in caſe of appeale, they go vnto the Lieutenants and Captaines of the towne of Groning, as the chiefe, and of the Ommelands, who in ſuch caſes iudge alſo by decree, (as we haue ſaid) without any appeale, euocation or remiſſion: Being alwaies to bee vnderſtood, that the ſaid lieutenant: who is choſen by the Eſtates of the towne & country, and the 4. Capitoux by the Burguemaſters and councell, may not meddle with the ſuperintendency, nor the politik gouernment of the Ommelands, but according to the commiſſion, oth and inſtructions which they haue from the Eſtates choſen by the towne and county: In the name and behalf of the ſoueraignty of the whole Eſtate, and Siegneury, they may adminiſter Iuſtice, according to the right & ancient cuſtomes of the Prouince. By the which Lieutenant & Capitoux, in vertue of a certaine grant made by the Emperor Charles the 5. in 1538. vnto thē of Wedde & Weſtuveldinger-landt, euen in caſes of appeall all matters within the ſaid quarters of Wedde and Weſtuvoldinger-landt, are decided, without any further euocation, prouocation or reuiſion. Of this towne doth meerly depend the towne which they call.
            
            
               
               THE DAM.
               THis towne is two leagues from Groning, in ancient time a good towne of trafficke, as beeing the Sluſe to goe to the ſea, the which is now at Delfzyel (for that which they call Zyel or Dam is all one, ſignifying a Sluſe) but ſince the yeare 1536. being taken by aſſault for the Imperialiſts, when as the Geldrois did hold it, the walles were demanteled: and then it was accorded that it ſhould not be lawfull for the Groningers to wall it in any more, nor to make any fort. The which notwithſtanding could not bee obſerued, for ſince the laſt warres, it hath bin fortefied, and taken and retaken againe. Now it lies open, yet holding the forme of a town, through the which paſſeth the chanell which goes to Delfzeyl, and from thence by the ſame Sluſes to the Dullart, or into the riuer of Ems.
               
            
            
               DELFZYEL.
               IS at this preſent a great and mighty fort in forme of a towne, much greater then before: for many yeares ſince there was one, but it hath beene often ruined and repaired againe: It was concluded betwixt the Emperour and the Groeningers, that this fort ſhould bee razed, and that they ſhould not build any one there, or in any other place without the conſent of both parties, yet in theſe laſt warres they haue ſuffred both that and others to

be built, whereof ſome are ruined as vnprofitable, ſome are yet ſtanding, which in time may bee alſo razed. But that of Delfzyel, for the greatnes: number of inhabitants, ſtrength and commodity, ſtanding vpon the Dullart, is likely to ſtand ſtill, and in time to become a good towne of traffick, yet vnder the ſubiection of the Groningers.
               
               This is all we can ſay in breefe of the towne, Eſtate and commonweale of Groning and their Ommelands; yet we may not forget that out of this towne are come great and learned men: among others Rodolphus Agricola, of whome that great Eraſmus of Rotterdam, giues an honorable teſtimony, for that he was expert in the Greeke, eloquent in the Latine, an excellent Orator; a good Poet, a ſubtill Philoſopher, a perfect Muſition, being able to make Muſical inſtruments himſelfe as he did the Organs of the great Church and others, of whome alſo that moſt learned Hermolaus Barbarus doth make mention in an Epitaph which he compounded vpon his vntimely death, wich was in the fourty yeare of his age, in the citty of Heidelberg, in the yeare 1585. where the Preſident Viglius Aita of Zichem paſſing that way, as one honoring the memory of his countriman, he cauſed a faire ſtone to bee ſet vpon his tombe, and the Epitaph of the ſaid Hermolaus grauen thereon, as followed.
               
                  
                  Inuida clauſerunt hoc marmore, Fata Rudolphum,
                  
                  
                     Agricolam, Friſij, ſpemque, decuſque ſoli,
                  Scilicet hoc viuo meruit Germania laudis,
                  Quicquid habet Latium, Grecia quicquid habet.
               
               
                  The glory of the Friſons ſhew is gone,
                  through enuious fate, and lieth within this ſtone:
                  
                     Rudolph Agricola, whoſe life did ſee,
                  All Europes praiſe deſeru'd by Germany.
                  
               
               In this towne, and in Agricolas time was alſo borne, the learned Weſſel Baſillius an excellent Philoſopher who died in the yeare, 1489. who we may ſay, were the two ſtarres of Groning.
               
            
            
               Townes and places out of the eight Prouinces, yet comprehended vnder their vnion.
               HAuing deſcribed as particularly as wee could, the eſtate of the ſaid eight vnited Prouinces, the ſituations, the commodities, the trafficke and the ornamants of euery one of the townes, & the forts comprehended within them, and which are of their iuriſdiction, although that the generall eſtates, haue not all at their commandement; as there are ſome in Gelders and beyond the Rhine, held by the Archduke Albertus and Iſabella of Austria, yet the vnited Eſtates haue the greateſt part and the cheefeſt places vnder their obedience: wee muſt

now alſo deſcribed the townes and forts, which they hold in thoſe Prouinces, which are vnder the ſaied Archdukes, eſpecially in the Duchy of Brabant, and Conty of Flanders, gotten by armes, the which they keepe. Firſt.
            
            
               In the Duchy of Brabant.
               BERGEN VP ZOOM.
               WE place this towne firſt of all thoſe which the vnited Eſtates hold in Brabant, for that it is made a Marquiſate, although that Breda be one of the firſt Barronies of the Duchy: This towne hath a good hauen, at the mouth wherof there is a mighty fort which defends it: it is right againſt Tertolen one of the Ilands of Zeeland. Before the towne of Antwerp was in credit, and that Bruges began to decay, it had the cheefe trade for Marchandiſe. There were wont to be goodly buildings, the which being abandoned in theſe laſt warre by their proprietaries, and remayning as it were deſert, they haue ſerued to noe other vſe but to lodge ſoldiars, and are much decayed. It hath beene alwaies a good garriſon for ſoldiars, who went to ſeeke there fortunes farre and neare, to the gates of Antwerp, and as farre as Luxembourge, bringing home often times very good booty, with whome the Bourgers, Inne-keepers and Tauerners did ſo well agree as they reaped great benifit by the ſoldiars. This

towne hath conſtantly mayntayned the party of the generall Eſtates of the vnited Prouinces, ſence the time that it was yeelded in the yeare 1577. by the Germaines, who deliuered vp their Collonel Fronſbergh with the towne vnto the generall Eſtates. In the yeare 1588. the Duke of Parma came to beſeege it with a mighty army, thinking to take the great fort by practiſe with an Engliſhman, but hee was diſapointed of his purpoſe, and was forced to retier with diſhonor and loſſe: And in the yeare, 1605. the Marquis Spinola, Lieutenant to the Arch-dukes, made two furious attempts, the which in a manner ſucceded, but they were repulſt by the valours of the Bourgers and ſoldiars with great loſſe. Although it bee vnder the obedience of the vnited Eſtates, yet doe they retaine ſtill their ancient rights and preuiledges.
            
            
               BREDA.
               IS a faire great towne, with a pleaſant Caſtle ioyning vnto it; which was wont to bee the Pallace whereas the Earles of Naſſau held their Court, as the deceaſed William of Naſſau Prince of Orange, did for a time for it is but twelue leagues: from Bruſſells. It was wont to haue a goodly Heronrie in the great Church-yard, but now they are diſperſed, yet there are ſome of them remayne ſtill beehinde the Caſtell. Collonel Foucker with

his Germaines, hauing eſcaped out of Antwerp in the yeare 1577. hee retired into this towne, whereas Philip Earle of Hohenloo went and beſeeged him, in the Prince of Oranges name (the towne being his patrymony) and for the Vnited Eſtates: the which the ſoldiars deliuered vnto the Eſtates, with their Collonel, as they had done Fronſbergh at Berghen vp Zoom, vnder whoſe obedience it did continue, vntill that the Baron of Freſin being priſoner in the Caſtle hauing corrupted ſome ſoldiars, found meanes in the yeare 1580. to deliuer it to the Duke of Parma: from whome it was recouered in the yeare 1590. by a hardy and dangerous enterpriſe which Chaptaine Charles of Heraugiere a gentleman of Cambray, ſeruing vnder Prince Maurice, made with 72. reſolute ſoldiars, who being hidden in a boatefull of turfes, in a thouſand dangers of their liues, hauing entred at noone day into the caſtle, without deſcouery the night following they ſurprized it, cutting the Corps de gard in peeces, & giuing entry vnto the Prince and the Earle of Hohenlo, with their troupes, which lay not farre of: which the Captaines of the garriſon ſeeing, fled, and the towne was alſo yeelded by compoſition, ſince which time, the towne hath continued vnder the obedience of the Prince and the ſaid Eſtates, who made Herauguiere gouernot as a recompence of his valour, and gaue good reward vnto the ſoldiars with promiſe of aduancement, as moſt of them haue had vpon the firſt changes.
            
            
               
               STEENBERGHEN.
               IS a little towne betwixt Berghen vp Zoom, and Breda, along the ſea-coaſt, the which the Spaniard did hold, vntill the yeare 1590. when as Charles Earle of Manſfeldt, by commandement from the Duke of Parma, went to beſiege the fort of Seuenberghe, the which he battred, and did what he could to take it, but finding he ſhould profit nothing, hee retired. The Prince hearing that the fort was thus freed, hee went to beſiege this towne of Steenberghen, the which hee forced to yeeld by compoſition, and ſince it hath continued vnder the obedience of the vnited Eſtates.
            
            
               WILLEMSTADT.
               THat is to ſay Williams towne, built within theſe 30. yeares, by William of Naſſau, Prince of Orange who gaue it that name. It is in the Iſland of Rogheville, which is in the duchy of Brabant, a good and a ſtrong towne, at this time almoſt all built. It ſerues as a Rendezuous to the Eſtates armie, when they haue any incurſion or enterpriſe to make; at it was at the enterpriſe of Breda whom it doth much import, as wel as the towne of Dordrect to haue it well kept: whereof the Eſtates do entertaine a ſufficient garriſon there, with a Gouernor, Sargent Maior and other Officers.
            
            
               
               CLVYNDERT.
               IS a good bourg in the Duchy of Brabant whereas the Eſtates haue built a mighty fort, where for the importance thereof they entertaine an ordinary garriſon, with a Captaine, ſuperintendant, and other officers.
            
            
               LILLO.
               IS a mighty fort vpon the riuer of Eſcault, within three leagues of Antwerp, not far from the gulph of the ſaid riuer, built within thirty yeares. It is a place of great importance, to ſtoppe the nauigation to Antwerp: which the Collonels and Bourgers of the ſaid towne, (during the time they were vnder the vnion) did carefully (and to their great charge) preſerue. And when as the Duke of Parma did reſolue to beſeege it, they did re-enforce the garriſon, and ſent the Seignor of Teligny, Sonne to Mounſieur de la Noue to command their, and Collonel Godin to prouide for all things before the comming of Collonell Mondragon Captaine of the Caſtle of Antwerp: who hauing beſeeged it, and ſeeing noe meanes to cut of their ſuccors by water, after that he had ſpent ſome cannon ſhotte, hee rayſed his campe and retyred. It hath continued euer ſence

vnto this day vnder the obedience of the vnited Eſtates, who in my opinion will not ſuffer it to bee ruined by the peace, but rather to conuert it to a good towne, the which in time, in ſteed of a place for warre, may haue good trade of marchandiſe, and proue rich, being ſeated vpon ſo goodly a riuer and ſo neere the gulph thereof towards the ſea, right oppoſit to another fort which the Eſtates now hold on Flanders ſide called Lyefsken hook.
               
            
            
               TER-HEYDEN.
               IS a fort at the mouth of the riuer, the which comming from Breda falls there into the ſea. It was firſt built by the Spaniards, but the towne of Breda being ſurpriſed, and won (as we haue ſayed) Prince Maurice (to the end that towne ſhould not be bridled on that ſide) went to beſeege it vntill it was yeelded vnto him by compoſition, the which he cauſed to be preſently raiſed.
               For all which townes and places, together with their Baylewickes and iuriſdictions, there is a forme of councel of Brabant at the Hage in Holland, before the which there is appeall from ſubalternall and inferior iudges.
            
            
               
               Townes and Forts which the Eſtates hold in Flanders.
               SLVCE.
               THis towne is a good port of the ſea, the which during the proſperity and trafficke of the towne of Bruges, ſome 10
                     •
                  . yeares ſince. when as the nations floriſhed there was their Magaſin or Stoor-houſe, as their great and goodly Caues doe witneſſe, ſeruing for the wines that came from Spaine, the Canaries and France. For Fliſsing (which is but three leagues diſtant) was then but a village, and Middelbourg no great matter; the whole trafficke at that time was either at Bruges or at Berghen vp Zoom, and ſince at Antwerp. Since the pacification of Gant, vntill the yeare 1587. this towne was vnder the obedience of the Eſtates, entertained, with a good gariſon, whereof the Siegnior of Groenevelt was Gouernor. But the ſame yeare the Duke of Parma went to beſiege it with all his forces, the which notwithſtanding his continuall battery, mines and furious aſſaults, was for a long time valiantly defended. In the end ſeeing no hope of any ſuccors, which they had expected from the Earle of Leceſter (Lieutenant for the Queene of England in the vnited Prouinces) and from the Eſtates, they were forced to yeeld it vpon an honorable compoſition, for want of munytion and other neceſſaries. Since which time, this towne did much anoy the

Eſtates, eſpecially the Zelanders, by the meanes of ten Gallies which Don Ieromino Spinola, brother to the Marquis Spinola brought out of Spaine, with the which he did often affront the ſhips of Holland and Zeeland, vntill in the end he was ſlaine in a ſea fight, with great loſſe of his men & ſpoyle of his Gallies, the which being repaired, ſought ſtill to cut off the victualls and ſuccors which the Eſtates ſent to Oſtend, during the time of three years & three months, that the Archduke Albert and the Marquis Spinola held it beſieged, the which in the end hee tooke by an honorable compoſition: after that by an other ſiege Prince Maurice had forced them of the garriſon of Sluſe to yeeld by compoſition, beeing preſt by famine: which towne hee tooke without battery or any other force, with all the Gallies and other ſhips, ſetting the ſlaues at liberty, with many other forts of importance, as you ſhall heare, wheras the Archduke on the other ſide got nothing but a heape of ſtones and earth, there remayning no forme of a towne at Oſtend, but onely the rampars. Thus was Sluſe reduced vnder the Eſtates command, much againſt Spinolas minde, who attempted twiſe to releeue it, but in vaine. It was yeelded vnto them a month before Oſtend, which from that time was vnprofitable vnto them and of great charge, ſeeing they had Sluſe, ſo as their gaine was much greater then their loſſe. For they did winne at one inſtant the Iſlle of Cadſandt, and all the other forts oppoſite to the hauen of that towne, then
            
            
               
               ARDENBOVRG.
               VVAs wont to bee a prettie country towne, about the which and in the Iſland of Cadſant they did breed good horſes, whereof there was twiſe a yeare a faire at this towne. But theſe ciuill warres by the breach of dykes and inondations, haue ſpoyled much of the country. Prince Maurice beſeeging Sluſe, did alſo beſiege this towne, the which was yeelded vnto him, and is now ſtronger then euer.
            
            
               YSENDYCK.
               IS a mighty fort on Flanders ſide, right againſt Fliſingue, ſtanding toward the Sas of Gant & Bocholdt, whereas the Archduke, for the importance of the place, did continually entertaine a great garriſon both of foote and horſe, to ſtop the incurſions of them of Fliſsingue & Berghen vp Zoom in that quarter of the Waſt of Flanders. And although hee did much rely in his fort, imagining it could not be eaſily taken: yet notwithſtanding that there were 800. men in the fort, Prince Maurice beſieged it, battred it, and forced it to come to compoſition in leſſe then eight daies, before he gaue any aſſault. Since the Eſtates haue inlarged it, & it is now like vnto a town; likely in time to be of good trafficke, for that the hauen is able to containe many ſhippes of 4. or 500. tuns a peece, being well ſituated vpon the ſea, wherfore in my opinion the Eſtates will not ſuffer it to

bee razed; nor leaue it in any ſort, beeing ſo commodious for them.
               As for the other leſſer forts about Sluſe and in the Iſland of Cadſand, wee will paſſe them ouer, hauing ſpoken of the principall.
            
            
               LYEFKENS-HOECH.
               THis fort was built at one inſtant with that of Lilloo, beeing oppoſite vnto it vpon the riuer of Eſcault, ſo as all ſhip s that come from the ſea to goe to Antwerp, muſt paſſe betwixt theſe two forts: But it could not reſiſt the enemies attempts like vnto Lilloo: for in the yeare 1584. the Vicont of Gant Marquis of Roubay beſieged it, and tooke it by aſſault, by a ſtratageme which he made with a heape of ſtrawe and haie, which he cauſed to bee burnt on the dicke-ſide where hee gaue the aſſault, ſo as the ſmoake being driuen with the winde, did ſo trouble their ſights that defended the breach, as they were forced with great furie, the Vicont killing Collonel Petain, (who commanded there) with his owne hand, in cold bloud, and cauſing many Burgers of Antwerp to bee hanged: the which was afterwards reuenged vpon the Spaniards and other priſoners which they held in the vnited Prouinces. It was ſince recouered by the Eſtates▪ vnder whoſe obedience it hath continued vnto this day. Yet it is not like to continue as Lilloo, but may well be razed vpon the concluſion of a peace, beeing of no ſuch importance as the other.
            
            
               
               TERNEVSE.
               Is a good village of that quarter of Flanders, which hath a Baylife, Alderman and other officers, whereas the vnited Eſtates did long ſince build a fort, and entertained a good garriſon: it is ſituated in the mideſt of a drowned Land, and therefore not eaſie to approch nor to campe before it; for which conſideration the Spaniard (who will not willingly wet his feet) would not attempt it: remaining vnto this day vnder the Eſtates, being commanded by a captaine, ſuperintendent for them.
            
            
               AXELLE.
               IS a little towne in the land of Waes (which is one of the beſt quarters of Flanders) which Seruaes van Steelandt great Bayliffe of the ſaid country of Waes deliuered vnto the Spaniard, when as the Duke of Aniou was retired, after that great folly committed at Antwerp. Six or ſeauen years after Sir Phillip Sidney Gouernor of Fleſsingue, and Collonel Ihon Peron ſurpriſed it, and deliuered it vnto the Eſtates in the yeare, 1587. the which they much fortefied ſince, by drowning of the great part of the country, which makes it inacceſſible, whereof the ſaid Peron hath recouered a good part, during the time that the Eſtates, left him gouernor of the place.
               There are other forts in that quarter of Axelle and of 
                     
                        •
                     erneuſe, vpon Flanders ſide, as that of Blockerſdyek, Saint Marguerits and Saint Anthonis-hoeck
                  
the which we omit, beeing of no great importance nor likely to continue.
            
            
               Forts beyond the riuer of Rhine.
               BOERENTANGHE.
               IT is a goodly fort, none of the greateſt, but at this preſent like a little towne vpon the fronters of the countie of Lingen, which is the high-way to goe out of Friſeland and Groning into the country of Weſtphalia, and by Cloppenbourg to Delmenhorſt and Breme, and ſo to Hamburg, Lubecke and other towns of the Eaſt country, along the Baltique ſea. Is is entertained with a good ordinary garriſon, conſiſting of many halfe companies (at the leaſt when I was there) wherby (in my opinion) the Eſtates did wiſely cutting off many Monopolies and occaſions of mutynies, for that there is ſeldome any accord where there is diuerſitie. The countrie about is all mooriſh or full of turfes, wherewith they doe both furniſh the place and the countrie about it.
            
            
               BELLINGER-WOLDER-ZYEL.
               IS a good village or rather a Borrough, at the end of the Dullard▪
                   where as the riuer of Ems growes narroweſt, by the which they muſt paſſe comming from Embden by water to goe to Boerentanghe, leauing the caſtle of Wedde vpon the right hand: where the Eſtates haue made a fort to defend the county

of Lingen: yet is it not ſo well fortefied, but it muſt yeeld to the firſt enemy if he be Maiſter of the field.
               As for the other forts diſperſed here and therevpon riuers, fronters and paſſages, beeing many in number, throughout all the vnited Prouinces, I haue thought it ſuperfluous to deſcribe them here particularly, hauing onely vndertaken the chiefe.
               By this deſcription may be ſeene, that in the ſaid eight vnited Prouinces, which make the Eſtates of the Belgike Common-weale, there are aboue ſixeſcore townes▪ great and ſmall, and aboue a hundred caſtles and forts of all ſorts, entertained with ordinarie garriſons, beſides their troupes of reſerue which they put into townes, eſpeciallie in winter, or when they haue neede to refreſh their companies either of foote or horſe, where they are well lodged and accommodated.
               Touching the ſhippes of warre which the vnited Eſtates doe vſually entertaine, as well at ſea, as vpon the riuers of Rhine, Meuſe, Wahal, Ems and others, I cannot ſet downe the number, the which is great, ſome-times more, ſome-times leſſe, according to the neceſſitie of their affaires: they haue ſome-times a hundred and twenty ſhippes of warre in paie, well armed and appointed with men and munition. Their nauigation and trafficke of marchandiſe extends to the Eaſt, Weſt, North and South. I dare boldly ſaie, that the Common-weale of Venice, which is held ſo ritch and mighty an Eſtate, could not haue continued ſuch inteſtine wars

three years, as they haue done many, and doyet like the ebbing and flowing of the ſea, whom all the forces of Spaine could neuer vanquiſh.
               Wherefore wee muſt conclude that the King of Spaine was ill aduiſed to intreate them with ſuch rigor, as they haue beene forced to oppoſe themſelues and to ſhake off his yoake. Whereas contrary-wiſe, the King his ſonne now raigning, (for feare of ſome greater inconuenience) hath with good aduice, declared them free Eſtates, ſeeing that his father could not with all his forces and treaſure, depriue them of their liberties and freedomes: offring then peace, without attending the preiudiciall euent of a warre of a hundred yeares: as the Princes of Auſtria his Predeceſſors had againſt the Cantons of Suiſſes, who almoſt for the like occaſions, did ſhake off their yoake, neere three hundred yeares ſince. Let vs praie vnto God, that their vnion may continue: the which may reſtraine the inſolency of ſome of their Neighbours and norriſh peace among them. Which God grant.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   