
      
         
            
            
            A PROFITABLE AND neceſſarie Diſcourſe, for the meeting with the bad Garbelling of Spices, vſed in theſe daies.
And againſt the Combination of the vvorkemen of that office, contrarie vnto common good.
Compoſed by diuers Grocers of London, wherein are handled ſuch principall matters, as followeth in the Table, before the booke.
            
            Printed at London, by R. B. for Thomas Man, dwelling in Pater noſter Row at the ſigne of the Talbot.
         
         
            
            
               
To the Right Honourable Sir William Webbe Knight, Lord Mayor of London, and to the right Worſhipfull the Aldermen of the ſame Cittie his brethren.
            
               BEcauſe the complaintes of ſundrye of the retayling grocers of Londō, to the cheefe officers the gardians, and to the firſt menne of that ſociety, againſt the fact of bad garbelling of ſpices, betvveene them and the Marchantes, hath in lieu of reformation taught manye indigneties and vvrought ſom indignation tovvards the cōplaināts. Therefore no councell vvas better (that deſpaire of remedie amongſt them, could then conceiue or bring forth) then to flie to your moſte godly vviſedome for ſuche helps therein, as do beare an Anologie and proportion correſpōdent to the miſchiefs and diſeaſes in the fact of garbling. Or if that doo faile to follovv the ſaieng of the Poet Muſaeus, the vvhich is thus ſet forth:

                  It is good ſometime to ſound in open ſtreet
                  The wicked works which men do thinke to hide.
               
               
meaning that by publishing of ſome ſmal pamphlet touching the ſame, ſuche good maye enſue, either the vvorkemanne to grovv better, or the buier to be more vviſer, in the office of garbling (a matter right Honorable and vvorshipfull, full of rashneſſe to breake open a diſcourſe, vvhereinto a man may more eaſilie enter, then find the vvaie out againe.) But ſince that aucthoritie and povver (vvhich vvorketh by operation) to redreſſe theſe defectes, is as yet lefte, only in them vvhich are the aucthors of them, vve meane in the Garbeller and vvorkemen. Our vvit is ſuch (vvhich ought to vvork vvith councell and diſcretion) to allovv and aduance this ſmal treatiſe vnder your Honors fauor and protection, the effect vvherof is to ſhevve the abuſes doone in that office, vvith the right vſe and motion therof: vvherin your vviſdomes and Honor may be pleaſed, to excuſe our boldneſſe vnder this defenſe, that in great inconueniences, great Officers haue not deſpiſed the meaneſt voices. Then ſhall our duties to the cōmonvvelth be out of daunger, and the ſame aduantaged

by your vvonted affection, to vvhatſoeuer concerneth common good, & by this our labour. In the vvhich affection vve beſeech the Creator of all thinges, to aſſiſt your Lordship and vvorships vvith his holy ſpirit, and to giue you the ſame for councel and conduction in the ſeruice of hir Maieſtie, this Cittie, and to his glory, and your poſteritie for euer heerafter. Grocers Hall in London.
            
               Your moſt humble the Retailors
Grocers. London.
            
         
         
            
            To the diſcreet and vertuous Readers.
            
            
               IN diſcourſing with diuers worſhipfull Marchants of the companie of Grocers and others, vpon the practiſes in garbelling of ſpices in London, a thinge to to the retaylors of ſuch ſpices of no ſmall importance: aſwel for that therby they are touched in honor and honeſtie, beeing inforced as it were to put to vtterance corrupt ſpices, as in conſcience & care to haue reformation for ſuch conſtraints: We ſpeake our minds therein; not of things doone this day; yeſterdny, or the daie before: but of things doone long ſince by experience, and of the obſeruation of the ſaid practiſes, and of the corruption therin daily vſed, & of the reformatiō now required (the which many yeeres more then ſome ſcores past was conceiued and foreſeen.) Therfore to burie the hatred growne, both hetweene the ſeller and the buier, we propoſed a poſſible means to profit the marchant, ſatitfie al the retaylers, and to aſſure the buier and occupier of the goodnes of ſuch ſpiees without fraud. The meanes are grounded vpon the true knowledge of the nature

of garbelling of ſpices, the which is not only the true ſifting of the ſame, but the deuiding of the good from the bad, and the putting of them vp in their ſaid deuiſions, and vppon the due vnderſtanding of the difference of garbelling vſed in time past, with the time preſent. And in that difference a iuſt choiſe is to bee made, and an ordinance to bee giuen, for the Garbeller to follow, for the benefite of all, the which our intent and meaning is, with the conſent of all, and in fauour of thee gentle Reader to publiſh, to the end, the practiſes of garbelling may be garbelled (we meane reformed) and hir Maieſtie and people of this realme bee better ſerued in ſuch affaires. For whoſe ſatisfaction, we labour with hope, crauing of thee the like vtterance of friendſhip towards vs, and to accept our meaning, if thou finde not this diſcourſe to be quallited to thy liking.
            Vale.
         
         
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               
               The Table.
               1 WHy the Art of garbelling was firſt inuented & by whom. Folio. 1.
               2 The auntient deuiſions of ſpices vſed in London, fol. 3.
               3 The abuſes now vſed in the ſaid Art there. 11.
               4 How the danger of thoſe abuſes, extendeth aſwell to the retailors Grocers, as to the marchant, and thereby the garbeller in danger of queſtion of his oath taken therein. 13.
               5 The abuſes of the workmen, and the neceſſity of reformation thereof, and for whoſe ſake it is to be doone, fol. 17. and 19.
               6 Who may reforme theſe abuſes in London, and the manner how to reforme them, 23.
               7 The manner of true garbelling, 31.
               8 The rate ſet and allowed by the maieſtrates, for the garbeller to receiue in his office, 71.
               9 The rate by himſelfe aduanced, and receiued, 71.
               10 The orders neceſſarie to bee made and kept, betweene the chiefe garbeller, and his workmen, fol. 50.
               11 The briefe abſtracte of the Actes of Common Councell, made in London for garbelling, in Anno xviii. of king Henry the eight, and in Anno. ſecond of king Edward the ſixt fol. 63.
               12 The othe therevpon appointed, for the ſaid Garbeller. fol. 87
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Reformation for Garbelling.
            
            
               
                  
                     1 Heerein is ſhewed that king Henry the ſixt did firſt giue the office of Garbelling of ſpices in London, to the Maior and Cominaltie of the ſame.
                  
                     2 That the Marchants and Retailors Grocers, did deuiſe the lawes howe the ſame ſhould be garbelled for euer.
                  
                     3 What Garbelling is.
               
               
                  Chap. 1.
               
                  IF the care which the Antient Romanes hadde, to performe the iudgement and decrees of their law-makers be well weighed and obſerued: amongeſt the reſt of great reſpect and honor, the obedience of Fabius Maximus to the ordinances of his ſonne, is to be admired: who beeing a Maieſtrate and in place of iudgement, and ſeeing his father a farre off comming towards him on horſſe backe (a thing forbidden amongſt the

                  Romanes) he commanded his father to ſet foote on ground, the which the father obeied, and embracing his ſonne, made greater account of him, then if he had doone otherwiſe. And on the other ſide, one Veſtius was put to death becauſe he aroſe not when the Tribune of the peple paſſed before him, the which he with obedience and patience endured. And diuers Citizens of Rome were disfranchiſed for breathing and yawning a little to lowd, in the preſence of the Cenſors: wherat they nothing repined. This we ſet foorth, for that it ſhould be remembred, that if the common breach of lawes & decrees be permitted, then enſueth not onelie the contempt of the Maieſtrate, but alſo the very ruine of that, for whoſe cauſe ſuch ordinances were aduanced: a thinge befallen to the ſubiect of this matter now in hand; namelie in the fact of Garbelling of ſpices. The neceſſitie of clenſing and purifieng whereof, in the time of the raigne of king Henry the ſixt was then debated, and the office of Garbelling was by the ſame kinge giuen to the Lord Maior & Cominaltie of this The office of Garbelling was by K. Henrye the vi. firſte giuen to the Lorde maior and comminalty of londō.famous Citie of London, but in ſuch wiſe, notwithſtanding, that it is verie apparant, that aſwell the Marchantes owners of ſuch ſpices, as the Grocers retaylors of the ſame Cittie, were called to giue aduice for the conceiuing & creating of ſuch ordinances therein, as might beſt tend to the benefit of the Marchant, the vtterance and ſale of the Grocer, and the goodnes

of the thing garbelled for the health of the people of this realme: vpon the which ordinances the Art of garbelling was pronounced to conſiſt, it being an habite of working according to right, reaſon, and mechanicall or a handicraft, the full knowledge whereof was partlie gotten by vſe, at that time by Richard Hackdie and William 
                  Hackdie & Aunſell, firſt garbellers after the ſaid gift.
                  Aunſell Citizens, and partly by inſtructions and reaſon, taught & ſhewed by the marchants and Grocers then being, and was left to the execution of the ſaid perſons the officers aforſaid, the which aduiſes, aſwel of the ſaid Marchants, Grocers, and of the ſaide officers, are thus ſette foorth.
            
            
               
                  
                     1 The deuiſions of Spices by the ſayde parties, are particularlie ſet downe.
                  
                     2 The ſame to be at no time altered.
               
               
                  Chap. 2.
               
                  FOrſomuch as euery thing hath his natural, proper and inward corruption, of which it is eaten and at the laſt conſumeth Euery thing hath his naturall corruption, whereof at the laſt it is conſumed.and beginneth to ſpread it ſelf in the beſt part to mar all, as rotteneſſe in ſpices is their proper euill. And for that alſo, the ſame ſpices are alſo ſubiecte (as all other thinges are) to accidents, and thereby alſo may be deſtroied

before their naturall ouerthrow, as bruſes, water, duſt, and age in ſpices. Therfore for the auoiding and curing of ſuch naturall corruption when it hapneth, & thorowly to meet with all ſuch hurtfull accidents to ſuch ſpices, being aliments and nutrimentes to reſtore and preſerue the health of man, or to preuent ſome infirmitie and diſeaſes, ready to ouerthrow their good eſtate: We (ſay they as skilfull phyſitions, preuenting diſeaſes and labouring in forſeene miſchiefs, according to the cauſes wheron the effects of ſuch corruption doo depend) haue ordained theſe deuiſions to be obſerued in the ſetting forth thoſe ſpices, with their qualities by way of garbelling and firſt of:
               
                  Nutmegges.
                  The operation whereof we meane not to ſet foorth, being no part of our charge: onely for the deuiding of the good from the badde, wee holde it neceſſarie that they bee deuided into three ſorts.
                  The firſt & the beſt we cal caſe nutmegs, the which are ſmooth, waightie, faire, & fullof oile.
                  The ſecond ſort we call Bale, the which are alſo faire and great but ſomewhat wrinkled, and heere and there oile in them, and declining to corruption.
                  The third and laſt ſort we terme Rompes, ſo termed being wrinkled, bruſed, ill coloured, and do want their oile, and therby are become drie or rotten. The which ſorts to be ſo ſeuerallie put vp.
               
               
                  
                  Pepper.
                  If the ſame by ſome accident ſhall receiue wet, or otherwiſe be euill conditioned: wee thinke it meete to be ſorted by it ſelfe and to be kept from the drie. Both which to be garbelled and clenſed from the duſt and corrupt pepper, and to be vttered in one ſort, in ſuch manner as the ſame dooth ariſe from the place it came, and notwithdrawing the head ſort of pepper from the ſmall.
               
               
                  Maces and Cynamon.
                  We holde it beſt to garbell and clenſe them into three ſorts, to wit: Lardge, middle & petit.
               
               
                  Ginger, Gaules, Riſe and Erreus.
                  That the ſame ſhal paſſe into two ſorts, (viz) Lardge and petit.
               
               
                  Cloues, Graines, Woormſeed, Anniſeed, Comminſeed, Dates, Senie, and all other things garbellable.
                  
                  We likewiſe think it beſt to garble and clenſe them into one good ſort from the duſt and garbels, according to the nature of the thing it ſelf.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     1 The proofe that thoſe deuiſions were by thē ſo appointed to be made and kept.
                  
                     2 That the L. Maior and comminalty by two ſeuerall acts of Common counſell haue allowed the ſame.
                  
                     3 That the Garbeller therby is excluded to make lawes by himſelf therein, or to alter the ſame.
                  
                     
                     4 That the common people haue receiued the ſame as a custome, and doo in euery faire and market, procure troubles for putting ſpices to ſale, garbelled to the contrarie.
               
               
                  Chap. 3.
               
                  FOr the approouing of which Deuiſions, beſides the antient remembrance therof, lefte with Maiſter Blaze Saunders late garbellor, the ſame may plainelie appeere in this. That in Flaunders, Marchantes before then, and long ſince, brought from Antwerp, Brudges and Roane, their Nutmegs and other ſpices in ſuch condition and ſorts as is beforeſaid, with a ſeale of the figure of the right hand vppon euery veſſell or bagge of caſe nutmegs and other ſpices in ſuch condition and ſortes as is aforeſaid. And on their baile Nutmegs, a hand with a barre ouerthwart, and the other ſort without marke. And in ſuch ſorts the ſame were bought and ſold, as by an acte of Common councell, holden by your predeceſſors it may appeare in Anno. 4. of K. Henry the viii. To the which deuiſions, the Marchant, Retailor, and Garbeller (ſay they) ſhall hold themſelues contented without alteration; vnleſſe there ſhall bee cauſe of correction of thoſe ſorts, vppon ſearch of them by the Garbellor in London: as alſo by another act of

Common counſell made in An. 18. of K. Henry the eight, it is ſet foorth: the which may appeare at the end of this preſent diſcourſe. The filth and duſt of which ſaid ſpices, were helde vnwholſome and not vendible but to be reiected as vnſeruiceable: your predeceſſors then were mooued with thoſe reaſons, to allowe and confirme thoſe deuiſions as reaſonable and full of equitie betweene the marchant and the retailors, and were deſirous that the ſame ſhuld alſo remaine and abide, for the auoiding of deceipt or loſſe of the common people, who haue in ſuch meaſure noted and felt the benefite of the ſaid deuiſions, that now in open faires and places corporate, they doo daielie procure the ſpices ſorted to the contrarie, to be ſeyſed on as goodes forfeited, and not garbelled as they ought to bee; to the great trouble of the retaylors, and notable detriment. Vppon theſe and ſuch like beginnings, and by the acts of Common councell enſuing, the facte of garbelling 
                     Couetouſneſſe dooth worke confuſion of all right.
                     The fact of garbelling a bond of vnitie betweene the marchant and the grocers.
                   hath had continuance, vntill now of late that couetouſneſſe or ignorance in the principall officer, hath bred the change and ouerthrow of the pollitike deuiſe of this Art. Theſe our predeceſſors alſo thought the fact of garbelling (as is before appointed) to be a bond of great vnitie, for the retailors with the marchants, and of no leſſe ſeruice for the Common-wealth: and in that ſence, they all (by the humble petition of the garbeller) agreed, that it ſhould be enacted

by a common councell therefore eſpeciallie made, that he might viſite the garbelling of Antwerpe and Brudges, onely to refine if neede were, but not to alter their ſaid deuiſions: and that the Marchants and retailors ſhould not afterwards alter their ſortes of garbelled ſpices, but put the ſame to ſale, in ſuch wiſe as the ſame ſpices were garbelled (in ſuch manner as is by the premiſes iuſtlie to be inferred) and not before they were ſo garbelled or refined, vppon a penaltie therein expreſſed; and to be accounted as an enimie to that forme, appointed therein for common good, as we before haue remembred, for the obſeruation of which indifferencie, There is but one way to goodnes.the ſaid officer taketh his corporall oth. And forſomuch as the fact of garbelling cannot bee good, but after one ſort, but to the euill it may be many waies done: as to hit a white, there is but one waie, but to miſſe it there are many waies. We ſay as commonlie it is ſaid, that that thing is rightly don, which is done to the order and inſtitution of good pollicie. And for ſuch we eſteeme thoſe deuiſions to be, and that they are the only way of cleane garbelling, for the The Marchant feeleth the hart by the garbellers preſence in his houſe.common wealth, whereon that art dependeth, and for whoſe ſake the Marchant is contented to make the Garbeller the maiſter of his marchandize for the time, (the inconueniences whereof he beſt feeleth, but leaſt knoweth) and the retaylor is appointed his inſtrument to put the ſame to ſale, according to the deuiſions ſo

made bought and ſold, whereby it is made very apparant to your wiſedomes, that the ſoueraigntie of that and euery other good order, is the ſure foundation thereof, with the vnion and bond of all the particulers, for whoſe cauſe the ſame was conceiued, made and aduanced, and heerein as in all other caſes, if euery man ſhould haue no other reſpect but to his owne, their vnity would ſoone be diſſolued.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 4.
               
                  
                     1. The greefes of the Retailors grocers.
                  
                     2. What it is they doo require of the Lorde Maior and Aldermen.
               
               
                  BVt to reſume & to continue the ſpeech by vs alreadie begun, of the abuſe of this art. We ſaye, that iniury is offered to thoſe goods of Marchants, and by the ſale of thoſe goodes, to the honor and perſon of the ſeller: the which iniurie is not doone by force, for force may bee repelled by force, but by fraude, and by this fraud an iniuſtice paſſeth to all, the which is to be remoued by reformation. And heerein wee are not called to do, but to demand iuſtice, the which wee require, euen no further, then that thoſe lawes of your predeceſſors, made as touching the fact of Garbelling may be kept and obeyed

by thoſe workmen, who are parties therevnto: the which belongeth to your offices to ſee performed. And vnder this obedience, is conteined The garbeller is not to make lawes at his pleaſure, nor to place nor diſplace any without conſent of the l. maiorthat moderation which the officer in this Art of garbelling, ought to obſerue, namelye, that hee muſt not of his owne motion directe ſuch maner of Garbelling as himſelfe pleaſeth, nor abuſe the manner of garbelling firſte vſed; nor by the ſame abuſe, take vpon him any parte of the maieſtrates office, in iudging and making forfeit what hee liketh. It is for the Commonwealths ſake (whome he may thanke) that hee commeth into the Marchantes dores: & therfore it is meet for him to ſpeake, ſay, and do all thinges for the preſeruation thereof by his facultie, as it was firſt appointed by your predeceſſors, who were as you are, armed with power, to enforce his obedience to theſe their ordinances, or to puniſh the contrarie, or to remoue him. But forſomuche as couetouſneſſe, wherewith a man beeing ſurpriſed, ſhall want knowledge howe to command himſelfe, maye entice him to fall from all antient orders, and to practiſe ſtrange deuiſions, as well of ſpices, as of profit and honeſtie, the which are neuer ſeparated in matters of good qualitie; for nothinge is iuſt nor profitable if not honeſt: and Nothing is profitable that is not honeſthe that maketh a deuiſion of them, by ſetting foorth and ſeparating his actions in this wiſe, ſaieng; this deed is honeſt, but that deed is profitable for me, he cannot be without fraud: but

will rend a ſunder all equitie ordained by publike power. Therefore wee haue ſet foorth the abuſes nowe offered, and wherein the antient deuiſions are not obſerued, and howe theſe deuiſions nowe vſed, bringeth detriment to the Marchant and loſſe to the retaylors, as we haue taken in hand, being the ſecond point by vs ſet downe in the premiſes of this diſcourſe, and to ſhewe wherein the antient order is obſerued though corruptlie, and whye the garbeller of late ſued to haue his manner of garbling, with further authoririe to be allowed to him, by acte of Common councell.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 5.
               
                  
                     1 The particular abuſes of the Garbeller in this office, aſwell in the clenſing and deuiding of ſpices, as in the putting vp of the ſame.
                  
                     2 By thoſe abuſes, he will conuert great benefit either to the Marchant or to the retaylor at his pleaſure▪ the which coulde not happen, if the antient orders were kept.
               
               
                  Haſt makes waſt. 
                  ANd firſt in Nutmegs, for expedition and haſt (the firſt point of his gaine) though it make waſt to all others. He woulde and oftentimes dooth drawe them into one ſort, caſting out

ſome of the Rompes, and by that one ſorte he may vppon occaſion of bribes, diſpleaſure or ignorance, conuert the ſame ſomtimes to the benefit of the Marchante, and otherwhiles to the grocer retailor, as is heereafter declared: but to whomſoeuer it is, the common people haue the harme thereby, and the retailor is very often diſcredited: and by theſe meanes, contentions are, maye bee, and haue beene moued, betweene the marchant, ſeller, and buier. For by this workemanſhip this fraud is maintained: Nutmegs falſelie packed vp.that on the top of his veſſell or bag, there are beſtowed nutmegs of faire condition, and in the bottome or a foot downwards, there are found Nutmegs not ſo good, by vi. viii. and xii. pence in the pound: And to the contrarye when he liſt, the worſt are laid vppermoſt, and in ſuch ſorte, that the retaylor muſt make ſale thereof vppon forfeiture of the ſame; a thinge which could not happen by the ancient deuiſions, for thereby the beſt are ſet foorth by it ſelf, by the name of caſe, being ſuch as is aforeſaide, full of oile, faire and of good perfection, and more permanent and laſting then others, and is knowne by his marke. The next ſort beeing called baile, is not halfe ſo oilie as the caſe, but declining and apt to corruption, and are not to be put vp among the beſt, for that it wil diſgrace them ſpeedilie, and in ſhort time change into a Rompe: the which matter common and dailie experience proueth, the which by a man skilful,

and a cunning Garbeller may eaſilie be drawne frō the beſt, but not by the vnskilful; ſo that the remainder being rompes are left to themſelues. The which we wiſh, for that the ſame is a ſpice of choiſe and priſe, that the garbelling and putting vp thereof, were committed to menne of better iudgement and skill, as by the garbellers owne petition it is required, and not to thoſe whoe nowe are artificers therein, for that they know not how, or malitiouſlie will not deuide the ſame as they ought to be, being a matter of great importance and of regard. Heereby and by the ſequell, you may ſee the abuſes, and eaſilie diſcerne the differences of his garbelling to one ſort (the which is no garbelling, but a practiſe tending to abuſes as is heereafter prooued) & the ancient deuiſions, & heerwithall you may The marchant doth forfeit his wares by the manner of garbelling nowe vſed.note the danger (if we may call it a danger) that by this practiſe of the deuiding of Nutmegs into one ſort, the marchant and the retaylor preſent and to come heereafter, may and do incur by the ſaid Act of common councell, made An. 18. of king Henry the viii, the ſaid deuiſion being contrarie to the ancient cuſtome: for where it is ſaid, that no marchant nor other, doo ſel in groſſe or retaile within the Cittie of London, any manner of ſpices before it be garbelled, tried, and made cleane by the officer, as of olde time accuſtomed: whereby it may or ſhall euidentlie appeare to the buiers therof, to be good perfect, cleane and wholſome, vppon paine of

forfeiture of the ſame ſpices ſo ſold. The which matter is not nor can be performed in this one ſort of deuiding; but to make it a danger (as we take it) the garbeller hath humblie beſought The practiſe of the garbeller is to intrappe the Marchant.your honour and worſhips of late, to giue him power by order and acte of common councell, to ſeize vppon all ſuch wares and ſpices, as are made forfeitable by the ſame act, and other acts ſince made, the which authoritie (hee ſaith) is wanting in the ſame Acts. This being conſidered, we cannot ſufficientlie maruaile, what hath moued him to enter into ſo prepoſterous a courſe; for from this abuſe in nutmegs, he hath fallen further to abuſe the antient ſort and manner of garbelling of
               
                  Pepper.
                  The wet and drie pepper are to vs the retaylors ſold and mingled togither, and in that ſort by him garbelled, nay rather vngarbelled; but the ſame in that wiſe, we are inioyned to put to ſale, whereby we are hindered and the people deceiued, and the Marchants ſtill in danger of the ſtatutes before mentioned, and the head or greateſt pepper of both wet and dry are taken apart, & mingled with other ſorts, from whēce it was not taken, and in briefe he maketh deuiſions therein as himſelfe liſte, and contrarie to the ancient order, the which was, as is aforſaid, but in one ſorte the drie pepper by it ſelfe▪ without ſubſtracting the greateſt from the ſame, and

the wet pepper by it ſelfe, the difference beeing noted by the ſeale thereon, the which was well knowne to our predeceſſors. But heereby the common people are much abuſed, being conſtrained to buy the ſmall from the great, and the wet with the drie: the one tainted and corrupted with ſalt water, and vnwholſome and altered in colour, and the beſt thereby made worſe.
               
               
                  Maces and Cynamon.
                  He obſerueth the antient order of deuiding them into three ſorts, but in ſuch wiſe, that by the packing and putting vp of the ſame, no ſuch indifferency is vſed, but that by his oath he may be called in queſtion therein.
               
               
                  Ginger, Gaules, Riſe and Erreus.
                  He likewiſe obſerueth the antient manner of paſſing them into two ſorts.
               
               
                  Cloues, Graines, Woormſeed, Anniſeed, Comminſeed, Dates, Senie, and all other things garbellable.
                  
                  He ſorteth them into one ſort, from the duſt and garbels but corruptlie: the rather for that in all he reſerueth this power to himſelfe, to diſgvize the Marchant or the retaylor, for by ſeparating the great from the ſmall, hee may laie the one or the other ſo vpwards or downwards that if his fauor be not bought, nor craued, hee may conuert the benefite which waye himſelfe

liſteth, either to the marchant or to the retaylor. And forſomuche as the ſubſtance of our greefe conſiſteth in the vnderſtanding of theſe abuſes and imperfections, therefore wee may with more ſafetie, and without the imputation of curioſitie enter therinto; otherwiſe we might be thoght curious, in ſeeking after other mens faults (a matter from which wiſe men will diuert and quench the ſame) for as ſometime, it is good to ceaſe to inquire after lawfull things, as an exerciſe and practiſe of iuſtice: ſo it is likewiſe expedient, ſometime to leaue vntaken that which a man may lawfullie take, whereby to reſtraine the deſire of vnlawfull taking. But by Profitable aduerſaries to the Garbeller.this our curioſitie, we wiſh to bee more profitable to the aduerſarye of our good then to our ſelues, by ſhewing him of what he is to beware, and what to correct. And firſt to prooue theſe abuſes to be ſuch in this workeman, whom wee haue regarded as the principal body (the which being infected, the members his miniſters cannot doo their dutie.) We ſay, that albeit he promiſeth, that he will well and lawfullye behaue himſelfe in the office of Garbelling, without any partialitie, taking reaſonablie; and that after he hath packed vp the goods by him garbelled, he will ſet thereon a marke, that the common wayer may take knowledge therof: yet in theſe matters, and in many other things apperteining to that office, he departeth from his ſaide promiſe in behauing himſelfe, as in this Chapter following it appeareth.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 6.
               
                  
                     1 Whereas the principall Garbeller vſeth diuers practiſes, tending to the ſlander of the office, therefore heerein are ſet foorth ſome of the ſame practiſes
                  
                     2 The proofes thereof are ſet foorth by a petition of the workemen of the ſaide office, which remaineth with the bodye of this ſocietie.
               
               
                  FOrſomuch as the Garbeller affirmeth, that this maner of garbelling is a lawefull manner of garbelling: therein we (as our predeceſſors did) do not repute it lawfull garbelling, to put wet and dry pepper togither: a thing by him vſed.
               Item, To giue licence to any man to buy ſpices garbellable, and to licence one and not another, to carrie the ſame hither and thither vngarbelled, vnder his paſſing ſeale, is not lawfull; a matter very notorious and enterteineth ſuſpicion of much euill.
               Item, to arreſt ſome marchantes, and not other ſome for keeping their goods vngarbelled, longer then the Act of Common councell appointeth, is (ſo farre as hee can allowe) partialitie.
               
                  
Item, To take money of marchants before their goods be garbelled, and to take more money of one then of another for garbelling of like commoditie, is partialitie: likewiſe to take more money, then by the act of common coū
                  cell is limitted, is vnlawfull.
               Item, To garbell Nutmegs into caſe & baile according to the ancient cuſtome in one place, and not in another, is partialitie.
               Item, By skill and pollicie, to hinder the ſale of marchants in their goods, requireth disfranchiſement, the which may ariſe, by puttinge Nutmegs into one ſort together in one place, and to hinder the ſale of the like in another place, he wil deuide them into two ſorts, wherin the retaylor, ſo long as hee may finde them ſo deuided, will neuer looke to him with one ſort: and heereby oftentimes, the Marchant is conſtrained to regarbell them. But to wade further into theſe or other particularities of his proceedings were too tedious; & are not heerin for diuers good cauſes to be diſcouered: by theſe it is euident, that the Art of garbelling is not lawfully vſed, but by him vnlawfully abuſed, and the skilfull ruling or gouerning of a companie is to begin in himſelfe: but the head being ſuch, let vs behold the proceedinges of his miniſters.
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 7.
               
                  
                     1 Diuers notable abuſes doone by the workemen vnder the ſaid garbeller.
                  
                     2 They can deceiue both Marchant and grocer, and their leader alſo.
                  
                     3 The Marchantes may ſaue 2000 poundes yeerelie, if the ancient manner of garbelling were obſerued.
               
               
                  NOt long ſince, a marchant had a commodity wherin the workmen garbellers laboured, by the ſpace of xiiii. daies: the which commoditie, for that it was bought or at the leaſt agreed for, before the garbelling thereof, by certaine retailors, the Marchant promiſed his reward to theſe miniſters, the retaylors alſo promiſed their reward, to haue the ſame well and duelie garbelled: but ſecretlie and vnder-hand, one of the ſaid miniſters required of one of the retaylors xx. ſhillings, promiſing therefore to leaue good garbell, if he bought the ſame garbell: the The deceiuer is deceiued.retaylor made his countenance to gratifie this friendſhip, but he would not parte with any of the mony required, vntill he ſaw this promiſe to ſucceed; in this hope theſe garbellers labored to

make good garbell vntil the end, and the retaylor made haſt to buy this garbel at a good priſe, hoping to haue had ſtore of good ſtuffe in the ſame; and alſo to reteine his promiſed reward: the which by delaies theſe garbellers ſuſpected. And therevpon one of them maketh ſute to the marchant that he might buy the ſaid garbell, he had his anſwer, that he came not in time, it was ſold to the retaylor: to this the ſaid workeman and his conſortes gaue countenance of their good liking, but withall to couer their abuſe, and to reuenge the breach of the retaylors promiſe, one of them cloſeth with the Marchant, and ſaith: Sir you promiſed vs a reward to take paines in this commoditie, for the true garbelling thereof, the which is perfourmed on our parte, but if you will giue vs xx. s. the garbell ſhall be againe caſt ouer, and thereby we doubt not, but to profit you very much. Whye ſaith the Marchant, my maſters you know my mind, they that pleaſure me, to them I will not be vngratefull.
               Heere 
                     〈◊◊…〉
                   and by regarbling of the garbell, the marchant ſaued v. pound, or more in money; their rewarde was giuen, and the garbell is packed vp, the which the retaylor with ſome gladnes and coſt receiued, knowing nothing of the regarbling thereof, and in lieu of his reward, giueth fewe and cheape wordes of thankes to the Garbellors; whoe commending the ſame in deriſion, leaueth the ſame to

his further and gentle conſideration. By this (beeing one of the leaſt of their bad practiſes) your Lordſhippe and worſhips may ſee the vndue regard, the ſaide Garbeller and workemen doo beare in theſe affaires to their duties, the rather for that there is as yet, no good lawe appointed to hold them therevnto: by theſe alſo we enforme our ſelues (and ſo ſome of vs haue This loſſe may be compared to the Ecco which cannot bee found but yet is ſenſibly heard & knowne.heard it deliuered, by the mouthe of ſome of thoſe miniſters) that the marchants in this citty (if reformation were heerein had by an expert garbeller) might ſaue 2000 poundes yearelie, whereof in this wiſe they are deceitfully defrauded, beſides the harmes the retaylor and the common people do ſuſtaine by their bad practiſes, a great impietie in the ſuffrance therof, the rather for that vnder the colour of garbling, for the health and wealth of the people, the proper owner of ſuch goodes, dooth receiue abuſe within his owne doores. Truelie the queſtion why euery ſuch proprietary of ſuch goods, may not clenſe the ſame, aſwell as to haue an officer therof, hath waightie reaſons on both ſides, but it is out of our purpoſe to diſpute thereof.
               And for further proofe of the ſecond point of our determination; the which is, that the deuiſions nowe vſed, are contrarie to the cauſes, for the which the ſaide Act was conceiued. We ſay as is beforeſaid, That by the impunitie of theſe offences; and from thence many ſhiftes and ſleightes are raunged and deriued, the

which by the weakeneſſe and ignorance of the principall garbeller, is foſtred in the members his workemen, cheeflie by the ſmall account which is made of the accompliſhment of the antient manner of garbelling, the which being miſregarded, theſe mēbers (good fellows, right Honourable, that wil make you to beleeue that flies doo carry pyke-ſtaues, in thoſe countries from whence theſe ſpices doo come) are comforted, contrarie to the fourme and faſhion of this Art, in the retch of the ſaid principall officer, and before his face, ſtrangelie and notablie to defraud him of his dutie, and corrupt theyr whole affaires, to the preiudice of the retaylors, but chieflie of the Marchants; & amongſt many others, this one we thinke meete to haue it remembred for his auaile.
               A Marchant hath a commoditie of Cloues, Maces, Wormeſeed, or ſuch like to bee garbelled, the quantitie is waied, or otherwiſe known to this head garbeller, and founde to bee ſome 600. pound waight, it being clenſed, the good of ſome one of theſe commodities, ariſeth to 300. or 400. pound waight, from which quantitie, theſe members beeing confederates with the Marchants man (who maketh it no ſinne to deceiue the deceiuer) withdraweth the thirde or halfe, hauing ready the like waight of olde garbell. Now this head garbeller, for the leuyeng of his dutie, reuiſiteth the waight aforſaid; then to diſguize him, they will thruſt the olde

and new garbell togither to hold waight, and thereby meaſure and leuie his dutie, according to the good remaining: and the reſt of his dutie is good prize to them, in which ouer-reach, the ſealer likewiſe in his office is as handſomely diſguiſed: the manner howe is vnfit heere to be ſet downe.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 8.
               
                  
                     1 The notable and intollerable deuices of theſe workemen, to beguile the Marchant.
                  
                     2 The meanes how to reforme them.
               
               
                  THeſe inconueniences as is moſt apparant, may well bee preuented, by following the antient manner of Garbelling, aſſociating the ſame with the petitions enſuing, all tending to one vniforme order in garbelling, to the benefit of all: for by diſſorting of the ſaid ſpices from the antient deuiſions; the ſaid workmen in this office, to the great preiudice of all parties, take libertie to packe the commoditie vppe verie corruptlie, and will giue ſuch ſecret marks, either by a knot made on the third, in the bagge made vp, or by A bad practiſe of the workemen againſt the marchant.a ſpot of Inke, that being confederate with another of their friends, who ſhall come to buy the ſame of the marchant, may thereby know how much or how deepe, the beſt ſort doo lie vnder

the ſecond, or worſt ſort, the which is laied vpon purpoſe vpon the top of the bagge, & heerby a man of their intelligence, ſhall take vp the beſt commoditie, and leaue the worſt to the retaylor; yea and pay leſſe for the ſame, then for the remainder: the marchant beleeuing that he holdeth the beſt ſorts ſtil, by reaſon that the beſt of his commodities is laid vppermoſt. Wherein we informe our ſelues, that the marchant loſeth v. pound in the hundreth waight, by their differences in garbelling and putting vp of the ſame. The loſſe runneth not to the benefite of the retaylors, but by the bad handling thereof, his loſſe likewiſe enſueth. Beſides we take that regarbling is intollerable, and falleth out as euil to the retailor, as filtching of the beſt falleth out to the Marchant, albeit the waight bee made vp by a little old garbel, bought of purpoſe (a matter if it be often vſed, for the marchant to looke vnto) all which conſidered, with manye more wherein euery one of vs haue a ſufficient feeling thereof in himſelfe by his owne harme. We ſay that the principall officer, may thinke that theſe abuſes are contrarie to the meaning of the firſte erection of garbelling, and that the good of the Common-wealth heerein, is the lawe of this Note.Art: and that hee nor his, can commit a fault, nor yet reſt from their duties without the hurt of thoſe, whoſe health and benefite is cheefelie conſidered in this art, the which is but a deuiſion of the good from the bad ſpices, and not to

hinder the marchantes ſale or his diſtribution thereof, or the retaylors detriment by ſleightes and practiſes of their owne inuentions, and further if he hadde reaſon of the alteration of anye of theſe ancient ordinances; if theſe were euill eſtabliſhed, and coulde obteine ſuche as are agreeyng with themſelues: yet in reaſon hee is to bring, aſwell the Marchant as the retaylor, in hart and mind to helpe the eſtate therof, and he is not of his owne motion, to intermeddle in the reformation thereof, it being not his priuate affaires: and they all are to ſhewe it to the ſuperiour, whom we know and take you to be, whoſe hands are vnbound, to diſpoſe and to order theſe affaires, beeing more publike then priuate.
               But to growe briefe in this matter alledged, and to ſet foorth ſome reſolutions in ſuch queſtions as may ariſe heerin. And firſt, where it is by ſome marchants; Ignorant in the qualitie of garbell and ſpices (the which ſometime falleth Queſtion.into their handes that expect not for them) alledged, that if the antient deuiſions ſhoulde be vſed, that then they ſhoulde ſell the beſt, and be conſtrained to keepe the other ſortes: as in Nutmegges if they bee deuided into caſe and baile; the caſe may be ſolde and the Bayle ſhall remaine; And therefore they like the ſame to bee doone into one ſorte. Heerevnto we ſaye, and will amende his account in this manner: That if the ſaid marchante haue three bagges Anſwer.
                  
of Nutmegs of ſome 600. waight, firſt ſuppoſe that all the rompes bee taken out, and that the reſt doo way 400. waight, being made into one ſort, worth to be ſold at v. ſhillings the pound, it ariſeth to the ſomme of 100. pounde, the which if afterwardes they bee deuided into caſe and baile, the caſe dooth ariſe to 250 pound The marchant doth not knowe many times what hee dooth ſell.waight, beeing worth ſix ſhillings the pounde, amounteth to 75. pound, and 150. waight of baile remaining, being worth iiii. ſhillings the pound, ariſeth to 30. pound, the whole ſumme being 105. pound. So that it appeareth, that the Marchants gaine is greater by theſe deuiſions, then by one ſort. And it cannot be denied, but the retaylor ſhall know better heereby what he buieth then otherwiſe: and the Marchant what he ſelleth, being diſguized as is aforeſaide, and Note.as is heereafter ſet foorth. And thus much the officer herin could tel the Marchant; with this, that he findeth vpon the ſight of the nutmegs, now ſent from beyond the ſeas, that their factors in thoſe parts care not, if the beſt ſorte of Nutmegs be picked out from the ſecond ſorte, the which they account will ſerue well enough in London, to draw into one ſort; but he commendeth and coloureth theſe euils with a commendable title of expedition, in that one ſort is quicklie doone: wherein his gaine is ſingular, as thus.
               He appointeth three men, being hired at xii. pence the daie a peece, to garbell the ſaide 600.

waight of nurmegs into one ſort, hee taketh as his due xvi. ſhillings. Theſe three men can draw thoſe into that ſort in half a day, and do receiue xviii. pence for their labour, ſo his gaine is cleer xiiii. ſhillings vi. pence, the which if they were dulie garbelled would aske three daies worke, the labour whereof ariſeth to nine. s. wherein it plainelie appeareth, that by paſſing this 600. waight into one ſort, he gaineth xiiii. ſhillings ſix pence, in halfe a day, and by keeping the antient The good of the commonwealth is the lawe of true garbelling.deuiſions, he gaineth but ſix ſhil. in three daies, the which is the cauſe of his expedition: without care either to the welfare of the Marchant, retaylor, or to the people into whoſe hands the ſame doo paſſe. But wee referre it to your Honourable conſideration, to iudge what gaine this expedition bringeth in ſix daies, whē he hath xiiii. ſhillings ſix pence, in a forenoon. The which being by his workemen well noted for recreation ſake, and to try the iudgement of the ſaide principall garbeller for a Dilemma in this expedition, they will ſometime get a heape of ſmall ſtones and laye them by their worke, and themſelues will play the good fellowes and let all alone: wherewith if any diſcontentment doo grow by the maſter garbeller for expedition, then they doo ſhewe theſe ſtones, and aske him if that be no labour to picke them out, and thereby theſe poore men ſometime doo gaine a daies labor or two. Wherin for that theſe workmen haue of themſelues found out and required

certaine orders to bee kepte among themſelues, and accordinglie haue made their requeſt to the ſaid officer, the which is correſpondent to the matter by vs required, therefore we haue cauſed the ſame their orders to be heerein ſet foorth, to the end, that the ſaid cheefe garbeller may be enioyned to allowe thereof, as a meane and for a principall correction of theyr former abuſes and conuerſation, by the repetition whereof, theſe perſons our friends will bee angred (as is very like.)
               But it is not materiall, ſo that they bee bettered, Anger better to be tollerated thā vice.and for that purpoſe, we are their friendes, and anger is better to be tollerated then vice, or ſuch inconueniences as are aforeſaide. But forſomuche as reprehenſion will breede but ſmall reformation heerein: we for that we know that your entent is to embrace the cauſe that runneth to the auaile of the common-wealth, and to ſuppreſſe the contrarye, do ſue to your lordſhippe, that by waie of your decree, confirmed by Act of Common councell, it maye bee perpetuallie and irreuokeablie ordeined, that the auntient and firſte ordinances aforeſayde, may be obſerued and kept, and all other exerciſe of Garbelling to bee aboliſhed. And that inſomuch as the ſaide workemen therein, are fallen from their true labour, and by negligence of their gouernour, doo falſifie their workes, to the hurt of manye, partly for want of a reaſonable ſallerie, the which may bee redreſſed, if the

orders by themſelues contriued and heerein ſette foorth may be granted, beeing ſuch in our opinions, as doo tende to publike profite, aſwell as to the priuate gaine of the ſaide office. That the ſame their ordinances may likewiſe be ratified with this.
               
                  He requireth to vſe men of skil, but he will vnskilfully vſe them. That none doo worke, inthe ſayde office, but able menne and ſuche as haue skill, as the Garbeller himſelfe, by his petition requireth, and to bee by your Honourable aſſent firſt allowed.
               And further, for that the enuie of their dooinges hath expoſed and made the Retaylor; ſubiect to manye miſlikinges with the people, whoe doo buie the ſaide ſpices (for an eaſe in this euill) it maye alſo pleaſe you, to giue your aſſent for the publication and confirmation of theſe ordinances alſo enſuyng; whereby neyther the Marchantes, Retaylors, nor Grocers, beeing Chapmen abroade, nor common people may reenter into any feare, to be abuſed by the enterpriſes of theſe needie workemen, beeing no Winterlinges nor colde-hanlers, of and in the Arte of garbelling: wherein as wee haue The remedies in the
                        •…
                      euils.noted the miſchiefe, ſo wee haue founde out the remedie, by this neceſſarie pathe, beeing accompanied with the auntient order, the which hetherto hathe beene broken vppe and diſturbed, by the myſſe-regarde of the firſte and chiefe Garbeller, whoſe practiſe hath byn and is (more & more) vnder ſundrie pretenſes

to abaſe the credite and authoritie of thoſe antient deuiſions of ſpices, and to gaine partakers to ouerthrowe all that ſtande in his waye, by him taken to ouerreache the abſolute power of handeling the ſaide office in London, to him giuen by your Honors predeceſſors, as he doth by his garbelling in other places, by force of hir maieſties letters pattents to his own purpoſes: and hath indeuoured to poſſeſſe them diuerſlie and their fauours, to the end aforeſaid, and hath preſumed to make lawes in ſome caſes, and in other caſes he craueth the ſame to be eſtabliſhed by an act of common councell. And that alſo it may bee ordeined that his miniſters and workmen vnder him, may take their oathe to obſerue the ſame to their vttermoſte, the which for that they be not contrarie nor preiudiciall to the order of the antient maner of garbelling, but onely doo tend to this end, that we may haue and receiue our ſpices duly deuided and ſo packed vp, or elſe that we may compaſſe our remedie, if thoſe antient deuiſions ſhoulde be falſified or corrupted.
               We therefore haue particularly ſet foorth the true vniformitie in garbelling of euery ſpice in his kind, for the more better and plaine directing of the ſaid workemen, and all other therin. And that in caſe in the execution of theſe ordinances and labour, the ſaide principall officer ſhall not receiue a ſufficient fee, vppon euerye thing garbelled, that then his duty may bee increaſed,

according to ſuch iudgement as himſelfe heeretofore hath required; eſpecially, if the amendment of his rate in the things required as to little, may not be defaulcked out of thinges, that he dooth garbell, for which hee hath too much, as is heereafter declared.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 9.
               
                  
                     1 The true manner of Garbelling of euery particular ſpice, and of their deuiſions.
                  
                     2 That by the marks heerein ſette foorth, euery ſort may be knowne with the partie who put them vppe, and the time.
                  
                     3 The which manner of Garbelling the Grocers doo ſue, to haue confirmed, and expreſlie ſet foorth, by act of common councell.
               
               
                  PEpper of all Spices ought to be garbelled in the ſelfe-ſame nature it firſt came in, whether caſe, callico, halfe barre wet or drie, the Garbeller ought not to alter the quallitie thereof, for feare of deceit; and to garbell it well, it ought to be thus handled by a workeman of skill. Firſt the duſt muſte bee ſifted through a ſiue, that ought to haue ſuch holes, that not onelie the duſt but alſo the grauell muſt go through: that being doone, it ought alſo to paſſe through another ſyue, of ſuch holes that they may bee all

equall, to the end that the ſtalks of the ſaid pepper, may be ſeperatcd from the good pepper: that beeing doone, there remaineth then nothing, but that the garbeller doo fanne out all the light pepper, from the ſaide good pepper. And forſomuch as it is impoſſible for the garbeller (if he reſpect expedition) ſo to fanne, but that he ſhall throw out much ſmall, hard, wrinkled pepper that is good, Therefore hee ought to regarble the ſaide light pepper againe. And that which he findeth to bee ſound, although it be ſmall, yet he ought to put the ſame into the good pepper, and ſo to mingle it, that hee deceiue neither the marchant, nor Grocer, for in ſuch a caſe as this is, many times it reſteth in the diſpoſition of the Garbeller, to pleaſe or diſpleaſe as is before recited. If he ſhould mingle vpon the toppe, or within a little from the top it woulde hinder the ſale of the pepper, peraduenture two pence in a pound: againe if it bee mingled in the midſt, or in the bottome, ſo farre from the ſight of the Grocer, that hee is not able to diſcerne the ſame, then is hee hindered many times two pence in a pound. And therefore to preuent this fault and ſuch like in manie other ſpices, which may be ſo garbled and mingled togither, that the one or the other ſhall be mightilie deceiued. We therfore haue thoght it good, to deuiſe a marke for the workeman, that dooth garbell and put vp marchantes ſpyces: that when he hath made vppe his worke,

the ſame marke with his name, may be ſet vpon the top of the bag, or other veſſell; ſhewing thereby the deuiſion and ſorte therein contained, and the goodnes therof (notwithſtanding the ſeale of the garbeller to be vſed at his pleaſure) the which marke may paſſe with Bonus, melior, optimus, according to the thing garbelled, as thus for an example.
               
                  
                     ✚ 
                     HORTON. the 26 of Marche An̄o 1592
                  
                  Pepper. bo.
                  
                     ✚ 
                     HVXSLEY. the 2 of April An̄o 1592
                  
                  Pepper. me.
                  
                     ✚ 
                     NEALE the 7. of Iuly. Anno. 1592.
                  
                  Pepper op.
                  
                     ✚ HAMBLETON the 16 of Septēber Ano 1592
                  Maces bo.
                  
                     ✚ DENSHEIRE the 8 of Decēber Anō 1592
                  Maces. me.
                  
                     ✚ 
                     WRIGHT the 12 of October Anno 1592.
                  
                  Maces op.
                  
                     ✚ 
                     NVTTINGE the 30 of Auguſt Ano 
                     1592
                  
                  ſynamon bo.
                  
                     ✚ 
                     FREEMAN the 3 of Iune Anno 1592
                  
                  ſynamon me.
                  
                     ✚ 
                     BOMER the 9 of Maye Anno 1592
                  
                  ſynamon. op.
               
               
                  
                  A fit remedy heereby if the retaylor or marchant be at any time deceiued. The which marks may be printed in paper, and euery of the ſaid workemen to carrie his owne marke.
               
                  Cloues.
                  Are a ſweete ſpice, and profitable to garbell, The ſmall cloue as good as the great.and in them there is no great cunning to bee ſhewed by the workemen, but to garbell them cleane, by picking them vpon a Table, and after that the duſt is ſifted out, the ſmall cloue is as good as the biggeſt, and therefore there canne come no great hurt to the Marchant or grocer, if the ſmalleſt be put either in the toppe, bottom or middeſt: only this there reſteth vpon the skil of the ſworne garbeller, to certifie by his marke whether they be wet or drie, that is ſo put vp.
               
               
                  Maces.
                  Are a ſpice that ought to bee deuided by the Garbeller, into three ſeuerall deuiſions, viz: large, myddle, and petit, and to performe this matter, he ought to haue a ſieue of a reaſonable Theſe ſiues and ſuch like are to be prouided by a man of iudgement & skill, that hath beene trained vp in garblingſcantling to ſifte the myddle from the large, and likewiſe a ſieue fit for the purpoſe to take the duſt from the petit. This beeing doone, the ſhelles, nuttes, feminine Maces, and ſuch like ſtuffe beeing taken out, their reſteth a kinde of honeſtie in the ſworne garbeller, that putteth them vppe into the Barrell, bagge, or hogeſhed,

to ſee whether the large maces be all of one like goodneſſe, if the one halfe or part of them bee brighter then the other, by twelue pence or two ſhillings in the pound, and if two ſortes of maces be mingled togither in the marchants houſe before the garbeller doo come vnto the owner thereof, or otherwiſe by himſelfe at the requeſt of the marchant: then in ſuch caſes as this is, he ought to put on his marke according to the goodneſſe thereof. This courſe beeing once taken, it will little preuaile the marchant to deceiue the Grocer, by putting on bright Maces vpon the toppe of his veſſell; againe, by a true marke the marchant ſhall be releeued although they do appeare worſt in ſight, vppon the view of the grocer.
               
               
                  Synamon.
                  Alſo is a ſpice to bee deuided into three ſeuerall ſortes, viz: Large, myddle, and petit, in this kind of Spice there is no great skill to be vſed, only this: that the Garbeller that ſhall garbell it, ought to ſee that amongſt the large Synamon, Synamon blacke, hauing taken ſalt water loſeth his ſubſtance, & otherwiſe it may bee good.there be no midle Synamon, viz: Synamon vnpiped, neither yet any great gouty ſticks or otherwiſe blacke, which if he finde anye, hee ought to breake them in peeces, and to put euerie ſticke in his right place, the middle ſynamon which ſhall come from the large, ought to bee ſo handled, that the garbeller deale not partiallie

betweene the marchante and the grocer; their ought nothing to be taken from that ſorte, but ſo much petit as will paſſe through a ginger ſieue, that being doon, the duſt with the ſtrawes are to be taken from it, by fanning by a workeman of skill. And forſomuch as there are diuers ſorts of Synamon of ſundry goodnes, therefore the skilfull Garbeller, ought to haue this ſpeciall regard, that is, that he after the garbelling of any ſuch ſort, doo ſet on a iuſte and true marke, aſwell profitable to the marchant as to the Grocer.
               
               
                  Nutmegges.
                  Are a ſpice that are to bee deuided into three ſorts, viz. Caſe, Baile, and Rompes: and without a garbeller of iudgement and skill haue the handling thereof, they cannot be truely garbelled as they ought to be, for the benefit of the Marchant, and all thoſe that ſhall buie them. And therfore to performe this true garbelling, they muſt be ſorted and deuided out, euery one from the other according to their goodnes, the caſe nutmegs muſt be full of oile, the baile nutmegges likewiſe muſt conteine ſo much oile in him, that if he be forced betweene the finger & the thumbe, and will not hold, he is then to bee caſt among the Rompes: and for expedition, the workeman muſt ſifte the duſte and peeces from the Rompes and other nutmegges before they deuide them, and that workeman that taketh the charge of their making vp, ought to ſet

a iuſt and a true marke vpon the top of the bag, anſwereable to their goodnes; to the ende that the Grocer may know what he buieth, and with out this order be followed, the marchant ſhall not iuſtlie know what hee ſelleth, nor the Grocer what he buieth.
               
               
                  Ginger.
                  Likewiſe, is a ſpice that is to be deuided into two ſorts, viz. large and petit: in this ſpice there is no great skill to be vſed, conſidering now the manner of his garbelling. Ginger garbelled at Antwerpe, or otherwiſe vngarbled frō by ſouth: the manner of deuiding is all one, for by a ſieue appointed for the purpoſe ginger is ſifted, at the will and pleaſure of him that taketh the ſieue in hand, and aſſoone falleth the good through as Note.the bad, and thereby it lieth in the power of the garbeller, to pleaſe or diſpleaſe whome hee will for a rewarde. In this kinde of ſpice there is no certaintie in garbling; for one while the ſieue is too great, and another while too little, but betweene too great and too little, it cannot be truly garbelled: but after the maner of his garbelling, the one ſort beeing taken from the other, with a few ſtones or ſtrawes or other filth therin contained, it is become clean, good, & wholſome for mans body.
                  But the manner to handle the ſame, is to ſifte out the duſt and lay the ginger vpon a table and to picke the ſame by hand, viz: the large from

the ſmall, and euery raſe of Ginger be it great or The true garbling of ginger, is to picke it by hand vpon a table.ſmall hauing ſubſtance in it, is to bee tearmed large: and contrariwiſe, euery raſe being long or broad wanting ſubſtance, is to be accounted of as petit. This courſe in garbelling of ginger, by a ſworn garbeller being performed, the marchant ſhal benefit more then heertofore he hath doone, by fiue pound vphon the hundreth, as hath beene prooued. And the retailing grocer ſhall bee no more deceiued; and the garbeller ſhall haue his fee (no doubt) anſwerable to his paines taking.
               
               
                  Gawles.
                  Gawles are a commodity for another manner of purpoſe then for mans ſuſtenance, they ſerue for Diers, and otherwiſe to bee vſed, yet notwithſtanding therc is vnder a pretenſed colour of deuiding, ſome care had for the garbelling of them, but not in ſuch manner & forme as they ought to be; expedition in the garbeller is the ouerthrow of the antient deuiſions, as it may appeere in the deuiding of theſe Gaules & other ſpices. Theſe are deuided into two ſorts, but in ſuch manner and order, that it reſteth in the diſpoſition of the Garbeller whom hee will pleaſe or diſpleaſe, no vniformitie in the garbelling of them is vſed at any time; but according to the ſmalnes of the gaule, ſo is there a ſieue appointed, nay rather we ſhould haue ſaide according to the greatneſſe of the owner of them,

ſo is friendſhip offered. But nowe to ſpeake of their true manner of garbelling, there ought to be a ſieue appointed for the purpoſe, and the skilfull ſworn garbeller ought to haue the handling thereof, to ſifte and deuide as the ſieue will giue him leaue: this being doone, there reſteth then nothing, but to take out the ſtones, ſticks, oake apples, and ſuche like, and then they are cleane.
               
               
                  Ryſe.
                  Ryſe is a graine good for mans body, and is to be deuided into two ſorts, viz, large and petite. This commodity hath need of an honeſt, skilfull, and a ſworne garbeller, to ſift and fan, and otherwiſe to ſorte and deuide the badde Ryſe from the good, with ſuch iudgement and skill, that all the good and ſweete Ryſe may bee knowne from the badde and muſtie, and that by the marke he ſhall ſette on, and without a iuſt and a true marke, al men may be deceiued. For the riſe many times may and are oilye, muſtie, Corrupted Ryce.and full of wormes. There is no way better to reforme what hath beene amiſſc in the garbelling of this Ryſe, then firſte to appoint a ſieue of a true ſcantling, to the end to ſort and deuide as is abouſaid.
               
               
                  Annyſeedes.
                  Are a commodity that for the moſt part come filthy and full of duſt and had neede of skilfull

garbellers, otherwiſe through the fouleneſſe of the worke, there paſſeth many good ſeedes thorough their ſieue which are many times lefte among the bad to the great loſſe and hinderance of the grocer. To ſet forth the manner of their deuiſions as they ought to be, is firſt to ſift them cleane from the ſtalkes and other filth: that being done there reſteth behind the greateſt labor which muſt be performed by fanning. And for that the labour thereto belonging is painfull to the workemen, and nothing gainefull; therfore they doo manye times neglect their duties. But to preuent this miſcheefe, there is no waie better then to giue ſuche reaſonable allowance as they may iuſtlie liue by their labour: that being doone, the marchant ſhall haue no good ſeedes left in his garbell, neither the grocer bad ſeedes left in his good. And forſomuch as Anniſeedes come many times euillie coloured, and muſtie, therefore the ſworne Garbeller ought to make known the goodnes, and cleaneſſe of the ſeeds by his marke ſet thereon as aforeſaid; otherwiſe the retaylors Grocers may be deceiued.
               
               
                  Wormeſeedes.
                  Is a drugge that is much vſed for many purpoſes, this commoditie had aſmuch need of a skilfull garbeller as the Nutmegs, and in ſome reſpects more needfull, for Nutmegs are to be deuided by hand vppon a table, and doo require but a little labour in reſpect of harde working,

only this, there is great iudgement and skill to be vſed in their deuiſions: for wormeſeed after that it is ſifted, is to be made cleane by fanning, and that by much labour and paines taking. Of all commodities that are to bee garbelled, the workman deſerueth not his money better then in this, if he garbell as hee ought to doo. That garbeller that ſhall handle this drug ought to be skilfull and iuſt, otherwiſe the marchants, Grocers, and people ſhall bee all deceiued, the Marchant in reſpect of the good ſeedes lefte among the bad; and the grocer & the reſt, by the garbel which they buy among the good. But to preuent the ſame, it lieth in the power of a skilfull garbeller to remedy at his pleaſure, if hee may haue tooles and fee anſwerable to his skill and paines. And heere is a thing to be remembred, to the ſaide workemen and others, that wheras there is alwaies as much and more good ſeedes left in the garbell of wormſeeds then bad ſeeds More good ſeedes left in the garbel, thē bad ſeedes in the good.in the good, and yet many times there are foūd the fourth part garbel, when they haue doone with the beſt in ſuch caſes as this is: wee wiſhe with all our harts, that the marchant might haue the garbell which we receiue among the good, and we the good ſeeds which are to bee found among the garbell, the which miſcheefe muſte be auoided as is before ſaid, and not elſe.
               
               
                  Greines, Almonds, Dates, Seenie, Comminſeed, Turmerick, and ſuch like.
                  
                  
                     
They are to bee garbelled in all fidelitie for the auoiding of deceit. But to ſet downe particularlie howe euery of theſe commodities in their kind ought to be garbelled, were a thing too tedious. But for that there is no better way then the antient manner of Garbelling of ſpices, and the iuſt packing or putting vppe of the ſame in ſuch manner as is aforeſaid, the which may the better be perfourmed, if your Honor and Worſhips doo make choiſe of ſome honeſt manne, skilfull in that Art and action, to reuiſit and ſuruey theſe workes and workemen, and to put vp the ſame as is before remembred. Therfore we pray your Lordſhip, that theſe cauſes maye receiue due hearing, the rather for that we are informed that the Clerke of her Maieſties ſpicerie haue heerein found out the faults, and doo ſearch after conuenient remedies, as is fit.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 10.
               
                  
                     1 The garbellers fee and dutie is ſet foorth.
                  
                     2 His notable gaine by the labour of three men.
                  
                     3 His exaction is intollerable, in that he will not bee contented with the ſmall rates in ſpices, where his labour is great.
               
               
                  FOrſomuche as it maye bee made knowne to all perſons what the Garbellors duetie is, the ſame at large is expreſſed in an act of common councel heerevnto added vpon

purpoſe, and the rather that it maye alſo appeere to all, the exaction doone by the garbeller in exceeding the ſame without warrant. And for that he is not ſatisfied with the antient rates, nor with his owne exactions therein, but ſtill practiſeth to haue a higher rate, it beeing probable that he by the eaſie labour of three men in the weeke, may by the wages he now receyueth, gaine cleerelie fiue pound and vpwardes, all his charges borne. Therefore wee haue particularlie ſet foorth ſome parte of his labours, with diuers reaſons, prouing that he hath ſmall cauſe to find himſelfe agreeued, or to bee tedious to the marchant about his allowances, or to ſue for higher rates, eſteeming it a matter of more indifferencie, that the marchants myght rebate the price of thoſe things wherin the garbeller his labour is little, and his gaine great, and to adde the ſame to ſuch, as his paines are great and his gaines very ſmall. And for proofe heerof we ſay as his workmen in their booke to him promiſed to performe, the which for that purpoſe we haue alſo heerevnto annexed: That in
               
                  Pepper.
                  
                     
                        
                           By the labor of three men he will garbell in one day viii. bagges of pepper from by ſouth, waieng about xx. C. at vi. d. the hundreth after the maieſtrates rate, ariſeth to
                           x. s.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           But his extraordinarie rate is two. s. vpon By exacting vpon pepper, gained his mennes wages, and xii. pence more then his due.euery bag, amounteth to 16, s, out of which ſomme he dooth now allowe his men for their workmanſhip, 7, d, ob, vpon euery bag, the which ariſeth to v, s ſo that his cleer gaine is 11, s, by the day,
                           11. s.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Cloues.
                  
                     
                        
                           He will garbell by the labor of three men C, li, waight in one day, his rate which is allowed is two, d, for the pound, the which ariſeth to 16, s, 8, d out of which ſomme he alloweth his workemen three farthinges for the pound, the which ariſeth to 6, s, and his proper gaines de claro is,
                           10 s. 8. d
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Maces.
                  
                     
                        
                           Likewiſe by the labour of three men he wil garbel in one day 4, C, waight his rate allowed is 2, s, 8, d, the which ariſeth to
                           10. s. 8. d
                        
                        
                           
                              By maces, his mennes wages gained extraordinarie. But his extraordinarie rate is 4, s, vpon euery C, waight, groweth to 16. s out of the which rate hee doth allow his men 16, pence, vpon the C, the which is 5, s, 4, d, ſo his gaines de claro is,
                           10. s. 8. d
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Synamon.
                  
                     
                        
                           Alſo by the labor of 3. men hee will garbell in one day x, C, waight of Synamon, the maieſtraies rate is 16, d, the C, and thereby his due ariſeth to
                           13. s. 4. d
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           But by his extraordinarie rate he receiueth 2, s, 8, d, vpō euery C. waight By Synamō gained hys mens wages, and 5. s. ouer.the which arriſeth to 26, s, 8, d, out of which ſomme, hee alloweth his men x, d, vpon euery C, waight, the which is 8, s, 4, d, and ſo he gaineth,
                           18. s. 4. d
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Nutmegges.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              By Nutmegs gayned 5. ſhil▪ more then the ancient allowance, beſides the ouerplus of his mens wages. Three men will garbell in a daye of this ſpice 6, C, waight and vpwardes, at xii. pence the C, beeing the olde rate ariſeth to vi, s, for his due,
                           6. s.
                        
                        
                           But by his extraordinary rate hee taketh 2, s, 8, d, vpon the C, whereby he raiſeth his dne to 16, ſhil, out of which ſomme his men haue x, pence vpon the hundreth waight. And ſo his gaines is cleerely,
                           11. s.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Ginger.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              By ginger gained his mēs wages, and 9. pence more then his due. Ginger alſo by the labor of his three men he will garbell xxx, C, waight, receiuing for it 6, pence vpon the C, after the maieſtrats rate amoūteth to
                           15. s.
                        
                        
                           His extraordinarie rate is 9, d, vpon the C, waight ariſeth to 22, s, 6, d, out of which ſum hee alloweth his men for workmanſhip 2, d, ob. vppon the C waight, ariſeth to 6, s, 8, d, ſo his gaines de claro is,
                           15. s. 9. d
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Gawles.
                  
                     
                        
                           By the like labor of three men he wil garbell in one day 40 C, waight of Gaules at ſix pence the C, after the maieſtrates rate, ariſeth to,
                           20. s.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           But by his extraordinary rate he doth receiue vpon euery C. waight, viii. d. the which ariſeth to 26. s. 8. d. out of which ſumme hee alloweth his men for workmanſhip 3. d. vppon the 100. waight, groweth to x. s. ſo his gaines is de claro,
                           16 s. 8. d
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Ryſe.
                  
                     
                        
                           In this alſo by the like labour for one daies work wil ariſe for 40. C. waight at 6. d. the hundreth being the maieſtrates rate,
                           20. s.
                        
                        
                           But his extraordinary rate, is 8. d. vpon the C. out of which hee alloweth his men three pence vpon the C. the which is x. s. And his gaine is,
                           16. s. 8. d
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Annyſeedes.
                  
                     
                        
                           In theſe are great labor, yet three men will garbell ten C. waight at 6. pence the C. in one day, the which after the maieſtrates rate is
                           5. s.
                        
                        
                           His extraordinarie rate is viii. d. vpon the C. of which the workemen haue three pence vpon the C. the which is two s. vi d, and his gaine is,
                           4. s. 2 d.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Woormeſeed.
                  
                     
                        
                           Theſe are alwaies verye fowle, yet by the labour of three men, 100 waight, may be garbelled in one day: the due rate is two pence vppon the pound, the which ariſeth to
                           16. s. 8. d
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           Out of which ſomme he alloweth his men three farthings vpon the pound the which ariſeth to ſix ſhillings three pence, and ſo he gaineth,
                           10. s. 5. d
                        
                        
                           Graines,
                           Senie.
                            
                        
                        
                           Almonds.
                           Comminſeed.
                            
                        
                        
                           Dates,
                           Turmerick.
                            
                        
                        
                           In theſe commodities and ſuch like, which are not ſo profitable, but more painfull to be clenſed then manye of the reſt, yet be they neuer ſo fowle, by the labor of three men, in one day he doth gaine all charges borne, aboue
                           4. s.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 11.
               
                  
                     1 That the garbellers petition for reformation to your honor, may be conferred heerewith.
                  
                     2 The garbell need not to be taken from the poſſeſsion of the Marchant, if theſe ordinances be confirmed.
                  
                     3 The manner how theſe ordinances may be briefed, and brought into the forme of lawe and actes of common councel.
               
               
                  FInallie, forſomuch as for want of better iudgement, the principall garbellor, by ſundry petitions laboureth to your Lordeſhip: and we, that the garbel and duſt might be packed, conueied and diſpoſed, according to his conſtitutions:

and wholie to bee drawne from the poſſeſſion of the Marchant. Whereby it is to bee inferred, that he accuſeth and condemneth the marchant and others, to haue dubbed and falſified the labour of his workemen, by mixing the ſame with the thing garbelled. And for his countenance therein, produceth the wordes of the Actes of Common councell before recited, the which we take to be friuolous and not indifferent, yet very ſufficient to make the ſaid garbeller maiſterfull, and a readie meane to hide and colour his owne follies, making the ſame his propoſition and ſubiect to talke of. Therefore, and for the preuenting of that poore help, we haue the rather aduanced theſe old ordinances as aforeſaid to be indifferent, and to quallifie that point of the ſaid Act, in yeelding vp the ſaid garbell and duſt to the chamberlaine, or to any other. For if by your wiſdomes it ſhall bee enacted, that this manner of garbelling before recited, ſhall be obſerued: and that ſuch marks be ſet and made vppon euery ſorts, as is heerein ſet foorth; Then no abuſe can or may ariſe but it may bee knowne, by whome the ſame commeth, wherby remedie may be had accordinglie, neither can any garbell or duſt, be imploied or vſed as the garbeller ſurmiſeth againſte the Marchant and others. And therefore not neceſſarie for him to parte therewith to the garbeller or to any other: but more requiſite to be from them deteined.
               
                  
And nowe for an ende heerein, theſe ſhorte waies and manner of garbling, which wee haue remembred and ſet foorth being obſerued, will bring vs all to an agreement, the which beeing denied or miſregarded, theſe our petitions and reaſons beeing once made knowne, the curſes of thoſe that ſhall ſuffer detriment in theſe affaires, we know cannot light vpon vs, but vpon the Authors of ſuch offenſes. And forſomuche Euery member dooth carry helpe to maintain the body according to his proportion.as the body is preſerued, by reaſon of that proportion, which euery member beareth towards it: ſo it is to be conceiued, that in this myſterie of the Grocerie, beeing compounded of the marchant, warehouſe men, and the retaylors, each member ſhoulde carrie the ſame and like reaſon of proportion, for the ſuſtentation therof, the which cannot be had without the vnitie aforeſaid. The which thing vndoubtedlie will come to paſſe, if theſe ordinances may bee by your wiſdomes with the graue aduiſe of the councellors and cominaltie of this famous Citie, ratified and reduced into fourme of lawe. Whereby euery party to this exerciſe, may bee conſtrained to walke in his vocation. Wherein Al ought to liue for the ſeruice of their prince & countrey.we doo aſſure ourſelues, that you doo care, to direct your wil and works to the ſeruice of god, the Queenes maieſtie and this our country, for whoſe ſeruice we all do liue.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            Heere enſueth the petition and orders, required of the workemen in garbelling of the principall garbeller, for the diſſoluing of ſuch complaintes as were mooued againſt them (as they pretend) the which for that the ſame do conteine many things worthie to be regarded: therefore we haue added the ſame to this diſcourſe, as very pertinent thereto.
            
               IT may pleaſe your worſhip to be informed, that forſomuch as it hath pleaſed you to aduiſe vs the companie of workemen to your office of garbelling, to aſſemble togither, and to ſet downe ſuch matter, as might ſhew the waies & meanes how to remooue the controuerſies, which are oftentimes ſtirred againſte vs, and mooued amongſt our ſelues, and how your Worſhippe may reape more gaine by our common accord, then heeretofore you haue doone. Therefore we haue brieflie ſet downe in articles, the matters of our requeſtes, wherein if it ſhall pleaſe you, to anſwer vs in that mutuall care and conſideration, by vniting and preferring vs, whereby our common gaines may bee multiplied: then wee ſhall not onely thinke our ſelues men altogither of myſerable fortune, to haue ledde our liues in that exerciſe and office, wherby ſuch diſſention and prepoſterous orders are maintained, the which maye bee eaſed and redreſſed,

without hindrance or preiudice vnto your office, but alſo we ſhall be inforced to ſeek our remedie, and complaine to the Citty, or to hir Maieſtie and Councell, for that wee ſhall hold the deniall heerof, & your meaning thereby to be ſuſpected, and purpoſed to holde vs in debate and controuerſie one with another. The which may and will bee auoided, in forme following;
            Inprimis, Omitting to moue your worſhip, for the obtaining of anye priuiledges for your workemen or office (albeit the like is vſed, towardes the workemen of the mint by reaſon of that office) and laieng aſide ſuch benefit as doth appertaine to your office, by not garbelling diuers things, which by vertue of your grant, are to be by vs garbled. And for auoiding of innouation or alteration of any matter to your office appertaining, we onlie beſeech your wor. to grant vnto vs this rate and price, the which we haue ſet downe in certain, vpon ſuch things as are vſuallie garbled by vs, the allowing wherof, will not draw you into ſo great charge, wee working according to the ſame rate, as our working now dooth at xii. pence the day, as is heerafter prooued.
            
               Pepper the bag, 8 d.
               or elſe by the hundred waight, 4 d
               Cloues the C, 6 s. 8 d
               Maces the C, 18 d.
               Wormſeede the hundred, 6 s. 8 d
               Nutmegs deuided into caſe, baile, & romps, the hundred, 2 s.
               
                  
Synamon the C. 12, d
               Graines the C, 4, d
               Ryſe the C, 3, d
               Anniſeedes the C, 6, d
               Comminſeed the C, 6, d
               Turmerick the C, 3, d
               Gawles the C, 3, d
               Senie the C, 2. s, 6, d
               Nutmegs the hundred, the rompes beeing onely taken out, 12, d
               Caſſia fiſtula the C, 12, d
               Colianders the C, 3, d
               Gum arabeck the C, 3, d
               Bayberies the C, 2, d
               Dates the C, 4, d
               Orchall the C, 6, d
               Maſtick the C, 4, d
               Frankenſence the C. 6, d
               Orris the C, 3, d
               Staues acre the C, 3, d
               Gallingall the C, 6, d
               Setwall the C, 6, d
               Long pepper the C, 6, d
               Spignard the C, 12, d
               Ginger the C, 4, d
            
            But for ſuch ſorts of wares as are periſhed, wet rotten or worme eaten, wherein much labour is to bee beſtowed, wee except the rate ſette downe.
            
               The proofe of the gaine heereby.
               The gaines which ſhall or may redounde to you, by the labour of all your woorkemen now employed, and by their labourers aſſociat, by allowing of the ſaide rates required, ariſeth vnto in the yeere, aboue one hundreth poundes, more then you doo now receiue by their work (allowing but xii. pence to each workeman and viii. pence to euery labourer per diem) if they do worke all the yeere; or ratablie for the time of their worke, as by this example it may appeere.
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Three workemen and their labourer, being allowed the wages of iii. s. 8, d. doo garbell ſix bags of pepper, for the which your dutie is xii, s. & your cleer gaines 8, s, 4, d, by the day, the which in the week, your charges defaulked is,
                        2. li. x. s
                     
                     
                        But theſe foure being allowed 8, pence vpon the bagge, will garbell eight bags by the day, for the which they ſhall receiue v. s. 4 pence, and your due therby is cleer gains 10. s. 8 d, the which in the week your charges defaulcked is, three pound 4. s. and ſo your gaine is more in the week, by 14. s. then it was before
                        3. li. 4. s
                     
                  
               
               Thus it appeereth that your workemen ſhall multiplie your gaine, and better their wages, viz: to euery workman ſix pence, and to the labourer two pence by the daye, more than they before receiued, ſo that the labourer ſhall haue x, d, & the workmen 18, d, a peece, by the day.
               Alſo that it may appeere to you, that the gain growing heerby ariſeth not to ſo much by your allowing of this rate, for in this allowance of 8 pence vpon the bag of pepper, ariſeth but to 4 pence more, then was paide for working of the ſame at xii, d, the day, as that it muſt be performed by our dilligence and ſore labor, wherin it may bee you will demand of vs, why wee ſhould not accompliſh that labour for you, vppon that wages of twelue pence the day, as we would and offer to doo, if the rate of viii. pence

vpon the bagge were allowed vnto vs.
               Thervnto our anſwer is, that the firſt & chiefeſt fault is in your ſelfe, for that when ſom ſtore of worke is in hand, you doo appoint vs (your workemen) in ſuche companies, that beeing ſome of vs placed where a monthes worke is; will lengthen and make the ſame ſix weekes, by reaſon, that they knowe that the workes of the reſt of the companies by you appointed, will ſo ſoone bee doone, that they ſhall haue no buſineſſe therein, and heereby ſome doo work, and ſome do play, & diuers other further miſchiefs doo ariſe, the which matter muſt be redreſſed in forme heereafter expreſſed, with your fauourable aſſent or otherwiſe by ſome further aucthoritie.
               The ſecond fault is, that ſome of theſe companies ſo by you appointed, by imbecilitie can doo no better, and oftentimes you doo ioyne with vs new commers, whoſe workes are caſte vpon the others necks, and the laſt and cheefeſt cauſe is for that men of iudgement and skil, can not haue ſuch tooles, as they in truth ought to haue for expedition, the which they will prouide, if accord be made as is decent.
               And forſomuch as theſe miſcheefes & faultes haue produced other inconueniences, aſwell to you as to vs, viz: for that your ſelfe is thereby growne into disfauour with diuers marchantes and grocers, and for your eaſe or fantaſie, you giue out hard words againſt vs, whome neuertheleſſe

you doo imploye; Whereby alſo often times wee are grudged at and diſdained, the which we as no
                     •
                   looking to the ground of theſe imperfections, whereby to ſeeke for better remedie, thinking our ſelues abuſed, returne the ſame againe.
               For the bettering and auoiding of which inconueniences, wee haue agreed amongeſt our ſelues, (if you ſhall pleaſe to yeeld to the ſayde rate required) howe to liue by our worke, in loue and concorde togither, and by what companies, and in what ſorte. Whereby not onelie theſe diſcordes maye bee diſſolued, but your gaine ſhall bee perfourmed to the vttermoſte, and your ſelfe quieted; to our good reporte, and your owne profite, and for the commoditie of all thoſe whoſe buſineſſe wee ſhall take in hand.
            
            
               Our agreement beeing nine workemen with eight Labourers nowe imployed, whoſe number are not to be increaſed, will handle all the buſineſſe as is declared in this manner following.
               
                  
                  
                     The nine Workemen.
                     Horton. Hambleton. Huxſley.
                     Nutting. Neale. Wright.
                     Boomer. Freeman. Denſhire
                     The eight Labourers.
                     Archer. Warner. Phillips. Aire.
                     Harriſon. Chadwicke. Smith. Morris.
                     If the worke ſhal lie in one place, then thus.
                     
                        
                           Horton.
                           Huxſley.
                           Hābletō.
                           Freemā.
                           Dēſhire.
                           Boomer.
                           Neale.
                           wright.
                           Nutting
                           Archer.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     If the worke fall out in two places, then theſe ſhall worke.
                     Horton. Huxſley. Nutting wright. Boomer
                     Neale. Hābletō Dēſhire. Freemā. Archer.
                     If in three places, then thus.
                     Huxſley. Horton. Nutting. Harriſon.
                     Hambleton. Wright. Boomer. Archer.
                     Neale. Denſhire. Freeman. Aire.
                     If the worke ſhal lie in foure places, then thus.
                     Horton. Huxſley. Nutting. Harriſon.
                     Wright. Hambleton. Boomer. Aire.
                     Neale. Warner. Smith. Aire.
                     Freeman. Denſhire. Chadwicke. Phillips.
                  
               
               
                  
Our agreement further is, that the rate wee require being allowed, the ouerplus of the money leuied by the ſaide rate, more then twelue pence the day, by anye companies that labour, ſhall be equallye deuided amongeſt them that labour not.
               Our agreement further is, that if the workemen in one place may be diſpatched by three or foure, or fewer, that then thoſe that ſhall work, to be elected by conſent of all the reſt, who ſhall giue an account to the reſt, of their worke, and value thereof.
               Alſo we agree that one man ſhall bee named and appointed by vs of our ſaid companie, not onely to trauell and to ſee howe and where our worke ſhall fall out, but alſo we agree that euerie of the ſaid companies which ſhall be diſperſed, ſhal be placed and appointed to their work, by the ſaid perſon ſo to be nominated amongſt vs, who ſhall ouerſee our workes in all places.
               Item, we agree that a booke ſhall bee made and kept by him, in the which the ſomme and particulers of our worke ſhall be ſet downe, as well for the preſeruation of your dutie, as for many neceſſarie cauſes to our ſelues apperteyning about our owne gaine.
               Item, we agree euery morning in the time of worke, to repaire to your houſe, for your direction notwithſtanding, and to informe you of the premiſes; the which if you can aduiſe to better, or ſhall diſcerne any fault, then to giue

directions accordinglie.
               The which matters and agreements conſidered, it will plainelie appeere, that the ſame tendeth not to our owne gaine ſo much, as to the credit of the office, our quiet, and your great auaile. And for proofe alſo heereof if need ſhall be, we can and will produce a certificat, requeſt, and petition of the beſt & experteſt marchants, and Grocers in London, teſtifieng and deſiring that the ſame may ſo proceed, for diuers reſons by them vſed, not to be reiected, they finding themſelues agreeued, and do ſurmiſe;
               1 Firſte, that by reaſon of our ſmall wages many of vs doo better the ſame, by imbezelling of their commodities.
               2 Item, That we doo prolong our work, vppon purpoſe to be alwaies occupied, and therby doo trouble their houſes longer then reaſon, to greeue them and to annoy their affaires.
               3 Item, That there is no ouerſeer in that worke, ſo that the Grocers affirme, that many things are badlie handled, and the marchantes doo impute it to vs, but the Grocers doo alledge that we are bribed, to amende our ſmall wages.
               Therefore, and to auoid all ſurmiſes by marchants and Grocers, wee haue further thought it good, to accept it by an oath from the Lorde maior, if theſe our requeſts be allowed and confirmed by authoritie. And the rather, not only to ſhew our true and plaine meaning in your affaires, but cheeflie to draw from you all ſuſpition,

and obiections, which you for want thereof may in any wiſe conceiue againſte theſe our ſaid requeſts howſoeuer. And vppon the ſaide oath taken, wee require to haue in our ſeuerall bonds, to you made, for our true and good dealing, it beeing ſufficient to paſſe our oathes in this behalf, without any bond or other writing.
            
            
               The Oath we meane to take.
               
                  YOu ſhall ſweare that you ſhall well and honeſtlie behaue your ſelfe in the office and action of Garbelling, within the Cittie of London, without ſtealing, imbeazelling, or vnlawfullle, or vnhoneſtlie conueieng away any part of ſuch ſpices as are lefte to your charges, in any Marchants houſe, or elſewhere.
               You ſhall aſmuch as in you ſhall lie, garbell and clenſe all manner of ſpices, drugs, and marchandize iuſtlie, trulie, and indifferently, according to your skill and iudgement, without reſpect of any perſon or perſons whoſoeuer.
               And in theſe & in al other things, that to the office of garbelling apperteineth, during the time of your worke, you ſhall well and truelie behaue your ſelfe, ſo God ſhall helpe you.
               Furthermore our concluſion and requeſt is, that you may be pleaſed to yeeld to our ſaid deſires: and that if heerevnto you can obiect any thing to the contrarie, it may alſo pleaſe you, to

ſet downe in writing, and that with ſpeed, your ſaid obiections, to the end that we may anſwer the ſame: otherwiſe wee truſt you will pardon vs, if wee doo ſue for the cenſure of the Lorde Mayor to be giuen in our ſaide requeſtes, it being more conuenient to allowe of the ſaid rates, then either to reteine ſix men to worke, & three Labourers at a certeine fee by the yeere, and to bind them to execute all the ſaide worke, or otherwiſe to allowe xviii. pence by the daye, for euery daies worke to the workemen, the rather, for that the reſt will not bee diſmiſſed, it beeing their exerciſe, nor they will not willinglye ſubiect themſelues to be appointed to anye places of worke, otherwiſe then by their owne accord and aſſent, as before is deſcribed, and as they haue agreed vppon, to the which agreemente, they doo ſubſcibe their names, and doo require to haue it ratified and confirmed by your worſhip, to whome the office apperteineth as wee thinke. In witneſſe whereof, wee haue cauſed this to bee made, and by vs vnder written the xiiii. day of October, in Anno. 1590.
               Subſcribed.

                     
                        Thomas Horton, gro.
                        Iohn Freeman, grocer.
                        Iohn Neale.
                        William Hambletō, gr.
                        Thomas wright.
                        Richard Huxſley.
                        Iohn Nutting.
                        Iohn Boomer.
                        Robert Warner, grocer.
                        Iohn Harriſon, grocer.
                        Iohn Deuonſhire, Grocer.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            Heere inſueth the Acts of Common Councell before remembred, made in Anno xviii. of King Henry the eight: and in Anno the ſeconde of King Edward the ſixt, concerning the Garbelling of ſpices, drugges, and Marchandize, in London.
            Commune Conſilium tent▪ apud Guildhall Ciuitatis London, vicesſimo ſeptimo, die Februarii, An. Regni Regis Henrici Octaui, xviii. in preſentia.
            
               
                  Adermen.
                  Thome Seymer, Mil▪ Maioris.
                  Iohannis Baker, Recordatoris.
                  Gulihelm. Butler. Millit.
                  Thome Exmew. Millit.
                  Iohannis mundi. Millit.
                  Thome Bauldry. Millit.
                  Iohannis Allin. Millit.
                  Iacobi Spencer.
                  Michaelis Engliſh.
                  Iohannis Rudſtone.
                  Radulphi Doder.
                  Iohannis Hardy.
                  Chriſtopheri Aſcue.
                  Stephani Peacock, & Nicholai Lambert, Vicecomites ciuit. eiuſd. &c.
               
            
            
               
               AT this Common councell the Garbeller of ſpices exhibited a bill, concerning the garbelling of certain ſpices, & other things which then & there was openly red and well vnderſtood, and therevpon agreed and granted, that it ſhoulde bee entered of recorde as it is, and ſo to bee continued, adding therevnto this cauſe of prouiſo.
            Prouided alwaies that all ſuch bagges of pepper being of the waight of two C. or aboue, that ought to be garbelled, and beeing marked with the marke of the hand of Antwerpe, vpon the opening thereof, by the garbeller or his deputie, be found well and truely garbelled, and no refuſe or garbel in effect therin found, aboue the waight of one pound and a halfe; that then and ſo often the ſaide garbeller or his deputie, ſhall nothing aske or require, by reaſon of his ſaid office, of the owner of any of the ſaid bags, for opening of the ſame. And if any thinge bee miſordered by the ſaid Garbeller or his deputy, by reaſon of any partialitie, or othetwiſe in executing The garbeller or his deputie to be puniſhed for not performing their duty.of the ſaide office: that then the reformation thereof, and alſo the penalties to be laid vpon the garbeller or his deputie, to be doone from time to time, by the good diſcretions of the maior and Aldermen for the time beeing, &c.
            
               
               To the right Honorable Lord, the lord Mayor of this Cittie of London, and the Worſhipfull Aldermen, his brethren, and to the deſcreet commons, of this preſent Common counſell aſſembled.
               
                  IN full humble wiſe ſheweth vnto your good Lordſhip and maſterſhips, your Suppliant & Citizen Robert Cooper garbeller. That whereas by Act of Common councell, holden the xvii. day of September, in the 4. yeere of the raigne of our moſt dread Soueraigne Lord that nowe is, K. Henry the eight, it was enacted, That all manner of ſpices, drugges, and other marchandize, after that time to be brought and conueyed from the parts of Flaunders, into this realme of Englande, marked with the marke of Antwerp, or Brudges, called the right hand, ſhould not by the Garbeller be garbelled heere; forſomuch as it was then ſuppoſed, that all manner of ſpices, drugs, and other marchandize, that did bring the ſaide marke verye trulie garbelled and clenſed: by colour whereof, diuers & ſundry marchants, ſithence that time hitherto, haue vſed to bring and conuey, and yet daiely doo, from the ſaid parts into this Realme and Cittie of London, great ſubſtance of ſpices, drugges, and other marchandize, bearing the ſaid mark of the hand, and the ſame heere put to ſale, with

ſpices, drugs, & marchandize, notwithſtanding the ſaid marking, being heere found ful of duſt, fuſſes, filthes, and other garbell not onelye to the great deceite and loſſe of the Kinges liege people, of all degrees, eating and vſing the ſame in meates and drinkes, and otherwiſe, and beſides that manie great complaintes, rumors, and exclamations, haue therevpon enſued, by a great number of perſonnes which haue founde themſelues agreeued in that behalfe. Wherefore it hath pleaſed my L. Maior and my maſters his Brethren, knowing the kings moſt high pleſure in that behalfe, at a court of Aldermen, to admit & authoriſe your ſaide ſuppliant vnto the ſaide office of garbelling, giuing him in commandment, to garbel and clenſe al maner of ſpices, drugs, and marchandiſe, which ought to be garbelled, aſwell thoſe that be marked with the ſaid marke of the right hand, as all other vnmarked or otherwiſe marked, according to which authoritie and commandment, your ſaid ſupp. and officer hath taken vpon him to garbell and hath garbelled amongſt other, all ſuch diuers & ſundry ſpices, drugs, & other marchandiſe marked with the ſaid marke of the right hande, and foūd in them great quantities of duſt, filth, and garbell, which he hath heer in Guildhal redy to be ſhewed. Pleſeth it therfore your good Land maſterſhips, the ſaid deceipts and other the premiſes tenderlye conſidered, to inact, ordeine, and ſtabliſh, nowe at this Common councel, &

by the authoritie of the ſame, that your ſaid ſuppliant and Garbeller, and all other ſucceeding in that roome, within this Cittie, may and ſhal haue all power and authoritie from henceforth duelie, truelye, and indifferentlie, from time to time, to garbell and clenſe all manner of ſpices, drugs, and other marchandize, the particular names whereof heereafter enſue, as well ſuch, and as many of them as bee marked with the marke of the ſaid hande, as all other beeing otherwiſe marked or vnmarked. That is to ſay.
               
                  Pepper, Ginger, Cloues, Maces, Nutmegges, Woormſeed, Galingall, Goome, Setwall, Cynamon, Long pepper, Spignard, Graines, Cominſeeds, Anniſeeds, Frankinſence, Senie, Caſſiae Fiſtula, Almonds, Morriſwax, Gawles, Colianderſced, Bayberries, Dates, Riſe, Maſticke, Turmerick, Orris, Staueſacre, Orchall, and Littmus.
               
               And moreouer to enact and ſtabliſhe that no marchant or marchants, Freeman, or foriner, inhabiting within this Cittie or ſuburbs of the ſame, nee anye marchant ſtranger, from hencefoorth, take vpon him or them, nor any other for them, or in their names, or in the name of any of them, to vtter or ſell, ingroſe or retayle, within this Cittie of London, any manner ſpices, drugs, or other marchandize aforenamed, before that it bee garbelled, tried, and made cleane, by the ſaide garbeller or his deputie or

deputies, for the time being, and ſealed with the ſeale of the ſaid office, as of olde time accuſtomed, whereby it ſhall or may euidentlie appeer to the buiers thereof, good, cleane, perfect, and wholeſome, as well for mans bodie, as otherwiſe to be vſed, vpon forfeiture of loſing of all ſuch ſpices, drugs, and other marchandize, ſo ſould vngarbelled, and vnclenſed, or to the value therof, to the vſe of the Comminaltie of the Cittie, and for euery hundred waight or bags of Spices, drugs, or other marchandize, bought and ſold, contrarie to this ordinance, the ſeller and buier thereof, ſhall forfeit and pay at euery time that they ſo offend forty ſhillings equallie betweene them to be borne and paied, and the ſame money to bee deuided into three partes, (that is to ſay) the one part thereof to the vſe of the Mayor and comminaltie of this Cittie. The ſecònd part to the wardens and fellowſhip of Grocers, and the thirde parte to the taker, that firſt ſhall take, and ſeize any ſuch ſpices, drugs, or other marchandize bought, or ſold, contrarie to this ordinance. And moreouer be it enacted and eſtabliſhed by the authoritie of this Common councell, that it ſhall be lawfull for euery perſon or perſons, vpon due proofe therof made, if any forfeit or forfeitures, as dooth appeere aboue rehearſed, for to bee recouered againſte euery manner of perſon or perſons ſo offending by action of debt, and that it ſhall not bee lawfull for the partie defendant, in no

wiſe to wage the lawe, wherby the partie plaintife, ſhall or may loaſe his ſute, nor yet no protection allowed in that behalfe.
               Prouided alwaies in that behalfe, and bee it further enacted, that the Garbeller his deputie and deputies for the time being, ſhall take, beare, and carrie awaye, and towardes him or them to reteine all manner of garbell and garbels, as duſt, fuſſes, and other filth, that hee or they at any time heereafter ſhall happen to garbell, trie and clenſe, out of all and euery manner drugs and other marchandize, to the intent and purpoſe, that no perſon ſhall eftſoones put, mix, or intermeddle the ſaid garbell into or with any manner of ſpices, drugs, or other marchandize, in auoiding and eſchewing the great ſlaunder and rebukes, that by occaſion of ſuch intermedling might growe and redound vnto your ſaide officer, his deputie or deputies, beeing thereof giltleſſe and innocent. And that the owner of all ſuch duſt, fuſſes, and other filthe, ſhall finde and prouide a bagge or bagges, to beſtowe and put in the ſame garbelles and other filthe, and thereof ſhall take the iuſte and true waight, the ſaide Garbeller his deputie or deputies, ſhall marke vpon the ſaid bagge or bagges, and theron the owner ſhall ſet on his ſeale, and the ſayd bagge or bagges ſo waied, marked, and ſealed, the ſaid Garbeller his deputie or deputies, for the time beeing, ſhall immediatlie at the coſtes of the ſaide owner, carrie and conuey to the

Guildhall in London, there to remaine in ſure keeping, vnder the keyes of the ſaide Garbeller and of the controller of the chamber of London, vnto ſuche time as the owner of euerye ſuch garbell and garbels, ſhall make and deliuer vnto one of the ſaid two officers, or to their deputies a bill obligatorie, wherein they ſhall ſtand bounde vnto the chamberlaine of London for the time being, in ſuch ſomme of monie as by one of the ſaid two officers ſhall be thoght good and reaſonable, that the ſame owner ſhal conuey, or cauſe to bee conueyed the ſaide garbell and garbelles vnto the parts of beyond the ſeas, by a certaine daye to bee limitted, by the ſaide two officers or one of them, and that the owner thereof ſhall pay for houſroome and keping of euery ſuch bagge, one halfe pennie euery weeke, as longe and by all the time thar hee ſhall ſuffer any ſuch bagge to lie and remaine.
               Prouided alſo that if the owner or owners of anye ſuch bagge or bagges of garbell, ſuffer the ſame to be and continue in the ſaide Guildhall, ouer and aboue the ſpace of nine moneths, that then the ſaid bagge or bagges with the garbell to be and remaine there ſtill as goodes forfeited and confiſcate to the vſe of the comminaltie of the Cittie of London, And that the Maior of the ſame citty for the time being within a moneth then next enſuing ſhal appoint and prouide for the ſure conueieng thereof vnto the partes of beyond the ſeas, ther to be ſold to

the moſt aduantage and the money comminge of the ſale to be deliuered to the chamberlaine of London for the time being, to the vſe of the common weale of the ſaid Cittie, and all ſuche garbell, duſt, fuſſes, and other filth, which is tried and clenſed as is aforeſaid, and beeing of no value nor ſubſtance, ſhall bee conueied into Cheape, or into ſome other conuenient place, within this Cittie at the pleaſure and commandement of the Mayor, for the time being, and there to be openly burnt in the ſight of the people, ſo that they maye well ſee and perceiue the good order and iuſtice truelie executed in that behalfe.
            
            
               The Rates and priſes what the garbeller ſhall take for garbelling all manner of Spices, and other things that ought to be garbelled, rated, and priſed, the xiii. of Auguſt, Anno 1526. by the wardens of the grocers in london, and the ſociates, as heereafter dooth enſue.
               
                  
                     
                        The rate of the Maieſtrates.
                        The exaction of the garbeller.
                     
                     
                        Pepper from by ſouth the C.
                        6, d.
                        xii. d.
                     
                     
                        Pepper and Ginger with the marke of Antwerp or Brudges, if it need to bee garbled the C.
                        4. d
                        6. d
                     
                     
                        Cloues not cleane that need to be picked by hand, the pound is
                        2. d.
                         
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        The rate of the Maieſtrates.
                        The exaction of the garbeller.
                     
                     
                        Maſes not garbled, the C. waight, 
                        2. 
                              •
                           , 8. d.
                        4. s.
                     
                     
                        Wormeſeed the li.
                        2. d
                         
                     
                     
                        Nutmegs the hundred,
                        12. d
                        2. s. 8. d
                     
                     
                        Gallingall the C,
                        x, d.
                         
                     
                     
                        Setwall the C,
                        12, d
                         
                     
                     
                        Synamon the C.
                        16, d
                        2. s. 8, d
                     
                     
                        Long pepper the C,
                        16, d
                         
                     
                     
                        Spignard the C,
                        2, s.
                         
                     
                     
                        Graines the C,
                        6, d
                        8. d
                     
                     
                        Almonds the C,
                        6, d
                        8. d
                     
                     
                        Ryſe the C,
                        4, d
                        8. d
                     
                     
                        Anniſeedes the C,
                        6, d
                        12. d
                     
                     
                        Comminſeed the C,
                        6, d
                        8. d
                     
                     
                        Gawles the C,
                        6, d
                        8. d
                     
                     
                        Moreſwax the C,
                        4, d
                         
                     
                     
                        Senie the C,
                        3. s, 4, d
                        4 s.
                     
                     
                        Caſſia fiſtula the C,
                        2, s.
                         
                     
                     
                        Colianders ſeed the C,
                        5, d
                        8, d
                     
                     
                        Gum arabeck the C,
                        4, d
                        8. d
                     
                     
                        Bayberies the C,
                        2, d
                        4. d
                     
                     
                        Dates the C,
                        6, d
                        12, d
                     
                     
                        Turmerick the C,
                        4, d
                        8, d
                     
                     
                        Orchall the C,
                        6, d
                         
                     
                     
                        Litmus the C,
                        3, d
                         
                     
                     
                        Maſtick the C,
                        6, d
                         
                     
                     
                        Frankenſence the C.
                        12, d
                         
                     
                     
                        Orris the C,
                        6, d
                        8. d
                     
                     
                        Staues acre the C,
                        6, d
                        8. d
                     
                  
               
               
                  
But all manner of wares wet with water, rotten or bruſed wherein there is much labor, and long time, that then, as the marchant and the officer can agree for the dooing thereof, and if they cannot agree, that then the wardens of the Grocers for the time beeing, to bee indifferent iudges betweene them.
            
            
               Commune Conſilium tent. apud Guildhall Ciuitatis London, deſimo ſeptimo, die Iunii, Anno. Regni Edwardi Sexti, ſecundo, Coram.
               
                  
                     
                        Iohanne Greſham, Mil. Maioris.
                        Adermen.
                     
                     
                        Robarto Brooke, Ar. Recordatoris
                     
                     
                        Randolpho Warren.
                        Millit.
                     
                     
                        Gulihelmo laxton.
                     
                     
                        Martino Bowes.
                     
                     
                        Iohanne Tolis.
                         
                     
                     
                        Iohanne Wilford.
                         
                     
                     
                        Andrea Iud.
                         
                     
                     
                        Georgio Barne.
                         
                     
                     
                        Gulielmo Locke.
                         
                     
                     
                        Auguſtino Hinde.
                         
                     
                     
                        Richardo Turke.
                         
                     
                     
                        Henriccho goodier.
                         
                     
                     
                        Iohanne lyon.
                         
                     
                     
                        Iohanne ambert,
                         
                     
                     
                        Gulihelmo garrerd.
                         
                     
                     
                        Thome White & Robarto Chartſey.
                        Vicecomites ciuit. eiuſd. &c.
                     
                     
                        Ac maiore parte Comunitatis, Comūis conſilii ciuitatis predict. exiſtente.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  ALſo at this court a bill was deuiſed and drawne, by the learned councell of this Cittie, by the commandement and aſſente of the Lorde Mayor, and Aldermen of the ſame cittie, for and concerning the garbelling and cleanſing of all ſuch ſpices, drugs, wares and marchandiſe, as heeretofore haue vſed or ought to be garbelled or clenſed, within the ſaid cittie and the lyberties thereof, was redde and by the commons preſentlie aſſembled, wel and ripelie conceiued and vnderſtand, and becauſe the ſame and the matter therin contained, vnto them to be good conſonant vnto reaſon, and profitable for the common-weale, for all our ſaid ſouereigne lord the kings ſubiects. It was therefore ordained, enacted, and eſtabliſhed, by the ſaid lord maior and Aldermen, and commons in the ſaid councell aſſembled, and by the aucthoritie of the ſame. That the ſaid bill ſhall be entered and ingroſſed of record, for a good & profitable law, act, and ordinance at all times heerafter, firmelie and inuiolablie to be obſerued, obeied, and kept in euery point, according to the tenor, true meaning, and effect of the ſame; vpon the ſeuerall paines and penalties therein mentioned and conteyned, the tenor of which bill heereafter enſueth.
               
                  
                  WHere by the Acte of Common councell, holden in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the cittie of London, the xx. of Februarie 1526. in the xviii. yeere of the raigne of our late Soueraigne Lord, of moſt worthie memorye Kinge Henrye the eight, before ſir Thomas Seimer knight, then Lord Mayor of the ſaid cittie, and the Aldermen of the ſame, it was amongeſt other things enacted & eſtabliſhed, by the ſaid L. mayor aldermen & cōmons, in the ſame cōmon councell then aſſembled, and by the authority of the ſame, that all kindes of ſortes of ſpices, drugges, and marchandize ſpeciallie recited & perticularlie expreſſed, within the ſame acte whereſoeuer they were garbled, as well thoſe that are marked with the right hande of Antwerp, Brudges, and Roane, as all other marked or vnmarked, & all other which of right ought and of long time then paſt, according to good and antient lawes and ordinanances, in that behalfe made and prouided, had beene accuſtomed to be garbelled within the ſaid Citty, and the liberties thereof, by the common garbeller of ſpices, of the ſame citty, therevnto lawfullie appointed, by the Lord Mayor of the ſaid Cittie, for the time being, before that the ſame ſpices, drugges, and marchandiſe, or anye parcell thereof, were or ſhould be put to ſale, vttered,

or ſold, and that the garbell, fuſſes, and duſt taken, garbelled, and clenſed, out of the ſaid ſpices, drugs, wares, and marchandize, ſhould be brought and conueied by the ſame garbeller to the Guildhall aforeſaid, to be from thence conueied and tranſported within a certeine tyme limited, by the ſaid Act of Common councell, made the xx. day of Februarie, in the ſaid xviii. yeere of the ſaid late king, into the partes beyond the ſeas, and otherwiſe be diſpoſed vpon certeine paines and penalties, in the ſame Acte mentioned and expreſſed, as by the ſame Act it doth and may more fullie appeer vpon record: By the which ſaid act of common councell, or yet by any other like acte concerning the garbelling and clenſing of the ſaid ſpices, drugs, & marchandize, hitherto made and prouided, there is not any certein time limited or appointed, within which the owners and poſſeſſors of ſuch ſpices, drugs, and marchandize, hetherto made and prouided, there is not anye certeine time limitted or appointed, within which the owners & poſſeſſors of ſuch ſpices, drugs, and marchandize, keeping the ſame longe in theyr cuſtodie and poſſeſſion, doo many times by couert, ſecret, and fraudulent waies and meanes, vtter and ſell the ſame, before that it bee ſeene, ſearched, garbelled or clenſed, by the ſaid common garbeller, or his deputie or deputies, to the no little loſſe, dammage, and perrill, of all the buiers and occupiers thereof, for remedie

and reformation whereof:
               Bee it ordered, eſtabliſhed, and enacted, by this preſent common councel, & by the aucthoritie of the ſame, That the ſame former Acte of common councel, made the ſaide xviii. yeere of the reigne of our late ſoueraigne lord K. Henry the viii▪ concerning the garbelling of ſpices, drugs, and marchandiſe, ſhall ſtande, continue, and remaine, in full ſtrength, force, and effect; adding and adioyning therevnto, that if anye perſon or perſons at any time heereafter, do retaine or keep, or cauſe to be kept, in his or their poſſeſſion, or in the poſſeſſion of any other perſon or perſons▪ any manner of bag, cheſt, veſſell, or remnant of any of the ſaide ſpices, drugs, or marchandiſe, what marke or ſeale ſoeuer they are, or any of them ſhall haue or beare vpon thē, and do not cauſe the ſame to be dulie garbelled or ſealed, by the ſaid common garbeller, or his ſufficient deputie or deputies, within the ſpace of 4. months after the bringing of the ſame marchandiſe, into the ſaid citty or the liberties therof, Almonds, Riſe, and dates, alwaies excepted, that then all and euery ſuch perſon or perſons, hauing or keeping in form aforeſaid, any parte or parcell thereof, as it ſhal pleaſe the owners of the ſame to reſerue & keepe for his or their own proper expenſes, in his or their own houſes, being vnder the waight of one quarter of a hundred vngarbeled, and vnclenſed, contrary to the tenor and effect of this preſent Acte and ordinance,

ſhall forfeit and pay or cauſe to be paid, for euery bag, cheſt, veſſell, remnant, and parcell, of all the ſaid ſpices, drugs, and marchandize, except before excepted, ſo beeing vngarbled, and kept by the ſpace of foure monethes, xxvi. s. 8. d. in the name of a paine.
               And further be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that if any cheſt▪ veſſell, bagge, parcel or remnant of Almonds, Riſe, and Dates, bee now or heereafter ſhall be in forme aforeſaide, kept, or reſerued, by the owner or owners, keeper or keepers of the ſame, not garbled & clenſed, by the ſaide garbeller his lawfull deputie or deputies, within halfe a yeer next after the bringing of the ſame Almonds, Riſe, and Dates, into the ſaid Cittie, or liberties thereof, That then euery ſuch perſon & perſons▪ ſhall forfeite and paie for euerie ſuch cheſt, veſſell, and bagge, remnant, and parcell of Almondes, Riſe, and Dates ſo kepte vngarbled, other then ſuche as ſhall be kept for his or their owne neceſſary vſe and expences, within their own houſhold, contrarie to the tenor and effect of this preſent act, and ordinances, xxvi. s. 8. d. in the name of a paine.
               Prouided alwaies, and bee it further enacted by the authoritie aforeſaid, that this preſent act nor any thing therein contained, do not in anie wiſe ſtretch or extend, to the hurt, damage, or greefe of any perſon or perſonnes, for not garbelling or cleanſing, of anye of the ſaide kinde

of ſpices, drugs, and marchandiſe, which nowe are and do remaine in the cuſtodie, and poſſeſſion of any perſon or perſons, of the ſaid Cittie or the liberties of the ſame, within the ſeuerall times before limitted and appointed, for the ſame, ſo alwaies that all and euery ſuch perſon and perſons, now hauing as is aforeſaid, any of the ſaid ſortes of ſpices, drugges, and marchandize, within the ſaid cittie, or the liberties therof, doo cauſe the ſame, and euery part and parcell thereof (excepte as is before excepted) to be garbelled and clenſed by the ſaid Common garbeller or his ſufficient deputie or deputies, within foure moneths now next enſuing, without fraud or further delaie.
               Prouided alſo, and bee it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that if any perſon or perſons at any time or times heereafter, doo vtter or ſell or cauſe to be ſold, or put to ſale, or conuey out of the ſaid cittie, any bag, cheſt, veſſell, parcell, or remnant, of the ſaid ſpices, drugges, or marchandize, being of the cleere value of x. pound, and vpwards, before they or any of them ſhall be garbled, and ſealed by the common garbeller, or by his deputie or deputies, as is aforeſaid, contrarie to the tenor, true meaning, and effect of this preſent act, or of the ſaide former act, That then euery ſuch offender; and offenders, ſhall forfeit for euery ſuch bag, cheſt, veſſell, parcell, and remnant, of the ſpices, drugs, and Marchandize, ten pound ſterling, and not

aboue, and for euerye bagge, cheſt, veſſell, parcell, or remnant of ſpices, drugges, and Marchandize, being vnder the vallue of ten pound, to forfaite ſuch paine and penaltie for the ſame, as is conteined in the ſaide former Act, mentioned or conteined, to the contrarye notwithſtanding.
               And further be it ordained, and enacted, by the ſaid aucthoritie, That if anye perſon or perſons, at any time heereafter, do mingle or mix, or intermeddle any manner of kind, part or parcell of garbell or garbels of the ſpices, drugges, or Marchandize aforeſaid, to the cleane ſpices, drugs, or marchandize, after that the ſame ſpices, drugs, & marchandiſe, or any of them haue beene clenſed and garbelled by the common garbeller, or by his deputie or deputies, to the intent to deceiue any of the kinges liedge people therewith, that then euery ſuch offender, & offenders, ſhall cleerelie loſe and forfeit, al ſuch ſpices, drugges, and marchandiſe, ſo mixed or mingled, and forty ſhillinges more, for euerie ſuch offence, to the vſes and intents heervnder expreſſed.
               Prouided alſo and be it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid; That if anie maner of perſon or perſons, at any time heereafter, doo conuey or bring, or cauſe to bee conueyed or to bee brought, to the ſaid Cittie or the liberties therof, any manner of garbell or garbels, of anie of the ſaid ſpices, drugges, or Marchandiſe, by it

ſelfe, from any of the partes of beyond the ſeas, to the intent to vtter or fell the ſame within the ſaid Cittie or liberties therof, That all & euery perſon or perſons ſo offending, ſhall forfeit and loſe all the ſaid garbell and garbels, and alſo ten pound ſterling, for euery time ſo dooing, and to be employed and deuided as heereafter ſhal be declared.
               Prouided alſo and be it enacted, that all and euery the forfeitures, paines and penalties, aſwel of ſpices, drugges, and marchandize, as of the ſommes of money aboue mentioned and expreſſed within this preſent Acte, or within the ſaid former Act, before, in and by this preſent act, or within the ſaid former act before remembred & confirmed, ſhall at all times from henſe forwarde bee recouered by action of debt, bill, plaint, or information to be commenſed, within any of our ſaid Soueraigne Lord the Kinges Courts within the ſaid Citty of London, in the name of the Chamberlaine of the ſame Citty of London for the time being, wherein none eſſoigne or wager of law ſhal be admitted, and ſhall be emploied, diſtributed and beſtowed, as heereafter is and ſhall be appointed and declared, That is to ſay, the one moitie or halfe deale of euery fuch paine, penaltie, and forfeiture, to be to the vſe of the taker and preſenter of the offender and offenders, and the other moitie to be and remaine to the vſe of the poore, for the time being, maintained and relieued in the new

Hoſpitall in Weſt-ſmithfielde in the ſuburbs of the ſaid citty. And alſo prouided, and be it enacted, that it ſhalbe lawfull at all times hereafter, to and for the Lord Maior and aldermen of the of the ſaid cittie for the time beeing, to cauſe by their diſcretions, all ſuch garbell of the ſaid ſpices, drugs and marchandize, as at anie time herafter ſhall be brought vnto the Guild-hall aforeſaid, according to the tenor, forme, and effect of the ſaid former act, made in the 18. yeare of the raigne of our ſaid late King, which may be lawfullie and conueniently conueied and put to anie good and reaſonable vſe and occupation to bee retained, vttered, ſolde, and ſpent by it ſelfe, vvithin the ſaid cittie, and elſewhere within the realme of England, anie thing vvithin the ſame former act, or anie other act or ordinance mentioned or contained to the contrarie in aniwiſe notvvithſtanding.
               And alſo, be it enacted and ordained by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that in caſe anie perſon or perſons at anie time hereafter, doe, or ſhal refuſe or deny trulie to content or pay to the ſaid garbeller for the time being, or to his ſufficient deputie or deputies, by the lavves and ordinances afore remembred ſhall be due and belong, as it hath beene accuſtomed for the garbelling and ſealing of anie of the ſaid ſpices, drugs, and marchandize: vvhen, and aſſoone as the ſame ſhall be ſo garbelled & ſealed: that then it ſhalbe lawfull for the ſaid Garbeller, his deputie, or deputies,

immediatlie to plucke of and to take away euery ſuch ſeale, ſo by him or them before put to the ſame ſpices, drugs, and marchandize, & that then and from thenſefoorth the ſaid ſpices, drugs, and marchandiſe, and euery parcel therof, ſhall be taken, deemed, and adiudged, as not garbelled, clenſed or ſealed, but remaine and ſtande vnder the danger and penaltie aboue in this preſent act mentioned and expreſſed, anie thing in the ſame act compriſed to the contrary notwithſtanding.
               Prouided alſo, and bee it enacted by the aucthoritie aforeſaid, that if at any time heerafter, any of the ſaid ſpices, drugs, wares, or marchandiſe, which ought to be garbelled and cleanſed as is aforeſaid, be found ſo full of ſtones, ſo wet with water, rotten, bruſed, worme eaten, or otherwiſe full of filthines and vncleane, that they cannot be garbled and clenſed, as is aforeſaid, in ſuche reaſonable and conuenient time and ſpace, as other drugs, ſpices, and marchandiſe of like kinds and ſortes for the moſt part may bee, That then it ſhall be in the ellection of the ſaide Garbeller his deputie or deputies, for the time being, to haue the fee therefore vſed and accuſtomed, or elſe to haue and take for euery ſuch perſon as ſhall worke about euery ſuch Garbelling, for euery whole daies worke, after the rate of viii. d. by the daie.
            
            
               
               The oath of the common Garbeller.
               
                  YOu ſhall ſweare that you ſhall well and lawefullie behaue you in the office of Garbeller, within the cittie of London, without any fauor or partialitie ſhewing to anie perſon, taking reaſonablie for your labour.
               And all the powder or order within the Bales, and of marchandize by you to be garbelled, wholelie yee ſhall bringe or deliuer to the Chamberlaine of this Cittie, for the time beeing, to the intent that the ſaid powder or order after that, ſhal not be mingled in any ſuch marchandize.
               And after that you haue garbled any bale or marchandize, you ſhall marke and ſigne the ſame bale by you garbled, with a marke to the intent that the Common weigher may haue knowledge thereof. And in this and in all other thinges, that to the office of Garbeller apperteineth, you ſhall well and truelie behaue your ſelfe, as God you helpe.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            An Appendix declaring, that forſomuch as the request of the authors, doo lie diſperſed in this booke, and leaſt it ſhould ſeeme to carry abroad, an vnſeruiceable mention of matters therein: therfore they, for a careful refining thereof, haue collected as readie (for ſuch Commiſsioners as may be appointed, or if any ſuch hap to be) for the due examination of the neceſſity of their ſaide petitions, the contents of the ſaid booke, and the breefe of ſuch things, as they do ſue to haue reformed, and to haue paſſed to an Acte of Common councell in London, the rather, for that theſe preſence may beare the better credit, by a conference with ſuch commiſſion, whereby the ſame Art of Garbelling, may be indued with the life of ſome lawe, for the benefit of the Common-wealth.
            
               The briefe Contents of the Booke.
               
                  INprimis, they ſhew that King Henry the ſixt, did giue the office of garbelling of ſpices, to the Lord Mayor and Comminaltie of London for euer, to the end that the ſpices broght

into this realme, ſhould bee made cleane, and the corrupt to bee deuided from the good, for the healthe and good of the ſubiectes of this Realme.
               That therevpon the Marchantes owners of ſuch ſpices, & the Grocers retaylors, of the ſame did at a meeting for that purpoſe, concord and agree vpon the maner of clenſing of ſuch ſpices, and alſo of the ſorts that euery kind of ſuch ſpice ſhould be deuided and made into.
               That by force of this agreemente, certeine Actes were made by the ſaid Lorde Mayor and Comminaltie, whereby the Marchants are inioyned not to ſell any ſpice, before the ſame be garbelled: and the Retaylors Grocers are inioyned, not to alter nor mixe the ſaide ſortes of ſpices, ſo made and garbelled, vppon paine of forfeiture of the ſaid ſpices.
            
            
               The ground of the Abuſes.
               
                  FOrſomuch as in the ſaide actes, the ſaide manner of garbling of the ſaid ſpice, ſo then agreed vpon, nor the ſaide ſortes likewiſe, that the ſame ſpices ſhoulde be deuided and made into, were not expreſſed in the ſaid Acts, nor ſufficientlie recorded in any court, Therefore the Garbeller vnder the Lorde Mayor, garbelleth the ſaid ſpices

as it pleaſeth him: and the retaylors grocers by force of the ſaid actes, are inforced to put the ſame to ſale in ſuch manner, as the ſaid Garbellers doo handle them, and in ſuch ſort:
               That hir maieſtie is deceiued in the goodnes and price of the ſaid ſpice, to a great value in the yeere.
               The marchant and owners before their faces are defrauded and deluded, with their owne goods.
               The Retaylors are diſcredited, and their ſpice in markets and faires are made forfeit, by reaſon of their corruption, and are in the ſaid book at large expreſſed.
               The price is nothing abated.
               And all the people are deceiued.
            
            
               The concluſion of the booke, and the matters therein required, to be enacted and to be for euer obſerued, if it ſhall be ſo thought requiſite by the Committees appointed.
               
                  THat the antient manner of garbelling of ſpices before agreed vpon, may be obſerued, and all others to be reiected.
               That the ſaid antient deuiſions of ſuch ſpices, may bee alſo kept, and the ſame ſo deuided, to bee ſeuerallie put vp.
               That none doo worke but men of skill, in

that office, as is in the ninth Chapter of the ſaid booke ſet foorth, and the ſame perſons to bee nominated and elected, by the companie of Grocers, out of the decaied brethren of that companie, as often as ſuch place ſhall fall void, with one of that companie, to ſuruey the orderlie putting vp, of the ſaide deuiſions with theyr marks.
               That the rates for the common garbeller bee reexamined, and made equall to his paine.
               That the orders deuiſed and ſet forth, by the workemen in that office, and in the booke expreſſed, may be examined, and ſo much thereof allowed them, as tendeth for the better preſeruation of the ſaid goods, and their concord in working in marchants houſes.
            
         
      
   