
      
         
            
            
            
            
            A BANQVET OF DAINTIE CONCEITS.
            Furniſhed with verie delicate and choyſe inuentions, to delight their mindes, who take pleaſure in Muſique, and there-withall to ſing ſweete Ditties, either to the Lute, Bandora, Virginalles, or anie other Inſtrument.
            Publiſhed at the deſire of bothe Honorable and Worſhipfull perſonages, who haue had copies of diuers of the Ditties heerein contained.
            Written by A. M. Seruaunt to the Queenes
moſt excellent Maieſtie.  HONOS ALIT ARTES.
            
               AT LONDON Printed by I. C. for Edwarde White, and are to be ſold at the ſigne of the Gunne, at the little North doore of Paules.
Anno. 1588.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
         
            
            
            To the worſhipfull and his eſpeciall good freend, Maister Richard Topcliffe, Eſquire. A. M. commendeth this ſmall motion of his vnfeigned good will and affection.
(⸫)
            
               
                  IN reſpecte of the manifolde good turnes, and fauourable deedes of freendship, that not onely I, but others, to whom I am ſomewhat beholding, haue receiued at your worshippes handes, albeit my dishabilitie will not permit me to make aunſwerable requitall, yet ſuch is the estimation I make of my duetie, that fayling in that I would, I will remaine ready in any thing I may: not that your worshippe hath any neede of mee or mine, but for I would bee lothe that ingratitude should ſo much inſult vppon me, as neither deedes nor dueties ſhoulde remaine to him, who hath ſo well deſerued. I will therefore containe the mind that poore Irus did, who comming into the Temple of the Goddeſſe Pallas, and ſeeing her to holde a Booke in the one hand, & a Launce in the other, made as great account of her ſecrete vertues, as her outward valliauncie:
 and therefore ſayd, Deſpitefull Pouertie, thou ſhalt not keepe me from honouring Pallas, though thou with-holdeſt me from giuing her Preſents. Euen ſo worshipfull Syr, though the world ſo frowne vpon me, that I cannot as I woulde: yet that poore Talent which God hath lent me (if it were ſuffycient for ſo many courteſies) shall at all times expreſſe, that I am loth to be vnthankfull. I therefore deſire your worshyppe to accept of thys ſlender gift, which meaſured in your wonted freendlie iudgment, I doubt not but shall ſpeede according to my expectation, and the rather, for that there is nothing heerein contayned that may eyther offend the vertuous, or giue any encouragement to the vicious: for if there were any ſuch matters, they shoulde neuer come in your worshippes view.
            Not doubting therefore, but to find your worshyppe as I alwayes haue doone, I committee you to the continuall protection of the Almightie, who defende you from all your enemies, and bleſſe you in remembring the labours of them that haue well deſerued.
            
               Your worſhips poore Freende to commaund.
Anthony Monday.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧To the Gentle and freendlie Reader.
            
               
                  BEfore thou readeſt this ſmall trauaile of mine,
(gentle Reader) I am a little to admoniſh thee, leaſt otherwiſe thou maiſt happen to falout of loue with my Booke, and ſo thinke it not woorthy the reading. Fyrſt, thou art to conſider, that the Ditties heerein contained, are made to ſeuerall ſet Notes, wherein no meaſure of verſe can be obſerued, becauſe the Notes will affoorde no ſuch libertie: for looke how they riſe and fall, in iuſt time and order of Muſique, euen ſo haue I kept courſe therewith in making the Ditties, which will ſeeme very bad ſtuffe in reading, but (I perſwade me) wyll delight thee, when thou ſingeſt any of them to thine Inſtrument. Secondlie, though thou finde them not ſette downe in excellent verſe, as perhaps many are curious in ſifting ſuch matters, yet I am ſure thou ſhalt finde in them ſence ſufficient, and matter woorth the reading: though not fantaſticall, and full of loue quirkes & quiddities, vet ſtored with good admonitions and freendly documents, ſo canſt thou not ſay, that there is neither time not reaſon in them, but if thou marke them wel, thou ſhalt finde both.
            
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
                Laſtly, if any Dittie ſhall chaunce to lympe a little in the Note (as I doo not know that any one of them dooth, becauſe they haue beene tryed by them of iudgment, and thoſe that haue not a little eſteemed of them) yet I pray thee condemne mee not, in that I haue no iote of knowledge in Muſique, but what I haue doone and doo, is onely by the eare: for had I skill in Muſique, they ſhould haue beene farre better then they be. But I thanke God of that which I haue, it is not for euery man to goe to Corinth, therefore I content my ſelfe with that poore Talent which I haue, & which is thine to commaund, ſo thou entertaine my labours with courteſie. Farewell.
            
               Thine to vſe in freendſhip,
A. Munday.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧A Breuiate of the Notes of the Ditties contained in this Booke.
            
               THe firſt Dittie may be ſung after the note of
Les guanto di Hiſpania.
               
               The 2. to Primero.
               
               The 3. to Iohnſons Medley.
               
               The 4. to the Earle of Oxenfords March.
               
               The 5. to Monſieures Allemaigne.
               
               The 6. to the flatte Pauin.
               
               The 7. to Prima viſto.
               
               The 8. to the newe Scottiſh Allemaigne.
               
               The 9. to the high Allemaigne Meaſure.
               
               The 10. to the Spaniſh Pauin.
               
               The 11. to the Venetian Allemaigne.
               
               The 12. to the note of Deeme all my deedes.
               
               The 13. to the Quadrant Pauin.
               
               The 14. to the Olde Allemaigne.
               
               The 15. to the newe Hunt is vp.
               
               The 16. to the Earle of Oxenfords Galliard.
               
               The 17. to Dowlands Galliard.
               
               The 18. to the Counteſſe of Ormonds Galliard.
               
               The 19. to Wigmores Galliard.
               
               The 20. to La vechia Pauin.
               
               The 21. to Mondaies Galliard.
               
               The 22. to Monday his Toy.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Dyttie expreſsing a familiar controuerſie between Wit and Will: wherein Wit mildlie rebuketh the follies of VVill, and ſheweth him
(as in a Glaſſe) the fall of wilfull heads.
            This Dittie may be ſung after the note of a Courtlie Daunce, called Les guanto.
            
            
               WHen I behold the rechles race of youth:
            How Wit and Will doo vainly ſéeme for to cō
               tende,
            about the tried trueth.
            And then againe when I haue pondred well:
            How fraile deſire ſubuerteth Wils deuiſes ſtill
            and reaſon ſaine would quell.
            Good Lord (thinke I) great néede had Wil beware
            Leaſt ſuddame woe his daungers doo prepare.
            
               Wit dooth forecaſt what after ſhall betide:
            But Will bewitcht with too too much of follies charmes,
            
               Wits counſell dooth deride.
            
               Wit ſaith vaine heads are alwaies apt to fall:
            But Wil that ſéekes to build his dwelling in the ayre,
            regardeth not at all.
            He will not heare, the golden meane is beſt:
            And content minds enioy the ſwéeteſt reſt.
            
               Will be warie and that in tune,
            Leaſt had I wiſt happen to late:
            
                Idlenes waſting thy youthfull prime,
            brings beggerlie age to the gate.
            Séeke then for profit while leyſure is lent thée:
            The tunes ſtaies no man, and ſlacknes wil ſhent thée.
            Looke into pleaſure, and thou ſhalt beholde,
            the end of her paſtimes are nothing but paine:
            Looke into profit there maiſt thou be bolde,
            to finde out ſuch ſwéetnes as will be thy gaine.
            It is not brauery that can auaile,
            if needines tie vppe the ſtrings of thy purſſe:
            For if thy ſtate ſéeme once to quaile,
            thy credite will after be alwaies the wurſſe.
            Beauty is vading and will not endure,
            faire Abſolons warning may well ſuffiſe:
            Set not thy fancie on things ſo vnſure,
            for beautie full often hath blamed the wiſe.
            Beautie with charges muſt be maintaind,
            and charges eates déepe where riches is ſcant:
            Then count the coſtes that thou haſt gainde,
            and all thy ſicknes will be but of want.
            Therefore if thou wilt be warned by me,
            according to cloth, ſo cut out thy coate:
            And as thy getting let ſpending ſo be,
            and ſuffer fond yonkers to liue all a-flote.
            Equall thy ſelfe with none of thoſe,
            althought they ſcorne to ſée thée chaunged:
            Thou ſhalt ſit ſmiling at their woes,
            when thou perceiueſt how they haue raunged.
            Shake of their freendſhip, and know them no more
            it is no ſhame to turne to doo well:
            The flatterer eateth a man very ſore,
            yea, to the bare bones as ſome can well tell.
            A freends rebuke farre better is,
            then the ſwéete kiſſe of an enemie.
            
                The one would gladly work thy bliſſe,
            the other thy death, farre contrarie.
            A prouerbe there is both auncient and true,
            while welth will hold out, thou ſhalt haue freends ſtore,
            But money once failing they bid thée adiew,
            they ſcorne then to know thée as they did before.
            Such is now the fréendſhip that this world dooth vſe:
            Truſt not to others leaſt they doo deceiue thée,
            but to thine owne ſelfe, then maiſt thou be bolde,
            Fayreſt lookes flatter, in lurche they will leaue thée,
            good Will leaue the newe fréende, and cleaue to the olde,
            All this hath béene prooued. Will, I tell no newes.
            When thine owne rod hath beaten thée well,
            then wilt thou remember what Wit hath bewraid:
            That better it is in quiet to dwell,
            then climing to fall, and ſo be diſmaid,
            Kéepe thee on the ground, and then thou canſt not fal:
            He that preſumeth aboue his degrée,
            the holy writ telleth, ſhall be brought full lowe,
            And he that is humble, content ſo to be,
            he ſhall be exalted and happy alſo.
            Thus thou ſéeſt humilitie is beſt of all.
            If thou dooſt doubt of that which I ſay,
            Behold the examples full greeuous to ſée:
            The Children of Folly, how they doo decay,
            and as their beginnings, their endings ſo be.
            What is then the cauſe that they doo ſpéede ſo ill?
            Folly firſt bred them, then Daintineſſe lulde them,
            and Idlenes brought them to horror and ſtrife:
            Impietie taught them, and Wilfulneſſe plud them,
            from vertuous delighting to diſſolute life,
            Then their ende to tell, it gréeueth me good Will.
            
            Séeke then by Labour thy ſelfe to maintaine,
            for Labour gets Learning, the chéefeſt of all:
            
                And learning will bée thy profit and gaine,
            Whereby to preferre thée when other things fall.
            Cleaue to this, and then be ſure thou doo
                  〈…〉
               ot ill:
            For nothing is gotten except thou take paine,
            And when thou haſt got it, then kéepe it as well:
            Prouide in an honeſt eſtate to remaine,
            And ſo thou maiſt hazard at all times expell
            Thinke on this, and ſo farewell good gentle Will.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            A Dittie declaring the vncertaintie of our earthly honor, the certaine account that we muſt all make of death: and therefore that we ſhould make our ſelues ready at all times, becauſe we are ignoraunt of our latter howre.
            This Dittie is ſung after a very prettie ſet note, which is called Primero.
            
            
               WHat ſtate ſo ſure, but time ſubuarts?
            what pleaſure that is voide of paine:
            What chéerefull change of former ſmarts,
            but turnes ſtraitwaie to gréefe againe?
            What credite may a man repoſe,
            vppon ſo fraile a clod of clay:
            Which as to daie in ſollace goes,
            to morrowe is brought to earthly bay?
            Thinke O man,
            How thy glaſſe is daily ſette to runne:
            And how thy life ſhall paſſe, when it is doone,
            Thy graue hath then thy glory wun,
            and all thy pompe in cinders laide full lowe:
            
                Take example
            By the fragrant flower in the féeld,
            Which as to daie in brauery to beheld,
            The parching Sun hath ouer-queld,
            O wretched man, euen thou thy ſelfe art ſo.
            Howe then?
            How canſt thou bragge, or canſt thou boaſt,
            How that thou maieſt,
            Or that thou ſhalt
            Enioy thy life vntill to morrow day:
            Thou ſeeſt,
            That death ſubdues the ſtrength of Kings,
            Of high and lowe,
            Of rich and poore,
            And all as one he dooth call awaie.
            Tantara, tantara, tantara,
            Thus dooth the Trompet ſounde:
            The Bell bids prepare a, prepare a, prepare a,
            Your bodies to the ground.
            Euen ſo,
            While we are ſporting, ſporting, ſporting,
            Amidſt our earneſt play:
            Death commeth ſtealing, ſtealing, ſtealing,
            And takes our liues awaie,
            To goe,
            Put on your black aray, for needes you muſt away,
            Vnto your houſe of clay,
            Prepare your conſcience gay, againſt the dreadfull day,
            That you may be.
            Chriſtes choſen flocke and ſheepe,
            Whom he will ſafely keepe,
            Whether you doo wake or ſléepe,
            Then ſhall the helliſh foe,
            Away in terror goe,
            This ioy to ſée.
            
                Remember this, amidſt your bliſſe,
            that Chriſt hath redéemed vs by his blood:
            Then let vs kill, our affections ſo ill,
            to be elected his Seruants good.
            Then ſhall we be ſure, for aye to endure:
            On Gods right hand among the pure.
            When as the ill, againſt their will:
            the endleſſe paine ſhall paſſe vntill.
            God graunt vs feruent conſtancie,
            to auoide ſo great extremitie:
            That by his grace continuallie,
            we may purchaſe heauens felicitie.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               ❧In this Dittie is expreſſed, the ſundry and daily miſhaps that chaunce in Loue: deciphered by him that felt them, to his paine.
            This Ditty is ſung to Iohnſons Medley.
            
               WHen fond deſire, had drawne my mind to Loue:
               Hard was my happe, and fierce the fittes,
               I was enforſt to proue.
               When Beautie gaue her becke,
               and Fancie held me thrall:
               Then Will had conquered Wittes deuiſe,
               Loue had me at her call.
               Quoth Wiſdome ware thy woe,
               thy daunger is at hand:
               Runne not too raſh, be ruld in time,
               leaſt perill thée withſtand.
               Theſe are the ſnares of Loue,
               her doome a laſting ill:
               
                   Her ſleights are nought but thriftleſſe ſhifts,
               for to allure thy will.
               Therefore reſpect, the hard effect,
               that may, thee ſtay,
               When thou wouldſt it reiect.
               Set hatch before, the wilfull doore,
               for blame, and ſhame,
               Keepe ſtill a ſhift in ſtore.
               So ſhalt thou eſpy it, when foes would ſay nay:
               When ſkill dooth deſery it, tis good to obey.
               Sure footing, good booting, the bargaine well made,
               returneth thy trauaile and charges:
               Forewarned hath learned, deceite would inuade,
               when libertie crieth a larges.
               Youths wales are vnſteddy, he runneth on heady,
               and ſcorneth the hazard to ſée:
               Loue leadeth to caring, and often diſpayring.
               wherefore fréend, be warned by mée.
               The child once toucht with paine:
               Will feare the like againe.
               And proouing this too true:
               Willed me bid Loue adiew.
            
            
               ¶But yet alas, this warning would not ſerue:
               for vaine delight had wunne me ſo,
               From Wiſdome I did ſwerue:
               Boldneſſe dyd egge me on,
               the vtmoſt harme to trie:
               Loue had enchaunted me within,
               when ſhe had wunne mine eye.
               Selfe-will perſwaded me,
               the paſſage would be fayre:
               And Dalliaunce fedde my fancie ſo,
               I little paſt for care.
               
                   Such was my venterou
                     •
                   mind,
               built on affections blaze:
               When Wiſdome cryed, I could not heare,
               mine eyes were ſet to gaze.
               My hart was bent, with full conſent,
               to craue, to haue,
               This motion of content.
               For none but ſhe, did pleaſe mine eye,
               Wherefore, I ſwore,
               For her to liue and dye.
               But ſee how it chaunced, fell Fortune did ſcorne me,
               My woes were aduaunced and loue had for lorne me.
               My loouing, in proouing, was turned to hate,
               My ſute and ſeruice diſpiſed:
               Then thought I, how might I, beene warned of late,
               When Wiſdome this platforme diſguiſed.
               I might haue preuented, and ſtayed me contented,
               the daunger was told me before:
               But ſelfe will did leade me, till folly deceiud me,
               but ſo ſhall ſhe neuer doo more.
               Yong heads I wiſh beware:
               Of this deceitfull ſnare.
               Leaſt you as well as I:
               The like miſhap do
                     •
                   try.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            ¶A Dittie, which ſheweth by example of diuers worthy perſonages paſt in auncient time, that neither ſtrength, wit, beautie, riches, or any tranſitory things (wherein worldlings put any confidence) can ſaue them from the ſtroke of Death.
            This Dittie may be ſung to a very gallant note, called the Earle of Oxenfords March.
            
            
               A Diew my former pleaſure,
               for I of force muſt leaue thée:
               I ſee my ſtate is moſt vnſure,
               and thou haſt long deceiude me,
               Time bids me minde my latter end,
               and that I am but clay:
               And euerie howre I doo offend,
               in manie a wicked waie.
               Then farewell ſinne,
               I will beginne.
               To ſorrowe for my wicked life at the laſt,
               and feare to ſinne any more:
               For when I remember all that is paſt,
               my hart dooth bleede therefore.
            
            
               ¶I ſée that valiant Sampſon,
               
               who vaunted of his ſtature:
               His ſtrength hath failde, and he is gone,
               Tyme forſt him yéeld to nature.
               And all the courage he poſſeſt,
               amidſt his flowring dayes:
               
                   When Death did call him home to reſt,
               did vade from him ſtrait waies.
               Then why ſhould I,
               On ſtrength relie?
               Perceiuing that the ſtouteſt hart dooth obay,
               when death dooth ſhew his power:
               And ſo muſt I néedes (as all fleſh) paſſe away,
               for ſtrength is but a flower.
            
            
               ¶I ſée that wiſe King Salomon,
               
               whoſe wiſedome was moſt excellent:
               Among the reſt is dead and gone,
               for all his prudent gouernment.
               And what is he that liueth now,
               in wiſedome moſt profound:
               But Death compelleth him to bow,
               and brings him to the ground:
               If ſtrength then faile?
               And wit dooth quaile.
               Vnwiſe were I once for to think that I might
               eſcape the ſtroke of Death:
               And knowe that there is on the earth no one wight
               but muſt reſigne his breath.
            
            
               ¶I ſée that faire yong Abſolon,
               
               beautie did nought auaile him:
               The welthy Glutton eke is gone,
               his riches could not baile him
               And he that had his Barnes ſo thwal
                     •
                  t,
               and bad his ſoule take reſt:
               In one night from his wealth was rapt,
               and ſo was diſpoſſeſt.
               Thus ſée you plaine:
               It is in vaine.
               
                   To make anie certaine account of this life,
               or in your ſelues to truſt:
               Therefore make you ready to part from this ſtrife,
               for to the earth you muſt.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               ❧A Dittie, deliuering a freendlye admonition to VVomen, to haue care of theyr own eſtates, to ſhunne ſuch vaine occaſions, as oftentimes call theyr good names in queſtion: and after the example of Sara, to order themſelues in all their actions.
(⸪)
            This Dittie is ſung to a pleaſaunt new note, called Mounſieures Allemaigne.
            
            
               LIſt a while faire Ladies,
               your freend dooth heere ſalute you:
               With notes of elder ages,
               whereto he would impute you.
               As nature hath you framed,
               with beautie in your faces:
               He is loth you ſhould be blamed,
               with any cloſe diſgraces.
               But this he wiſheth,
               your vertues may be ſuch:
               As no ill tongue may challenge meanes,
               your credite for to touch.
               
                   For Women once defamed,
               are ſubiect while they liue:
               To euery looſe and light report,
               yong heads of them ſhall giue.
            
            
               ¶Remember good olde Sara,
               
               though ſhe be dead and rotten:
               Shee left a leſſon to all Wiues,
               which ſhould not be forgotten.
               Shée reuerenced her Huſbande,
               and called him her Lord:
               And feared leaſt ſhe ſhould offend,
               either in déede or word.
               She did not like ſome Women,
               her wedded mate deſpiſe:
               But as olde Abraham had her hart
               ſo did he pleaſe her eyes.
               Neither would ſhe cloath her ſelfe
               beyond her Huſbands ſtate:
               As now ſome Women vainly doo,
               and rue if all too late.
            
            
               ¶She did regard her houſhold,
               leaſt any thing ſhould lacke:
               And would not let her Seruants want,
               to lay it on her back.
               She did not gad on goſſipping,
               for ſhe could neuer learne it:
               To ſpend away her Huſbands thrift,
               ſo faſt as he coulde yearne it.
               Nor would ſhe on the Sunday,
               her time ſo vainely ſpend:
               In playting her apparrell on
               till ſeruice were at end.
               
                   Her face was neuer painted,
               her haire laid foorth to view:
               Her ruffes were neuer ſtarched,
               ſuch toyes ſhe neuer knew.
            
            
               ¶And when ſhe lay in child-bed,
               ſhe vſed no ſuch chéere:
               To ſpend ſo larglie on a Feaſt,
               and lacke it all the yeere.
               Such fine and daintie lynnen,
               as now ſome Women vſe:
               And ſuch vaine coſt in banquetting,
               all this to her was newes.
               She cared not for ſuch faſhions,
               as now ſome Women doo:
               That cannot ſée a garment worne,
               but they muſt haue it too.
               She did regard her Huſband,
               and houſhold charge beſide:
               Remembring that ſuch vaine expence,
               woulde greater needes prouide.
            
            
               ¶She ſpent in youth aduiſedly,
               leaſt ſhe in age ſhould want:
               For age hath manie miſeries,
               yet none ſo great as ſcant.
               Beſide ſhe had another minde,
               which manie Women lacke:
               Who iet about in others goods,
               and payment is full ſlacke.
               Wherefore be wiſe faire Women,
               and where theſe follies be:
               It is no ſhame to leaue them off,
               as Sara did you ſée.
               
                   For if you ſtill frequent them,
               your daunger is the more:
               And time will roote your credite vp.
               be well aduiſde therefore.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               ❧A Dittie, wherein may be ſeene by many and ſundry examples, that no man ought to giue ouer-much credite to this fraile and tranſitorie life: but as all other things ſoone vade and decay, ſo the life of man hath no greater aſſuraunce.
(⸪)
            This Dittie is ſung after the note of the flat Pauin, which is playd in Conſorte.
            
            
               WHen I ſometime begin to thinke vpon
               the frailtie of this preſent life:
               Howe ſoone the pompe of man is gone,
               how ſoone his ioyes are chaunged to gréefe.
               Good Lord (think I) what mind hath man,
               to truſt to ſuch a ſtate:
               Which frailtie at the firſt began,
               and knowes no certaine date?
               Now in ioy, then annoy,
               Thus our time we doo deſtroy,
               not minding that we be:
               Like the graſſe, which ſoone dooth paſſe,
               Or as our Image in a glaſſe,
               euen ſo good freends are we.
            
            
               
               ¶Behold how Summer yéerely bloometh foorth,
               the goodlie bloſſomes of the Tree:
               Which waſtfull Winter counteth little woorth,
               and therefore will not ſuffer them to bee.
               And Natures mantell which ſhe ſpread,
               ſo gréene vpon the ground:
               Vpon a ſuddaine wexeth dead,
               that whilome grew full ſound.
               Thus are we, if we ſée,
               To things according as they be,
               for our example left:
               That as they, paſſe away,
               So hath man as little ſtay,
               when courſe hath him bereft.
            
            
               ¶Think on the Ship, that cutteth through ye ſeas,
               and on her ſuddaine ſtate with all:
               Nowe doo the Sailers ride on at their eaſe,
               not fearing what miſchaunce may fall.
               But in a moment then behold,
               when ſwelling flawes doo riſe:
               The Ship is ſplit, their harts were cold,
               and eche for mercie cries.
               Thus ere while, they did ſmile,
               When time their fancies did beguile,
               now, ſwallowed in the déepe:
               Euen ſo we, in health now be,
               Anon, a lumpe of clay (to ſée,)
               thus death on vs dooth créepe.
            
            
               ¶When thou dooſt lay thee dow
                     ••…
                   to take thy reſt.
               and ſleepeſt ſoundly void of care:
               An Image of thy death is there expreſt,
               which ſteales on thée before thou canſt beware.
               
                   What thing ſo ere thou takeſt in hand,
               doo thus thy ſelfe prouide:
               That death dooth at thine elbow ſtand,
               and waites no time or tide.
               Yong or old, be not too bold,
               For life cannot be bought or ſold,
               For fréendſhippe or for fée:
               The Lordly minde, the homely hind
               All fleſh muſt yeeld vnto their kind,
               Death ſpareth no degrée.
            
            
               Then happy is that man (in ſooth) ſay I,
               that can his time ſo well dyrect:
               As at eache howre, he is prepard to dye,
               and fleſhly hope dooth cleane reiect.
               For he that dooth regard the place,
               whence all our comfort ſprings:
               Accounts this earthlie, honor baſe,
               he mindeth heauenly things.
               For there is ioy, without annoy,
               Let vs then ſo our times imploy,
               that there may be our reſt:
               Thus wiſh I all, both great & ſmall,
               To ſuch repentance they may fall,
               to liue among the bleſt.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧A Dittie, wherein is contained a very proper diſcourſe, of a certaine welthy Merchaunt, who forgetting his profite, gaue his mind to pleaſure.
            The Dittie may be ſung after a pleaſant newe note, called Prima viſto.
            
            
               
                   A Merchaunt of great riches dwelt,
               in Surria (as I reade:)
               Whoſe yeerely traffique to the Cair,
               
               full well ſuſfiſde his néede.
               
                   For bringing precious Stones from thence,
               the profit roſe ſo much:
               By his account, vnto himſelfe,
               as very fewe had ſuch.
            
            
               ¶This Merchaunt to giue greater grace,
               to Iewels of ſuch price:
               Compounded with a ſkilfull man,
               both excellent and wiſe.
               To ſette theſe ſtones in fineſt Golde,
               agreeing by the daie:
               Becauſe he ſhould not ſlack his worke,
               a certaine ſumme to pay.
            
            
               ¶This cunning workman euerie daie,
               applied his buſines well:
               And euery night receiu'de his wadge.
               At laſt it ſo befell,
               Vnto the Merchants houſe was brought,
               a goodly Inſtrument:
               Which for the Beauty and the ſound,
               did highly him content.
            
            
               ¶The workeman (as his cuſtome was)
               vnto his buſineſſe came:
               When as the Merchaunt tooke the Harpe,
               and ſhewed him the ſame.
               His ſkill in Muſicke beeing great,
               did take the Inſtrument:
               Demaunding if that he ſhould play,
               the Merchaunt was content.
            
            
               ¶So ſweetly did he play thereon,
               and with ſuch rare delight:
               
                   That thus he waſted foorth the day,
               vntill it was darke night.
               Then for his duetie he dooth call,
               and as much dooth require:
               As if he had applyed his worke,
               ſeruing for dailye hire.
            
            
               ¶The Merchaunt ſaies, he had not wrought
               but played all the day:
               The workman ſaies, you did commaund,
               then I muſt needes obay.
               Your bargaine is for daily wadge,
               all day I haue béene heere:
               And doone what you commaunded me,
               my wadges then is cleere.
            
            
               ¶In breefe, they fell ſo much at ſquare,
               and ſo farre did proceede:
               That by the Iudges of the Towne,
               ſentence muſt be decreed.
               Which went againſt the Merchant flatte,
               and ſo much he muſt pay:
               The workeman, as if he had wrought,
               and laboured all the day.
            
            
               ¶The Merchaunt ſcant digeſted this,
               that he ſo much muſt pay:
               And might haue gotten twiſe ſo much,
               if he had wrought all day.
               His folly nowe he dooth repent,
               and biddes ſuch gaudes farewell:
               He finds more ſwéetneſſe in the Nutte,
               then in the outward ſhell.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            In this Dittie, is ſet downe the morrall iudgment of the great and learned Philoſopher Sendebar, on the ſtorie before paſſed: which will be found, both worth the reading and regarding
            This Dittie may be ſung to the newe Scottiſh Allemaigne.
            
            
               SUch men as betake them to pleaſure and eaſe,
               may ſée by this ſtory what iſſue it brings:
               And noting their folly, they may if they pleaſe,
               contrary their humor, with durable things.
               Forſaking ſuch fondneſſe as dooth them beguile,
               When they ſhould remember their ſoules in meane while:
               To keepe it moſt pure, leaſt ought it defile.
            
            
               ¶Howe great is the number that profite forſake,
               and ſéeke after folly, and vanities vaine?
               What high eſtimation doo worldlings make,
               of toyes and of trifles that cannot remaine?
               And all to winne credite in wanton folkes eyes,
               Whoſe prayſes are counted as death (with the wiſe:)
               Becauſe light coniectures, ſwéete counſell deſpiſe.
            
            
               ¶The Grey-hound that ſwiftly purſuing the Hare,
               receiues his aduanutage, and holdeth her faſt:
               And ſéeing another, dooth after prepare,
               and ſo looſeth both, and labours in waſte.
               So fares it with couetous men now a daies,
               Who gape after all thinges, which promiſe thē praiſe:
               And yet are deceiued by many like waies.
            
            
               
               ¶May not this world be myſerable namde?
               nay, rather our willes moſt wretched and vile?
               That ſée what attempts will make vs be blamde,
               and blindly will let them our fancies beguile.
               But if we remembred how ſhort is our ſtay,
               And that we poſſeſſe, muſt vaniſh away:
               Theſe worldly affections could not vs betray.
            
            
               ¶Where is the good beginning of vs?
               where is our excellent middeſt likewiſe?
               Where may we our perfect end diſcus?
               O man, learne in dealing to be more preciſe.
               For euen on thy birth day, Death dooth embrace thée,
               And all thy life time, at his will doth chace thee:
               And when thou leaſt thinkeſt, then doth he diſplace thée
            
            
               ¶In darkneſſe and in corruption we are borne,
               and when the light of this world we firſt enioy:
               Myſerie dooth compaſſe vs, and holdes vs in ſcorne,
               and cloggeth vs daily with greefe and annoy.
               Th' Elements with heate and cold doo offend vs,
               Diſeaſes oppreſſe vs, till Phiſick doo mend vs:
               And troubles hang on vs, ech howre for to end vs.
            
            
               ¶If we be alone, then ſollemnes killes vs,
               if we be in companie, ſomewhat dooth molleſt vs:
               If we be wealthy, then feare of Théeues ſpilles vs,
               if we be needy, diſpayre dooth areſt vs.
               To die we are loth, or to part from our treaſure,
               To leaue fréends, wife and children, we greeue out of meaſure
               To ſin we are ready, but we repent at leiſure.
            
            
               ¶And what will one man doo for an other?
               but grieue and repine, that his neighbour dooth well?
               
                   For gaine he will cut the throate of his Brother,
               and for preferment his ſoule he will ſell.
               The fooles beares aware the credite of the wiſe,
               Trueth is trode downe by him that telles lyes:
               And ill will for good will is now the worlds guiſe.
            
            
               ¶All vertuous actions are in ſmall account,
               Mercie is dead, and Charitie colde:
               Selfe-loue dooth neighbourly kindneſſe ſurmount,
               and Vſury hurteth both yong and olde.
               Good Lord amend this, when thy will may be,
               And quicken againe true Loue and Charitie:
               For good men are ſicke, theſe diſorders to ſée.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            ¶A Dittie, wherein is contained diuers good and neceſſary documents, which beeing embraced and followed earneſtly, may cauſe a man to ſhunne manie euilles and miſchaunces, that may otherwiſe fall vpon him, ere he can beware.
            This Ditty may be ſung to the high Allemaigne Meaſure, ſinging euery last straine twiſe with the Muſicque.
            
               SOfte fire makes ſweete Mault, they ſay:
               Few words well plaſt, the wiſe will way.
               Time idle ſpent, in trifles vaine:
               Returnes no guerdon for thy paine.
               
                   But time well ſpent, doth profite bring:
               And of good works will honour ſpring.
               Beſtow thy time then in ſuch ſort:
               That vertue may thy déedes ſupport.
               The greater profite thou ſhalt ſée:
               And better fame will goe of thée.
            
            
               ¶In talke be ſober, wiſe and ſadde,
               Faire to thy Freend, kind to the badde.
               And let thy words ſo placed bée:
               As no man may finde fault with thée.
               Nor meddle not in any caſe,
               With matters which thy witte ſurpaſſe.
               With things that not to thée pertaines,
               It folly were to beate thy braines.
               For ſuddaine blame may hap to thee:
               In medling vnaduiſedly.
            
            
               ¶Take heede in any wiſe, I ſay:
               What things thou goeſt about to day.
               That thou to morrow not repent,
               And with thy ſelfe be diſcontent.
               Speake not ſuch words to others blame:
               As afterward may turne thee ſhame.
               To day thou ſpeakeſt and dooſt not care:
               But of to morrow ſtill beware.
               For then thou canſt not call againe,
               What lauiſhly did paſſe thy braine.
            
            
               ¶Kéepe ſecrete cloſely in thy minde:
               Things that thy ſtate and credite binde.
               Beware, if thou doo them diſcloſe:
               To whom and where, for feare of foes.
               
                   Eſpecially of him take heede,
               Whoſe trueth thou dooſt not know in déede.
               For hard it is thy freend to know:
               From him that is a flattering foe.
               And many men in ſhowe are kind,
               Yet worſe then Serpents in their mind.
            
            
               ¶Be not too haſty in thy déedes,
               Of too muſt haſte, oft harme procéedes.
               Be ſober, mute, take good aduiſe:
               For things too much are full of vice.
               With moderation rule thée ſo:
               As thou aſide no way maiſt goe.
               For haſte makes waſte, as proofe dooth ſay:
               And little ſaid, ſoone mend ye may.
               Forecaſt what after may befall:
               So ſhalt thou not be raſhe at all.
            
            
               ¶Haue mind ſtill of thine owne offence:
               Regard thy faults with good pretence.
               Séeke not a moate in one to ſpie:
               Firſt pull the beame out of thine eye.
               And find no fault with any man:
               Except amend thy ſelfe thou can.
               And when thy faults amended be:
               The good that others ſee in thée.
               Will learne them ſo their déedes to frame:
               As they may likewiſe ſcape from blame.
            
            
               ¶Of no man giue thou bad report:
               Backbite not any in thy ſport.
               For words doo wound as déepe as ſwords:
               Which many vſe in ieſting boordes.
               
                   And ſlaunder is a hainous hate:
               Which dooth nought els but ſtirre debate.
               And twixt good freendes makes deadly ſtrife:
               To hazard one anothers life.
               And all this may procéede of thée:
               Except thou wilt aduiſed bée.
            
            
               ¶Beare freendly with thy neighbours fault,
               Remember thou thy ſelfe maiſt halt.
               If he hath ought offended thée:
               Forgiue, as thou the like wouldeſt be.
               And thinke if thou haſt gone awrie:
               Thou for forgiueneſſe muſt apply.
               So with thy neighbours faults doo beare:
               And of thine owne ſtand ſtill in feare.
               Pardon as thou wouldeſt pardoned be:
               So God will pardon him and thee.
            
            
               ¶Be gentle vnto euery wight:
               Let courteſie be thy delight.
               Familiar be with few, I ſay,
               For ſure it is the wiſeſt waie.
               Too much familiaritie,
               May bring thy ſorrowes ſuddainly.
               Therefore keepe gentleneſſe in mind,
               To rich and poore be alwaies kind.
               So pride ſhall neuer conquere thée:
               Which is mans chéefeſt enemie.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A pleaſant Dittie, wherein is deſcribed, what falſehood oftentimes is found in felowſhip, verified by a couetous minded man, who laboured to deceiue his deere freende, but yet deceiued himſelfe in the ende.
            This Dittie may be ſung to the note of the Spaniſh Pauin.
            
            
               
                   TWo freends that had a ſtocke of Corne,
               one daie did part it equally:
               But left it in the Garner ſtill,
               for want of other remedie.
               
                   One of them thought his freende had moſt,
               which cauſed him diſcourteouſly:
               To ſeeke to ſteale it thence,
               not minding fréendly am itie.
            
            
               ¶His freend that not miſtruſted him,
               did walke about his buſines:
               The other to the Garner comes,
               to make aſſur'de his craftineſſe.
               And on his freends heape caſt his cloake,
               leaſt he ſhould miſſe of his deuiſe
               For he that ſteales in the darke,
               may be deceiued twiſe.
            
            
               ¶He being gone, within a while,
               the other partner thether came:
               Who ſéeing his freends cloake on his heape,
               did very kindly take the ſame.
               Thinking his freend had left his Cloake,
               to ſaue his portion from the duſt:
               Therefore he thought again,
               to ſhew his freendſhip iuſt.
            
            
               ¶Quoth he, how kind a fréende haue I,
               that deales with me thus courteouſly?
               His owne Corne héere he leaueth bare,
               and couers mine full gentlie.
               I needes muſt ſhew ſome loue againe,
               vnto ſo good a freend and Brother:
               So he takes of the Cloake,
               and laies it on the other.
            
            
               ¶At night this falſe freend comes againe,
               who with a Théefe compacted had:
               
                   To haue halfe bootie of the Corne,
               I iudge his freendſhip verie bad.
               Becauſe he would deceiue his freend,
               he was content the halfe to loſe:
               They béeing thus agreed,
               the Théefe then with him goes.
            
            
               ¶This falſe freend groped in the darke,
               to find the heape his Cloake lay on:
               And iudging it had béene his fréends,
               became a Theefe vnto his owne.
               Betweene them they conuaied it thence,
               eche to his houſe where he did dwell:
               Thus was the man deceiu'de,
               the Theefe he ſped full well.
            
            
               ¶Next morning both the partners came,
               according as they were agreed:
               Vnto the Garner for their Corne,
               to carry it thence away with ſpéede.
               But when the falſe fréend ſaw the heape,
               and how himſelfe he had deceiu'de:
               He wiſt not what to ſay,
               his witts were nie bereau'de.
            
            
               ¶His partner carried thence his Corne,
               and he went home full heauily:
               Not daring to reueale his harme,
               leaſt all ſhould know his trecherie.
               Sée how deceit deceiu'de himſelfe,
               marke well the practiſe and the end,
               I would the like might hap,
               to euery faithleſſe freend.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧A Dittie, wherein the breuitie of mans life is deſcribed, how ſoone his pompe vaniſheth away, and he brought to his lateſt home.
            This Ditty may be ſung to the Venetian Allemaigne.
            
            
               
                   THe ſtatelie Pine, whoſe braunches ſpreade ſo faire,
               by winde or weather waſted is at length:
               
                   The ſturdie Dake that clymeth in the ayre,
               in time dooth loſe his beautie and his ſtrength.
               The ſayreſt Flower that floriſht as to daie:
               To morrow ſéemeth like the withered haie.
            
            
               ¶So fares it with the preſent ſtate of man,
               whoſe ſhowe of health dooth argue manie yeeres:
               But as his life is likened to a ſpan,
               ſo, ſuddaine ſicknes pulles him from his peeres.
               And where he ſéemde for longer time to daie:
               To morrow lies he as a lumpe of clay.
            
            
               ¶The Infant yong, the milke white aged head,
               the gallant Youth that braueth with the beſt:
               We ſée with earth are quickly ouer-ſpreade,
               and both alike brought to their lateſt reſt.
               As ſoone to market commeth to be ſolde:
               The tender Lambes ſkin, as the Weathers olde.
            
            
               ¶Death is not partiall, as the Prouerbe ſaies,
               the Prince and Peaſant, both with him are one:
               The ſweeteſt face that's painted now a daies,
               and higheſt head ſet forth with pearle and ſtone.
               When he hath brought them to the earthly graue:
               Beare no more reckoning then the pooreſt ſlaue.
            
            
               ¶The wealthy Chuffe, that makes his Gold his God,
               and ſcrapes and ſcratches all the mucke he may:
               And with the world dooth play at euen and od,
               when Death thinks good to take him hence away.
               Hath no more ritches in his winding ſhéete:
               Then the poore ſoule that ſterued in the ſtréete.
            
            
               ¶Vnhappie man that runneth on thy race,
               not minding where thy craſed bones muſt reſt:
               
                   But woe to thée that dooſt forget thy place,
               purchaſt for thée, to liue amongſt the bleſt.
               Spend then thy life in ſuch a good regard:
               That Chriſtes bleſſing may be thy reward.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            A Dittie, diſcourſing the communication betweene Chriſt and the woman of Samaria, that came to drawe water at Iacobs well, according as it is ſette downe in the 4. chapter of Saint Iohn.
(⸪)
            This Dittie may be ſung to the note of Deeme all my deedes.
            
            
               AS Ieſus went to Galilee,
               
               his iourney chaunced ſo:
               Thorow Samaria as he went,
               by Iacobs Well to go.
               Where béeing faint and wearied,
               with labouring on the waie,
               He ſate him downe on Iacobs Well,
               at midde time of the day.
            
            
               ¶Not long had Ieſus ſitten there,
               but (as the text dooth tell:)
               A woman of Samaria came,
               for water to the well.
               
                   His Diſciples were gone for meate,
               leaſt faintneſſe ſhoulde force them ſhrinke:
               When Ieſus to the woman ſaid,
               Woman giue me ſome drinke.
            
            
               ¶How is it (ſaid the woman) then?
               a Iewe thou ſeem'ſt to be:
               How happens it, that thou dooſt thus,
               demaund for drinke of me?
               The Iewes make ſmall account of vs,
               and we eſtéeme them ſo:
               They meddle not with Samaritanes,
               
               I thinke thy ſelfe dooſt know.
            
            
               ¶Said Ieſus then, if thou didſt knowe,
               the gift of God on hie:
               And who he is that aſketh drinke,
               I thinke aſſuredlie,
               Thou wouldeſt haue aſked drinke of him,
               to eaſe thy inward ſtrife:
               And he woulde haue beſtowed on thée,
               the ſwéete water of life.
            
            
               ¶Quoth ſhe, thou nothing haſt to draw,
               the well is déepe likewiſe:
               From whence haſt thou the water of life,
               I cannot well deuiſe.
               Art thou greater then our Father Iacob,
               
               who gaue to vs this well?
               He and his Children dranke thereof,
               and ſo did his Cattell.
            
            
               ¶Quoth Ieſus then, this water héere,
               can no mans thirſting ſlake:
               
                   But who ſo of the water drinks,
               that I to him ſhall take.
               Shall neuer thirſt, but ſhall in him,
               a well of water raiſe:
               Springing vnto eternall life,
               where he ſhall ſee good daies.
            
            
               ¶Sir (ſaid the Woman) giue to me,
               of this ſweete water cléere:
               That I may neuer thirſt againe,
               nor come to draw more heere.
               Then Ieſus thus to her replied,
               Thy Huſband goe and call:
               And then come hether vnto me,
               and anſwer thée I ſhall.
            
            
               ¶I haue no huſbande, Sir (ſaid ſhe)
               Quoth he, Thou ſaieſt well:
               Thou haſt no huſband, but haſt had,
               fiue huſbands I can tell.
               And for the man whom now thou haſt,
               thy huſband is not he:
               I knowe as much as thou haſt ſaid,
               the very certaintie.
            
            
               ¶The Woman then amazed was,
               to heare her fault deſcried:
               Thou art a Prophet, ſir I ſée,
               thus ſhe to him replied.
               Our Fathers worſhipped in this Mount,
               ſo long as they did liue:
               But you ſay at Ieruſalem,
               
               that men ſhould worſhip giue.
            
            
               
               ¶Woman (ſaid Ieſus vnto her,)
               the howre draweth néere:
               When neither at Ieruſalem,
               
               nor in this Mountaine heere.
               Shall you the Father reuerence,
               his worſhippe you abuſe:
               We know our worſhippe, and that life,
               procéedeth of the Iewes.
               
            
            
               ¶But ſure the howre is at hand,
               and nowe it is likewiſe:
               When the true seruaunts of the Lord,
               ſhall with themſelues deuiſe,
               To worſhip him in ſpirit and trueth,
               ſuch worſhip would he haue:
               He is a Spirit, and the trueth,
               like worſhip doth he craue.
            
            
               ¶Then ſaid the woman vnto him;
               I knowe aſſuredly:
               That the Meſsias ſoone ſhall come,
               and Chriſt his name muſt be.
               When he is come, as come he will,
               all things he will reueale:
               And he will tell vs by what waies,
               our actions we muſt deale.
            
            
               ¶Quoth Ieſus vnto her againe,
               take this for certaintie:
               I am Meſsias and that Chriſt,
               
               that talketh heere with thée.
               With that came his Diſciples ſtraite,
               who meruailed much to ſée:
               That he would with the woman talke,
               and ſo familiar bee.
            
            
               
               ¶The Woman left her water pot,
               and to the Cittie ran:
               Where ſhe diſcloſde what Chriſt had ſaid,
               willing them come ſée the man.
               Which when they did, they by this meanes,
               were brought vnto beléefe:
               And he remaind with them two daies,
               to yéeld them more reléefe.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            ¶Of the three wiſe ſentences, which three yong men of the Guarde of King Darius preſented to him. The firſt ſaid: VVine is strongeſt. The ſecond ſaid: The King of ſtrongeſt. The third ſaid: VVomen are strongeſt, but Truth ouercommeth all things.
            
            
               The firſt that ſpake of the ſtrength of VVine, began to prooue his argument firſt as foloweth, according as it is written in the third and fourth Chap. of Eſdras.
               
               Wyne is strongeſt.
               This Ditty may be ſung to the Quadrant Galliard.
               
               
                  O What a thing of ſtrength is wine?
                  of how great power and might?
                  For it deceiueth euery one,
                  that takes therein delight.
                  The minde of King and fatherleſſe:
                  It maketh equall in likeneſſe.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The bond-man and the frée-man bothe,
                  Wine maketh in equality:
                  The poore-man and the welthy wretch,
                  Wine knitteth in affinity.
                  The Lordly péere and homely hind:
                  In Wine but ſlender difference finde.
               
               
                  ¶Wine turneth euerie penſiue thought,
                  to ioy and gladneſſe preſentlie:
                  So that all they which drinke thereof,
                  doo cleane caſt out of memorie.
                  All ſorrow, greefe, debt or diſtreſſe:
                  Wine ſets them in ſuch pleaſantnes.
               
               
                  ¶Wine maketh euery hart ſo ritch,
                  that they forgette immediatly:
                  Their King, their Gouernour, and all,
                  and pleade their owne authoritie.
                  And all their words weigh verie déepe:
                  Till wine haue brought them faſt a ſléepe.
               
               
                  ¶When men are entred in their drink,
                  they haue no minde at all:
                  Of loue to Brethren, fréends or kin,
                  but ſome to weapons fall.
                  But when they are from Wine at laſt:
                  They not remember what hath paſt.
               
               
                  ¶Is not Wine ſtrongeſt now thinke you,
                  that carrieth with it ſuch a might:
                  As forceth men to doo theſe things,
                  without regard of wrong or right?
                  This ſaid, he pauſed for a ſpace:
                  And to the ſecond man gaue place.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               ¶The ſecond man, who ſpake of the ſtrength of the King, after his fellow had ended, beganne to declare his minde.
               The King is ſtrongeſt.
               This Ditty may be ſung to the Maskers Allemaigne, commonly called the olde Allemaigne.
               
               
                  IF Wine be ſtrong, what ſtrength haue men,
                  which rule by land and Sea?
                  And ouer all things in them too,
                  they needes muſt ſtrongeſt be.
                  But yet the King farre ſtronger is,
                  for he dooth rule all men:
                  And all things that he dooth commaunde,
                  they doo fulfill it then.
               
               
                  ¶If he bidde warre amongſt themſelues,
                  they graunt to doo it preſently:
                  Or els againſt their enemies,
                  they goe, and that couragiouſly.
                  They breake downe Mountaines, walles, and Towres,
                  they kill and killed be:
                  And looke what ſpoyles they winne in fight,
                  they bring the King to ſee.
               
               
                  ¶And they that deale not in theſe broyles,
                  but till the earth at home:
                  They ſowe, they reape, and to the King,
                  they bring it as his owne.
                  
                      They one another force to pay,
                  theyr tribute to the King:
                  And looke what he commaundeth them,
                  they doo it euerie thing.
               
               
                  ¶And yet the King is but one man,
                  but if he bidde them kill:
                  They kill: And if he bid them ſpare,
                  they ſpare with right good will.
                  If he bid ſmite, then doo they ſmite,
                  if he bid deſolate.
                  They doo it: and if he bid build,
                  they doo obey it ſtrait.
               
               
                  ¶If he ſay, cut off, they cut off,
                  if he ſay: plant, they plant:
                  And all things els that he commaunde,
                  in them ſhall be no want.
                  Thus all his people and his Realme,
                  one onely man obey:
                  Meane while, he ſitteth, eates and ſléepes,
                  and if he liſt may play.
               
               
                  ¶For theſe doo kéepe him round about,
                  their toyles they ſet apart:
                  And doo what he commaundeth them,
                  they reuerence him in hart.
                  Is not the King ſtrongeſt of all,
                  beeing honored in this ſort?
                  Thus brake he off, and then the third,
                  his ſentence did report.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               Then the third, whoſe ſentence was: that, women were strongeſt, but Trueth ouercommeth all things, and whoſe name was Zerobabell, began to ſpeake as followeth.
               Women are ſtrongeſt: but Trueth ouercommeth all things.
               This Dittie may be ſung after the note of the Queenes Maieſties new Hunt is vp.
               
               
                  IT neither is the mightie King,
                  nor any men beſide:
                  Nor wine that may be ſtrongeſt namde,
                  alas you are too wide.
               
               
                  Who is it that dooth gouerne theſe,
                  and ruleth ore them all:
                  Women they are, and Womens ſtrength,
                  may not be counted ſmall.
               
               
                  The King himſelfe of Woman came,
                  and they that rule the earth:
                  Men of what ſtate ſo euer they be,
                  of Women had their birth.
               
               
                  Yea, they that tooke the paines to plant,
                  the Vines that beare the Wine:
                  They came of Women at the firſt,
                  and vnto them encline.
               
               
                  
                  They make mens garments, and beſide,
                  they make them honorable:
                  No man without a Woman can,
                  long time to liue be able.
               
               
                  They that haue Siluer and Gold at will,
                  or ought that they may déeme:
                  When they faire Women doo behold,
                  more déere they them eſtéeme.
               
               
                  For all thoſe things they doo forſake,
                  to gaze on beauties face:
                  Not weighing any precious thing,
                  faire beautie to embrace.
               
               
                  A man forſakes his Father déere,
                  that kept him all his life:
                  Yea, Kinne and Countrey dooth forgoe,
                  and cleaueth to his wife.
               
               
                  For her he ieoperdeth his life,
                  and dooth great hazards finde
                  He recks not Countrey, Dad nor Dame,
                  ſo he may pleaſe her minde.
               
               
                  By this you plainlie may perceiue,
                  Women ouer you doo ſway:
                  At night you bring them home your hyre,
                  for labouring all the daie,
               
               
                  Manie ſticks not to kill and ſteale,
                  and ſaile vpon the Seas:
                  To bring home booties for their Loues,
                  and glad their mindes to pleaſe.
               
               
                  
                  Manie for Women haue runne mad,
                  and ſo haue ſeru'de in thrall:
                  Yea, ſome haue ſinned and periſhed,
                  and thus (for Women) all.
               
               
                  I graunt the King is great in power,
                  all ſtand of him in awe:
                  Yet Apame the Kings Concubine,
                  not long ſithence I ſawe:
               
               
                  Her ſit on the right hand of the King,
                  and verie pleaſantlie:
                  She tooke the Crowne from off his heade,
                  which he endur'de famlliarlie.
               
               
                  And on her head ſhe put his Crowne,
                  and lifting vp her hande:
                  Therewith ſhe gaue the King a ſtroke,
                  all this I ſtood and ſcande.
               
               
                  And in meane ſeaſon what did he,
                  but on her gaze and looke?
                  And when ſhe laughed, then he laught,
                  ſo well he could her brooke.
               
               
                  But if that ſhe did frowne on him,
                  then would he flatter her:
                  That ſhe might into good conceit,
                  the King againe prefer.
               
               
                  How thinke ye now of Women kinde:
                  are they not ſtrong indeede:
                  The King and Princes lookt apace,
                  as though they were agreed.
               
               
                  
                  But then againe he did beginne,
                  great is the earth (quoth hee)
                  The Heauen hie, the Sunne in courſe,
                  doth paſſe full ſpéedilie.
               
               
                  For in one daie he compaſſeth,
                  the Heauen round about:
                  And turnes againe vnto his place,
                  where he firſt iſſued out.
               
               
                  Is not he great that made theſe things,
                  ſo wonderfull to ſee?
                  Then ſay that Trueth is ſtrongeſt of all,
                  for very Trueth is hee.
               
               
                  All the whole earth dooth call for Trueth,
                  
                  and Heauen bleſſeth it:
                  All things doo ſhake and tremble thereat,
                  it is not falſe one whit.
               
               
                  The Wine, the King, yea Women too,
                  and Men are wicked all:
                  Theyr works are naught, no Trueth in them,
                  they perriſh and they fall.
               
               
                  But Trueth dooth conſtantlie abide,
                  and ſtrongeſt is for euer:
                  She liues and raignes, and euer ſhall,
                  can be confounded neuer.
               
               
                  With her no choyſe of perſon is,
                  ſhe dooth the things are iuſt:
                  From wicked works ſhe dooth abſtaine,
                  men ought in her to truſt.
               
               
                  
                  Her iudgments euermore are ſound,
                  her Maieſtie enſueth:
                  Ouer all ages by her power,
                  Bleſt be the God of Trueth.
               
               
                  Thus brake he off, and then began,
                  the people all to cry:
                  Trueth greateſt is, and ſtrongeſt of all,
                  and Trueth ſhall neuer die.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            A Glaſſe for all men to behold themſelues in, eſpecially ſuch proude and prodigall minded men, and ſuch delicate and daintie women who building on the pride of their beautie, and amiable complexion, thinke ſcorne to become aged, and that their ſweete faces ſhould be wrinckled, or their youthfulnes brought into ſubiection by age.
            
             This Ditty may be ſung to the Earle of Oxenfords Galliard.
            
            
               
            
            
               YOu youthfull heads, whoſe climing mindes,
               doo ſéeke for worldly praiſe:
               Whoſe yong deſires doo ſéeme to ſcorne,
               Olde ages ſlaied waies.
               Beare with ſhe plaine-ſong of my note,
               which is ſo plaine in déede:
               As daintie mindes will ſcant endure,
               ſo harſhe a tale to reade.
            
            
               
               ¶As nature hath endued your ſhapes,
               with exquiſite perfection:
               And giues you choyſe of ſweete delights,
               wherein you haue affection.
               When Time hath runne his courſe in you,
               the ſelfe-ſame Nature ſaies:
               That all theſe daintie toyes muſt die,
               whereof you made your praiſe.
            
            
               ¶Marke how the yeere in courſe doth paſſe,
               note firſt the pleaſant Spring:
               The earth by Nature then affoordes,
               full many a precious thing.
               Of fruits, of flowres, of wholſome hearbes,
               we gather as we pleaſe:
               And all things els we lacke beſide,
               our needfull wants to eaſe.
            
            
               ¶And likewiſe in this pleaſant time,
               we take delight to walke:
               To run and play at barley breake,
               and in our Gardens talke.
               One freend an other dooth inuite,
               they ſeaſt and make good chéere:
               Both rich and poore doo make paſtime,
               at this time of the yéere.
            
            
               ¶But wreakfull Winter drawing on,
               withdraweth theſe delights:
               And robbes vs of them one by one,
               as toyes and trifling ſights.
               The Seith cuttes downe the goodlie graſſe,
               that grew ſo greene to day:
               And all the ſwéete and pleaſant flowers,
               are changed then to hay.
            
            
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               ¶The Trées that bragged in their leaues,
               the bitter blaſts doo bight:
               And chaunge them from their goodly ſtate,
               to olde and withered plight.
               And they that flocked to the Féeldes,
               when Summer was ſo braue:
               Nowe cloſelie creepe about the fire,
               for Winter warmth will haue.
            
            
               ¶Compare we now the yéerely chaunge,
               with mans appointed race:
               Who in the Aprill of his age,
               greene humours dooth embrace.
               And as Maie flowers glad the eye,
               ſo in his youthfull time:
               Man compaſſeth a world of ioyes,
               whereto his though is doo clime.
            
            
               ¶Behold likewiſe Dame Beauties gyrles,
               whoſe daintie mindes are ſuch:
               As not the Sun-ſhine nor the wind,
               muſt their faire faces touch.
               Theyr Maſkes, their Fannes, and all the toyes,
               that wanton heads can craue:
               To maintaine Beautie in her pride,
               theſe prancking Dames muſt haue.
            
            
               ¶But elder yeeres approching on,
               a little euery daie:
               Their daintie Beautie dooth decline,
               and vaniſheth away.
               And as colde Winter chaſeth hence,
               the pleaſant Summer daies:
               So withered Age encountreth Youth,
               amidſt his wanton waies.
            
            
               
               ¶You that thinke ſcorne of auncient age,
               and hold him in contempt:
               To make of Beautie ſuch a price,
               and to vaine thoughts are bent.
               Remember Nature yéelds to courſe,
               and courſe his race will haue:
               From the firſt howre of your byrth,
               vntill you come to graue.
            
            
               ¶Age is an honour vnto them,
               that liue to ſée the ſame:
               And none but vaine and fooliſh heads,
               will blot olde Age with blame.
               Who oftentimes are ſoone cut off:
               and not ſo happy bleſt:
               To ſee the dayes their Fathers did,
               before they went to reſt.
            
            
               ¶Thriſe happy they that ſpend their youth,
               in good and vertuous wiſe:
               Forſaking all ſuch vaine deſires,
               as wanton heads ſurmiſe.
               And wholie doo direct themſelues,
               vnto his will that made them:
               Then Folly neuer can haue power,
               from vertue to diſſwade them.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A Ditty, wherin is expreſſed a notable example of a ſlothfull man, who wilfully ſuffered himſelfe to be robbed and dyſpoyled of his goods by ſlothfulnes, which otherwiſe he might very well haue ſaued.
            This Dittie may be ſung to Dowlands Galliard.
            
            
               
            
            
                IT chaunced on a time, that a lewde Theefe:
               Did enter in a mans houſe for ſome reléefe.
               Where ſéeking buſilie what he might finde:
               At length he found ſuch things as pleaſde his minde.
               Sorting them earneſtly what he did lacke:
               At laſt of all the beſt he made a packe.
            
            
               
               ¶The good man of the houſe lay in his Bedde,
               And heard how faſt his goods abroade were ſpread.
               He thought to let the Théefe take his owne pleaſure,
               And for to fill his bagge at his owne leyſure.
               And when he ſuddainly ſhould packe away:
               Then would he manfullie cauſe him to ſtay.
            
            
               ¶For (quoth he) if I ſhould now goe and fray him:
               He might eſcape away, and I not ſtay him.
               I will therefore ſuffer him yet for a while:
               And when he thinketh leaſt, will him beguile.
               As he lay thinking thus the Théefe to keepe:
               He quite forgot himſelfe, and fell a ſleepe.
            
            
               ¶The Théefe had filled his bagge to his content:
               Which caſting on his backe, away he went.
               The man at laſt awakt, and then did ſée:
               His Cheſts were broken vp, and left all emptie.
               And his houſe robbed cleane in euery place:
               He ſate him downe and ſight in heauie caſe.
            
            
               ¶Quoth he, I wretched man might this haue eaſed:
               And might haue ſtaied the Théefe, if I had pleaſed.
               For when I heard the noyſe, if I had haſted:
               I might haue ſau'de my goods, which nowe are waſted.
               But thinking to deceiue and take him tardie:
               I haue deceiu'de my ſelfe through mine owne follie.
            
            
               ¶By this we may perceiue how good it is:
               To take time while time laſtes, leaſt we doo miſſe.
               In driuing off our time we may repent vs:
               When our owne rod worthily commeth to ſhent vs.
               Therefore be warie, and vſe time well:
               Elſe may it to you as to this man befell:
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A Dittie, wherein may be diſcerned the troubleſome daungers, & vneaſie paſſages in this world: exampled by a very proper diſcourſe of a Trauailer in his iourney, howe many and ſundry miſchaunces happened vnto him.
             This Dittie may be ſung to the Counteſſe of Ormonds Galliard.
            
            
               
            
            
               A Certaine yong man, as I reade,
               that trauelled on his way:
               
                   On ſuch affayres and buſineſſe,
               as his occaſions lay,
               Paſſing through waſte and deſart ſoyles,
               which drew his mind in ſadneſſe:
               At laſt he ſpied a pleaſant plaine,
               which gaue ſome cauſe of gladneſſe.
            
            
               ¶Walking along this pleaſant plaine,
               more merrie then before:
               Feeding his eyes with pleaſant ſighes,
               whereof this place had ſtore.
               At laſt, on ſuddaine he eſpyed,
               foure Lyons very fiercelie:
               Preparde themſelues to runne at him,
               which he did brooke but ſcarcelie.
            
            
               ¶He ſeeing refuge on no ſide,
               his life in daungerous plight:
               Did take himſelfe vnto his legges,
               to ſhun them if he might.
               But well he knewe that running long,
               his ſtrength perforce muſt fayle him:
               And then his rauenous enemies,
               might eaſilie aſſayle him.
            
            
               ¶He thought it better (if he could)
               ſome where in ſecrete hid him:
               So running on, he ſawe a place,
               whereof he did prouide him.
               A Well beſette with little twigges,
               which catching hold vpon:
               He thought to hang there by the hands,
               vntill the Beaſtes were gone.
            
            
               
               ¶So caſting both his legges abroade,
               on either ſide the Well,
               Where beſt he might ſuſtaine himſelfe,
               what happe ſo euer fell.
               With hands and feete ſuch ſhift he made,
               as well he could not fall:
               Nor yet the Lyons if they came,
               might come at him at all.
            
            
               ¶The Lions hauing loſt the fight,
               of this perplexed man:
               Followed no more, but to the woods,
               againe they ſwiftly ran.
               He looking downe into the Well,
               a hideous Dragon ſawe:
               With yawning mouth waighting his fall,
               to glutte his greedie mawe.
            
            
               ¶The yong man nowe more fearefull was,
               then at his firſt miſhappe:
               Perceiuing where he lookt for ayde,
               he found the doubtful'ſt trappe.
               If he ſhould fall, the Dragon ſtoode,
               at hand for to receiue him:
               The Lyons were without (he thought)
               of life for to bereaue him.
            
            
               ¶In this ſo great extremitie,
               he wiſt not what to doo:
               Séeing his death before his eyes,
               and by ſuch tyrants too.
               Beſides, there had he hung ſo long,
               and in ſuch greeuous paine:
               His hands could hardly longer time,
               his heauie weight ſuſtaine.
            
            
               
               ¶But as we know that life is ſweete,
               and lothe we are to leaue it:
               So this poore ſoule was very lothe,
               theſe rauenous beaſts ſhould reaue it.
               Which made him raiſe himſelfe aloft,
               deſiring long to ſée:
               Whether the Lyons yet were gone,
               or ſhould his Butchers be.
            
            
               ¶He ſawe them gone, but then alas,
               a newe miſhappe began.
               Threatning more daunger and diſtreſſe,
               to this poore wretched man.
               For looking out, he did behold,
               two other Beaſts were by:
               The one was white, the other blacke,
               now thought he ſure to die.
            
            
               ¶For theſe two beaſts ſtood gnawing ye roots.
               of thoſe two litte Trees:
               Whereby he did vphold himſelfe,
               which when (poore man) he ſées.
               And ſtill the Dragon was belowe,
               awayting for his fall:
               We well may iudge this yong mans gréefe,
               may not be counted ſmall.
            
            
               ¶He ſtruggles hard to kéepe his holde,
               becauſe his ioynts did faint:
               His legges likewiſe full often ſlippe,
               ſuch numneſſe did them taint.
               Then looking round about the Well,
               he chaunced to eſpie:
               A potte of Honnie in a hole,
               that was to him full nie.
            
            
               
               ¶This Pot ſome Shéepheard had left there,
               in paſſing by the way:
               And iudging this a place ſo fitte,
               did there the ſame conuay.
               Which when this yong man did behold,
               he preſently forgotte:
               In what hard caſe he ſtoode of life,
               and luſted to the potte.
            
            
               ¶One of the twigges he dooth forſake,
               and hangeth by one hand:
               Becauſe he would the Honnie taſte,
               that did ſo neere him ſtand.
               Thus hauing quite forgot the beaſtes
               that gnawed the twigges without:
               He ſweetlie of the Honnie lickes,
               not minding anie doubt.
            
            
               ¶So long he did delight himſelfe,
               in taſting of the potte:
               The twigges by one and one doo breake,
               and he ſo ouer-ſhotte.
               That to the other twigges againe,
               he could by no meanes come:
               Nor could his footing longer held,
               becauſe his ſtrength was doone.
            
            
               ¶So falles he downe into the Well,
               and there poore ſoule he died:
               You that haue heard how many woes,
               did this yong man betyde.
               And yet how many ſhifts he made,
               the perrill to preuent:
               Let his miſ-fortune teach you all,
               whereto this world is bent.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            In this Dittie, is reuealed the morrall iudgment of this notable and excellent Hiſtory, ſette downe by the famous and learned Philoſopher Tyabonus: wherein may be ſeene the very full courſe and wretched race of man in this tranſitory life.
            This Ditty may be ſung to Wigmores Galliard.
            
            
               THe Well this man for refuge tooke,
               the World dooth repreſent:
               Wherein we ſeeke by diuers meanes,
               to worke our owne content.
               And where we ſtruggle and we ſtriue,
               eche one for his auaile:
               Liuing in hope of many things,
               whereof great numbers faile.
            
            
               ¶The Lyons which did force this man,
               vnto his fearefull flight:
               Signifie the foure Elements,
               
               which ſéeke both day and night.
               To chaſe man into contraries,
               now well, then ſicke againe:
               With many alterations,
               whereof man féeles the paine.
            
            
               ¶The Dragon that with gaping mouth,
               did watch this yong mans fall:
               Dooth repreſent our earthly Graue,
               
               whereto in ende we ſhall.
               How braue or ſtoute ſo euer we be,
               how pollitique or wiſe:
               The Graue muſt ſhroude our bones at laſt,
               for ſo is Natures guiſe.
            
            
               
               ¶The Two young twigges wherby he held,
               the one is named Loue:
               
               The other may be Temporall goods,
               
               whoſe ſtrength we often proue.
               By Loue we beare vnto this droſſe,
               ſo long we hang thereon:
               That heauie ſinne dooth weigh vs downe,
               till faith is well néere gone.
            
            
               ¶The Little Beaſtes that gnawed the twigs
               of couller blacke and white:
               May be compared very well,
               vnto the Day and Night.
               
               For they conſume the time ſo faſt,
               that goods nor wealth can ſaue vs:
               But theſe two cuts vs off at length,
               and then the earth muſt haue vs.
            
            
               ¶The Pot with Honnie may be tearmd,
               The pleaſure in this life:
               Wherewith we glutte our ſelues ſo full,
               we recke no ſtormes of ſtrife.
               Nor manifold calamities,
               which threaten mans decay:
               The luſt of Pleaſure gluttes vs ſo,
               we feare them by no way.
            
            
               ¶So at the length, the Day and Night,
               
               cuttes off our Pleaſure too:
               And then into our Graue we fall,
               as all mankind muſt doo.
               For be we poore, or be we ritch,
               this is the end of all:
               The Graue muſt be our ſhrowding ſhéete,
               when dreadfull Death dooth call.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A Dittie, wherein is liuely and amply deſcribed, the Manſion or Caſtel of vaine exerciſes & delights, which being maintained by Pride, Prodigalitie, Luſt, Ambition, Contempt of Vertue, and ſuch other, is the ouerthrow of many that reſorte thither, rather then to vertuous ſtudies and exerciſes.

            
            
               
This Dittie may be ſung to the note of La vechia Pauin.
            
            
               WHo liſt to ſée a patterne of abuſe,
               Or reade a tale, which manie rue with teares:
               Or who will ſée into the verie ſluce,
               That leadeth man into a world of feares.
               Let him regard what I ſhall heere report,
               in blazing forth vaine Pleaſure and her mates:
               Whoſe odious liuing (with the vertuous ſort,)
               is namde the fall of many mennes eſtates,
               And noting well her fetches and her ſleights,
               he may himſelfe beware:
               For Vanitie hath choyſe of déepe deceits,
               to wrappe a man in care.
            
            
               ¶Firſt ſettes ſhe Pride in forefront of her Forte,
               Trickt in her fines, yea, more then ſuper-fine:
               
                  Daliaunce her wanton giues her choyſe of ſport,
               Some while with Muſique, then with notes diuine.
               The goers by doo gaze on this proſpect,
               which ſhe perceiuing calleth for Delight:
               
               Whom ſhe commaundeth with a ſubtill becke,
               to féede their eyes with ſome new-fangled ſight.
               Which ſhe performes with ſuch a gallant grace,
               as they that ſée the ſame:
               What with his toyes, and Prides alluring face,
               their ſences are made lame.
            
            
               ¶Then comming into this delightfull place,
               where all abuſes in the world abounds:
               
                  Flatterie telles them with a goodly grace,
               Such tales as quite their memory confounds.
               Then launch out yonkers while your liuings laſt,
               for Beautie muſt be braue againe.
               
                   He that with ſparing ſhall be héere diſgraſt,
               may not, or ought in this place remaine.
               Then ſpend they that their Parents got with care,
               in riotous exceſſe:
               And launch ſo farre till they be worne thread-bare,
               through their owne wilfulneſſe.
            
            
               ¶Thus hauing ſpent, till they can ſpend no more,
               Theſe daintie darlings byd them then farewell:
               Then Beggerie comes knocking at the doore,
               To thriftleſſe youth their follies paſt to tell.
               Thus walke they thence in care and heauineſſe,
               deſpiſde of them on whom they ſpent ſo much:
               The world likewiſe that ſawe their fooliſhneſſe,
               dooth ſcorne to mone or pittie any ſuch.
               Then howe they ende their liues in Miſerie,
               
               I néede not heere report:
               Beware therefore my fréends of Vanitie,
               
               or any of her ſort.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            A Dittie, wherein the Author giueth his farewell to Fancie, hauing learned the auncient Prouerbe: that it is good to take warning by other mens miſ-fortunes.
            This Ditty may be ſung to A. Munday his Galliard.
            
            
               FArewell ſweet Fancie,
               Thou maiſt goe play thee,
               Wiſedome ſaith, I may not ſtay thée:
               I am vnſkilfull,
               
                   And thou too wilfull,
               And Time dooth thy ſports denay me.
               Olde men haue learned:
               And I my ſelfe haue this diſcerned.
               That Sports and pleaſure:
               Muſt be applyed to time and meaſure.
               For youthfull heads,
               Runne ſo farre till blame doth ſhent them:
               Then theyr owne red,
               Makes them glad in the ende to repent them.
            
            
               ¶I ſee that many,
               Haue followed Fancie,
               To their owne great loſſe and daunger:
               Some in aſpyring,
               To vaine deſiring,
               Wherein Reaſon hath béene a ſtranger.
               Some thirſt for fauour,
               And yet find hate in th'end for their labour.
               Some looke for liuing,
               And yet come ſhort when tis in giuing.
               And ſome I ſee,
               Well deſerue, yet doo ſpeede but badly:
               and others reape,
               The reward (they) ſhould haue of duetie.
            
            
               ¶Thus time is tyckle,
               and fancie fickle,
               Neuer abyding in aſſuraunce:
               Who then would truſt thée,
               That dealſt vniuſtlie,
               With thy freends of longeſt duraunce?
               Others mens warning:
               Shalbe ſufficient for my learning.
               
                   And thy vnkindneſſe,
               Shall make me feare to folow blindnes.
               For thou that haſt,
               Beene a cauſe to deceiue ſo manie:
               Wilt ſerue me ſo,
               And therefore fare thou well ſwéete Fancie.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            A pleaſant Dittie, of a familiar communication, that paſſed betweene certaine Ladies, as they walked abroade into the fields for their recreation: wherein is prooued, that Beautie is nothing worth, except it be coupled with vertue.
            This Ditty may be ſung to A. Munday his Toy.
            
            
               IT was my chaunce to walke abroade,
               where Ladies were a ſporting:
               And youthfull yonkers on a row,
               from euery place reſorting.
               And ſitting downe vpon the bancks,
               where Flowers grew full ſwéetlie:
               By one and one they did begin,
               to ſpeake their ſeuerall fancie.
               One did Beautie much commend,
               Saying ſuch a daintie fréende:
               deſerued eſtimation:
               And they that were not Beauties freends,
               Should reape diſhonour for amendes:
               ſooner then commendation.
            
            
               
               ¶The ſecond Lady then replied,
               and ſaid, I like well Beautie:
               If vertue be conioynd therewith,
               it then becomes it fitly.
               For what may better beare the name,
               of Beauties ſoueraigne gracing:
               Then Vertue which ſo decks the ſame,
               there can be no defacing.
               But beauty that's maintaind by pride
               Hath no aſſuraunce to abide,
               but quickly is confounded:
               Let Vertue dwell in Beauties breaſt,
               And then muſt Beautie néeds be bleſt,
               that is ſo ſurely grounded.
            
            
               ¶We muſt not name them beautifull,
               which beare a gaye complexion:
               And make no reckoning of their ſtates,
               but liue without diſcretion.
               And wound their honor with diſgrace,
               in companie laſciuious:
               Who onely praiſe their daintie face,
               to worke them treaſon tretcherous.
               Faire beauty liketh none of this,
               That with pure Vertue ioyned is,
               but highly dooth diſdaine it:
               Then let vs name that Woman faire,
               That of her credite hath a care,
               leaſt any ſpot ſhould ſtaine it.
            
            
               ¶Your iudgment (Siſter) quoth the third,
               is not to be deſpiſed:
               For Beautie walketh now a daies,
               me thinks too much diſguiſed.
               
                   For they that ſeeme in outward ſhow,
               as Saints in their profeſſion:
               So careleſſe out of courſe doo goe,
               as it is paſt ſuſpition.
               And yet are theſe accounted faire,
               Who dare not looke into the ayre,
               leaſt that the Sun ſhould ſhow them:
               Faire Beautie that is faire indéede,
               Accounts this Beautie as a weede,
               and thinketh ſcorne to know them.
            
            
               ¶Me thinks thoſe men are worſe then mad,
               that doo ſo much abaſe them:
               To haue affiance in ſuch Dames,
               whoſe very déedes diſgrace them.
               But ſome ſay men are cauſe of all,
               who flatter them ſo kindly:
               Tuſh, vertuous Women will not fall,
               let men ſpeake nere ſo fréendly.
               With that there fell a ſhowre of raine,
               Which made thē trudge away amaine,
               and ſo brake off their talking:
               I would be glad the reſt to heare,
               If I might méete theſe Ladies there,
               when they goe next on walking.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            ¶The ſeconde ſeruice of this Banquet (vppon the gentle and good receit of this firſt) I will verie ſhortlie publiſh, wherein is manie excellent Ditties, and ſuch as I doubt not but thou wilt well eſteeme of.
         
      
   