
      
         
            
            
            AN EXHORTATION TO ſtyrre all Englyſhe men to the defence of theyr countreye, made by Richarde Moryſine. ❧
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               AL BE IT THE kynges hyghnes is, and hath bene a longe ſeaſon in leage with all chriſten princis, and hauyng giuen no iuſt cauſe of breache, to any of them, myghte rather loke for kyndenes, than thynke to receyue any diſpleaſure at theyr handes, Yet for as moche as guyle may be, where none can be myſtruſted, and deceyte hydde, where great cauſe of frendeſhyp is, me thynke, whan tokens of peace are taken awaye, and many ſuſpytions of warre lefte in their places, loue and dewetie bynde all englyſhe men, both to ſay and do, al that they iudge to be for noble Englandes honour, welthe, and ſafetie. I knowe ryght well, that the office and parte of all good men is, to deſyre peace, concorde, and erneſt amitie, betwene nation and nation, and yet if ennemies aſſaute vs, it myght well be accompted extreme madnes, and we more than madde, not to auoyde our owne ſlaughter, yea though it were with the ſlaughter of many other. God gaue not
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
If men coulde as well ſee the danger in a bodye polytike, as they can in a bodye naturall, we ſhuld lyttell nede any commandement of god, to obeye, ſerue, and loue our rulers. Lyttell nede any examples to prouoke vs to fyghte our ſelues, and to leaue them in ſafetie, if we coulde perceyue the loſſe that a countrey ſuſteyneth, whan it loſeth a good gouernour. Kynge Dauid, where as his people was goinge ageynſte Abſalome and other rebelles, ſayde to them, I wol alſo go forth with you. Noo ſyr, ſaythe the people, ye ſhal not go, for whether we fle or be ſlain, ye ſhall euer be able to haue a newe hoſt. you alone are counted for .x. M. men. It is a princis part, to ſe that his ſubiectes, haue capitaynes, vnder whom they may ſhewe, what hartes they beare to theyr countrey, what loue they owe to theyr ſoueraygne: A princis offyce, to prouyde, that the capitaynes haue men wel furniſhed, well appoynted, mete to doo theyr feate. And as kynges are bound to omyt nothynge, that they iudge woll ſerue for the defence of their people, ſoo is it the

bounden duetie of all ſubiectes, of what degree ſo euer they be, to ſerue theyr contreye in ſuche ſorte, as theyr prynce and heed ſhall appoynt them. He that redeth the hyſtoryes of Ethenickes, and ſeeth, what they dyd for theyr countreys ſake, can not but thynke, that chriſten men lytell nede any exhortation, to ſturre them to the defence of theyr countrey. The examples of them ar ſo many, ſo wonderful, that if nothyng els moued vs, ſhame me thynke were moughe to compell men of any honeſt nature, not to be ſoo farre behynde theym, with whome they wolde thynke great ſcorne to be compared. Let there be nothynge els to inuite vs, to the loue of it, beſyde theyr dedes, maye not ſhame, if dutie be not able, to enforce men chriſtened, men profeſſynge Chriſtes religion, to ſhewe, that they haue lerned as moche by Chriſte, as ethenickes and pagannes toke of naturall influence? whan they had done what they could, ſpending bodyes, goodes, and lyues to, for theyr countreys ſake, howe lyttell was the rewarde they loked for? what other thynge

ſought they, than honeſte fame, of that theyr ſo honeſt doinge? Plutarche wryteth a ſtraunge ſtorye of kynge Midas ſonne. There was, ſayth he, in this kinges realme Phrigia, a great gapynge of the erthe, moche water ſwellynge out of it, hurlynge downe as many houſes as ſtode any thynge nyghe. Ancurus, the kynges ſonne, borne to inherite after his father, a yonge man, maryed wonderful moche to his contentation, hearynge of ſuche as toke vpon them to knowe, how goddis ire myght be lenified and aſſwaged, that this breache of the erthe wolde cloſe ageyne, if ſome one lept into it, Ancurus I ſaye, a frayde, leſte ſome other ſhoulde haue preuented hym, kyſſed the kynge his father and his wyfe, and forth with fell into that gapynge erthe. This breache dyd but lyttell hurte, it had ſunkyn but a fewe houſes, and all be it men thoughte it wolde haue ſunken moo, yet percaſe it myght haue gone to gether ageyne, though he had kept hym ſelfe out of it. Vndoubted it myght haue done ſo, but loue ſeketh noo percaſes, ne vſeth any

delayes, where greatte peryll axeth preſent helpe. His death was very certayne, and he wonderous vncertayne, whether by that his deathe, his countrey ſhuld be ryd of daunger or no.
            ¶Curtius that noble Romayne, dyd euen vpon lyke occaſion, the lyke for his countreye. If theſe men had ben put to forbearynge a lyttell money, theyr countrey beinge in ieoperdy, theyr ennemyes aſſauting them, trowe ye, they that thus loſt theyr lyues, or rather beſtowed them vppon theyr countreye, wolde haue ſtagard at the gyuynge of a lyttel moneye?
            ¶The Lacedemoniens ſlew Xerxes ambaſſatour, contrary to the law of al nations, which wol, bothe in time of peace & warre, al ambaſſatours to come ſafe and go ſafe. They were not longe after, very ſore plagued with a gret peſtilence, whiche they toke as ſēt for that their vltrage. And where as it was thought the ſickenes encreaſynge dayely more and more, that ſome of them, muſt of neceſſitie goo to Xerxes, and there by theyr owne death ſatiſfy for hym, whom they had wrongfully

ſlayne, Spartius and Bulides .ii. verye welthy citezens, went thither, and there deſyred the hangeman, they might be truſt vp. Theſe mē paſſed lyttel of life where they had but a ſclender hope, that theyr deathe might profit theyr countrey. ¶ Gaius Marius dreamed, that if he did offer vp his doughter Calphurnia in ſacrifice, he ſhuld ouercome the Cymbriens, fierce and cruell ennemyes to his countrey. In the mornynge, callyng his dreame to mynde, ſory to ſlee his doughter, ſoryer his countrey ſhulde ſtande in ieoperdie, he toke a knyfe, and folowed his dreame. Erecteus, a man wonderful moche in loue with his doughter, vppon lyke occaſion dyd euen the ſame. But to paſſe ouer manye an hundred hyſtories, worthy all eternall memorye, I can not without moch my diſprayſe, ſuffer noble Themiſtocles, to loſe his prayſe. This valiant capitayne, not withſtandyng he hadde done more honour to Athens his countrey, then did almoſt any other, was in ſpyte of all his memorable victoryes, banyſhed Athens. vndoubtedly if there

were any cauſe, that myght make a man enmy to his countrey, Themiſtocles had ſure a iuſte cauſe, to be vtter ennemye to Athens. He was than exyled, whan there were fewe pryncis, fewe nations, vnto whom, for the defence of his countreye, he had not done ſome dyſpleaſure. The choyſe was ſo euyll, the ſhyftes ſo fewe, that he was conſtrayned to ſeke fauoure at Xerxes hande, kynge of the Perſians whom he had not longe before diſcomfited in battayl. Which Xerxes in loue with vertue, taken with noble courage, yea thoughe it were his ennemye, coulde not but hyghly entertayne Themiſtocles. To be ſhorte, there was no man leſſe beholdyng to his countrey than he, no man more bound to Xerxes than he was. The kynge laye ſoore vpon hym, oft prayenge hym, that he wolde conducte his hoſte ageynſte the vnkynd Atheniens. Themiſtocles ſtylle refuſed it, and where as the kynge wolde make no ende of entyſyng hym agaynſte his countreye, he neyther fyndynge in his harte to do ſoo, neyther intendynge to deceyue a kynge, whome

he had founde ſo beneficiall, thoughte it a leſſe faut to rydde hym ſelfe by poyſon, than to go with an armye ayenſt his natiue countrey.
            ¶Cretinus Magneſius his countreye being at warre with kyng Mithridates, gaue his aſſent, that one callid Hermias his great enemye, ſhulde be capitayne ayenſte Mithridates, promiſynge by ſolempne proteſtation, that he wolde in the meane ſeaſon banyſhe him ſelfe his coū
               trey, leſte there might riſe ſom tumulte & buſynes by their two factions. But Hermias, knowynge Cretinus to be the better capitayn of both, for the loue he bare to his countrey, gaue that honour to his enemie, and after baniſhed hym ſelfe his countrey, tyll the warre was at an ende. Percaſe the byſhop of Rome is perſwaded, that men here ar of two ſortes, ſome yet remaynynge his true frendes. Reynard his man, may put this in his heed. But I truſte they bothe be deceyued. I truſte there be verye fewe, but they feele their knowlege moche enlightned, ſithēs this good father, with his trumpery and

baggage departed hens, enforced to diſpatche his wares in ſome other markets of fooles, Fewe I thynke, but beynge brought from ſuche a ſorte of errours, in to ſo many truthes, truthes that ſo doo quiet all troubeled conſciences, but they fynde greatte cauſes, to be gladde of the chaunge. The way, that was this many hundred yeres kepte ſhutte, is nowe, god and the kinges highnes be thanked, layd open. God inſtilleth his fayth into mans harte, by his apoynted ordynaunce, that is by worthy herynge of the goſpell. All men, ſayth ſaynt Paule, that call rightly vppon the name of god, ſhall be ſaued. But howe, ſaythe he, can they call vpon hym, in whome they beleue not? Howe can they beleue hym, of whom they here not? how can they here of him, if no man preache hym? howe can they preche hym, that are not ſente? ſo that we ſee by this gradation, the onely way to the knowelege of faith, to the ſtyckynge vnto goddis promyſes, is heryng his word. This waye is layde open. knoweledge approcheth, errours are takynge theyr vyage.

The byſſhop of Rome, foreſeing the damages that enſue to hym and his, by the commynge forth of goddis word, knowing alſo, howe moch his vantages maye dayly encreaſe, yf errours be reteyned in all chriſten kyngedomes, doth and wolle do what he can, to ouerrunne this way, with a peſtyferouſe Poole, that floweth out of courſe, that ſeketh ayenſt nature, to deſtroy the heed, from whenſe it fyrſte dyd ſprynge. The byſſhoppe ſeeth, if we walke in this way longe, he muſt walke to that he came fro, that is, to pouertie, to preachynge, to humilite, and to obeyſaunce. This is it, that wryngeth hym, at this he fretteth, for this he ſturreth all theſe coles. They are lyttell acqueynted with the biſhop of Romes practiſes, that thynke, he ſtyrreth prynces ayenſte vs, for any loue or deſyre he hath to auaunce goddis honour. His hole actes declare hym to meane al thyng rather than that. Who can beleue, he wold take ſuche peynes, ſuſteyne ſuche charges, to ſeeke oure helth and ſafetie, whan he treadeth them vnder his fete, at his owne dores, whiche

fayne wolde enter into our religion, and may not? He hath dwellyng in his owne citie of Rome many, that moche couet to be chriſtened, whom he wol in no caſe receyue, excepte they forſake all their goodes, and gyue theym hole vnto hym. I meane the poore iewes, whiche are ſoo ſpoyled of hym, whan god gyueth them his greatteſt giftes, faithe and affiaunce, that theyr ſynnes ſhall be forgyuen, that it wolde pytie an hethen harte, to ſe his tyranny ouer them. If it pleaſe the holye gooſte, to call any of theym, to Chryſtis fayth, this good father, ſtarteth betwene them, and ſaythe there is a playne texte, excepte a man renounce all that he hath, he may not be my diſciple. Is not this a good ſhepeherde, that woll not receiue ſhepe, which are ſtrayed from the flocke, excepte they giue hym money? A iewe for money, is made a ryght chriſtian. And a right chriſtian is taken for a miſcreaunt, for a iewe, for a turke, if he refuſe to giue a pounde for that is not worthe a penye. This good byſhoppe loued vs excedyng tenderlye, as longe as we gaue to hym

frankely our ſiluer. He gaue vs pardons plentuouſly, which brought vs far from purgatory, euen the nexte waye to helle, but now, that we ſe his chaffer is naught worthe, and therfore woll gyue naughte for it, this good father, hath chaunged his affection, and is ſo farre in loue with our ſowles, that he wolde with ſwerde ſeke for them in our bowels. I wol grāte hym for a while, we were, as he and his are, in errour, in blyndenes, if he loued vs, as ſurely he wolde, if he were our father, as he calleth hym ſelfe: if he loued vs, wolde he ſeke the diſtruction of our lyues, we beinge in an euel belefe? ought he not rather, if he were but a good chriſten mā, to knele on his bare knees vnto god, and deſyre hym, our bodyes myght kepe our ſoules, while we were better inſtructed? If we were in a wronge feythe, dothe not he ſlee our ſoules, if our bodies by his meanes, be ſlayne, er we tourne? coulde he thus doo, thus entende, if he were goddes vicar? If he loued our ſoules? if he ſought to brynge vs to ſaluation? Peter pence make Paule to do as he

dothe. Our holy father enioyeth no lenger our goodes: this loſſe greueth hym ſore, and yet he feareth thexample worſe than the domage. He is afrayde, leſte yf god proſper vs, that other kynges woll alſo paſſe as moche of hym, as our moſt noble kyng dothe. We be gone from him to Chriſte, whiche ſaythe, Qui uenit ad me, non eiiciam eum foras, He that commeth to me, I woll not ſee him caſt out of doores. Let our good father, which in very dede is moche meter to be a hogherde, than a ſhepeherde of men, let hym curſe, vntyll his tonge fall into hell, they ſhall be bleſſed, that god bleſſeth. Let hym order his byndynge and loſynge, as luſte leadeth hym, There is one, that woll one day, ſe his ſawcye power tyed ſhorter. For what I pray you, is lefte for pride to chalenge, whan he ones taketh vpon hym to binde that, that god commaundeth to be leuſe, to leuſe that that god in any wyſe wolle haue bounden? God wolle all ſubiectes, peyne of eternall damnation, to obeye their princis. This good interpreter of goddis wyll, whan affection, gayne, or

feare of loſſe wol, delyuereth all pryncis ſubiectes from the bondes, that god hath knyt them in, and gyueth theym pardon, that leaue their duetie, that breke goddis commaundement, and curſeth all theym that wol not folow his malyce, and withſtand goddis pleaſure. Peter and Paule toke vppon theym a power, and yet they graunted it to be cancelled within certayne lymyttes, they wente not oute of theyr bondes, they wolde not paſſe theyr rayles, but ſayde, they had power to exhorte men, power to edifie, to reconcyle, but no power to ſcatter, to ſpoyle, to dyſtroy. This good father is of an nother ſchole, a ſtudent of Rome, taught in the conſiſtorie of Cardynals, where though there be fewe good made, yet, there commeth fewer good thither, but they depart as euyll, as they that be theyr readers. It is with them a gay ſchole poynte, without any drede of god, to breake that louely bonde, whiche god hath ordeyned and ſette in nature, to holde togyther, to preſerue and maynteyne a thynge in this worlde for mans welth and ſafetie moſte

nedefull, ciuyle ordinauuce, obeyſaunce of the membres to the heed, of the ſubiectes to theyr ſouerayne. What thynge is more beneficiall vnto mannes lyfe, then polytike order, then mutuall ſocyetie of men, knitte together in iuſtice, temperā
               cie, modeſtie, and honeſt lybertie, one to helpe and comforte an other. oone to inſtruct and teache an other, in al thinges, but in eſpeciall in matters belongyng to god, and ſuche as maynteyne this ſocyetie? God ordeyned kynges, magiſtrates, and rulers, commaundynge theym to be honoured, euen as fathers are of theym chyldren. This is the fyrſte precepte of the ſeconde table, wherin god ſetteth a polycie, and teacheth the workes, neceſſarye vnto mannes lyfe. He ſhewethe of all thynges this to be the firſte, that ſome rule, and ſome obeye. Obedyence vndoubtedly is the knotte of al common weales, this broken they muſte nedes runne al heedlonge to vtter deſtruction. God woll in any caſe, ſubiectes owe this obedience to theyr rulers, he woll they be dettours of this, and neuer to ceaſe the

payenge of it. He requireth not onely ſeruice of our bodyes, to be at our prynces commaundemente, but that our hartes, honour and ſerue his hyghnes, with all loue and feythfulnes. Marke howe this good Romiſhe vicar, ſupplieth his maſters office, he giueth remiſſion of ſinnes, to theym that offende depeſte in this precepte: and curſeth all theym, that hate not goddes commandment. Good cauſe he can not haue to do ſo, and yet he knoweth, his thryft is paſte, if goddes commaundementes be kepte, and his curſes not ſet by. Who wolde thynke, that goddes vycar, coulde call prynces, that were goinge ayenſte the turke, to tourne theyr force vpon chriſten princes, Who wolde thinke, that he him ſelfe, coulde be of any good belefe, beinge farder in loue with turkes, whiche ſeke nothynge more then the vtter ruyne of Chryſtes faythe, then with vs, that refuſe with our moneye to maintayne his pryde ayenſt god and his holy worde. Errors haue ſet his cheyre alofte, he ſeeth trouthe muſte nedes abaſe hym. He wryteth, he ſendeth, he calleth,

he cryeth for helpe vnto all prynces. If ſome of them, ſeduſed by falſe perſuaſiō, ſhal ſet vpō vs, bicauſe we haue left Idolatry, dryuen away deceytful Hypocriſy, that thus many yeres haue lyen lurkyng in celles, kepynge by force and crafte the place of Chryſtes relygyon. Whan euer had Englande ſo good a cauſe, to fyghte as nowe? Whan euer myghte we goo to fielde with better hope of victorye, then nowe? Were it poſſyble, that they ſhulde haue better hartes fyghtynge ayenſt religyon, ayenſte goddes worde, and ſo ayenſt god hym ſelfe, then we, that fyghte for the mayntenaunce of all thre? Canne they haue better wylles, to loſe bodyes and ſoules, then we to ſaue bothe? ſhall they take payne, to come ſo farre, to ſeke theyr owne ſorowe, and we not ſtep oute of our doores, to defende our welth, our countrey, our ſelues? haue they, yea can they haue greater cauſes, to hate Englande, then we to loue it? If they paſſe not of goddes wrothe and vengiaunce, ſo that they may brynge vs into captiuity and bondage, ſhall not we, beinge aſſured

of goddes fauour, as longe as we fauour his worde, his name, his glorye, mete with theſe, not ſo moche oures, as goddes ennemies? I muſte here ſaye a thynge, that I thynke woll make a good ſorte of vs angry at the leaſte. Certes, if we be not, as one reported vs, it myghte make vs vpon oceaſion, not only ready, but very deſyreful, to ſpende, yea though it were a good quantitie of bloude, in ſo honeſt a quarell.
            ¶Not longe ſithens, a ientil ientilman, (I myght ſaye he was an ambaſſatour, but then percaſe men wolde go nyghe, to geſſe whome I meane) made, at his retorne home, this reporte of vs, Thactyuitie of Englyſhmen hath ben greate, if hiſtories be true, but if I maye iudge by any coniectures, it is nothynge ſo nowe. I ſe neyther harneyes, ne weapons, of manhode amonges them, they haue ben of good hartes, couragyouſe, bolde, valiant in marciall feates: But thoſe Englyſhe men are deade.
            ¶If we had none other cauſe to fyghte, beinge prouoked with the aſſaulte of our

enemies, wolde not this contumely, this ſpytefull tale, make vs ſhewe vnto ſuche reporters, that as long as Englyſhe bodies remayn in Englande, they ſhal alſo fynde Englyſhe ſtomackes, Englyſſhe handes, Englyſſhe hartes. We ſee verye cowardes can euyll abyde to be ſo called and taken: and are Englyſſhe men nothynge ſtirred, to be thus counted, and of them, that are in dede but verye daſtardes? What thynge had Englande euer, that it now lacketh, bōdage of the proude tyrant of Rome layde apart? Were there euer at any tyme in Englande goodlyer bodies, cleaner made mē, than there be at this day? Were there euer mo thinges to ſet hartes in courage, thā there be at this houre? were there euer mo rewacdes for vertue? mo? nay halfe ſo many, as there be nowe, ſythens Englande was England? were there at any tyme mo euydent ſygnes of goddes fauour towardes vs, than haue ben theſe many yeres?
            ¶We many nowe ſee, if we be not blynder than betels, why god ſuffered ſuche a nomber to riſe in the North, and after to

do no hurte to this realme, but rather excedynge moche good. For beſydes, that ſuche were wieded away, as myght haue done hurte, if our enemies had come betymes, how dyd that cōmotion furniſſhe almooſte all Englande, with weapons, with harneys, and other thynges neceſſarye for warre? howe ſone were both the Sotherne and Northern men in a redyneſſe, wantynge nothynge fytte, eyther for men that intended hurte to other, eyther for theym that purpoſed theyr owne ſafetie? Howe many yonge Ientylmen, that than were aſhamed they coulde ryde no better, ryde wel now? how many, that than lacked almoſte all thynge mete for a warry our, be nowe furnyſhed for all aſſayes? God vndoubted dydde moche for vs, that of ſo euyll a thyng, we receyued ſo many commodities. Harneys, bowes, bylles, gunnes, with the reſt of the furnitures for ſoudiours, were prepared than. See the goodnes of god, that wold them all to be prepared than, and all to be preſerued hole, ſounde, vnhurte for a better ſeaſon. They were commynge, whether

they dare come on or no, we ſhall ſee: they were commynge I ſaye, ageynſt whome our bowes oughte to be bente, to whoſe hedes our billes owe blowes, into whoſe boſomes our arowes ought to crepe. Pitie it is, that men ſhulde be ſo mad, to couet their own miſery, rather than to ſuffer vs in welthe. greatte pitie to ſee, one chriſten armye ayenſt an other. But for as moche as they ſeke to doo vs iniurye, and we only to put of wronge, if it be offered, we nede not doubte, but he woll be with vs, for whoſe cauſe we be compelled to fyghte. They can not be to fewe, that haue god on their ſide. They haue a feire bende of men, that haue a good cauſe, a good quarel to ſtande in. I wol for a ſeaſon imagin vs to be the weker ſide, fewer in noumber, of leſſe power than our aduerſaries are, I wol not yet ſpeake of the feates, that Englyſhe men haue done in battayles.
            ¶Well, we be not ſo many as our enemies are, what if we be fewer, yea and man for man of moche leſſe might than they are? May not the ſondrye promyſes

of god, the manyfold hyſtories of ſcripture, whiche proue hym iuſte and trewe of his promyſe, make vs lyttell to paſſe, of what number and ſtrēgth ſo euer they be? who ſo dwelleth vnder the ſhadowe of the almyghty, hym, as Dauid ſaythe, god couereth with his wynges, and kepeth ſafe vnder his fethers. I knowe ſayth he, the lord helpeth his annoynted, and euen frome heauen hereth theym. Some truſte in charyottes, ſome in horſes, but we, in callynge vppon the lorde. God can, and oft tymes dothe pyne man and beaſt, euen in the myddes of all plentie. God whan his wyll is, fedeth, where no foode is to be founde. And as folyſhenes, whan hym luſteth, confoundeth the wyttes of the wyſe, ſo weakenes, where god ſetteth to his hande, worketh wonders, and ſturdy ſtrength ſtandeth in no ſtede. It is the lorde, ſaythe Daniel, that on highe ruleth the kyngedomes of men, gyuyng them to whom he woll. God can as wel be no god, as not true of his promyſe. He ſaythe, who ſoo honoureth me, hym wol I make honorable. In an other

place, the ſame god ſaythe, ſpeakynge of kynge Dauyd, bycauſe he hath ſette his loue vpon me, I woll ſe hym rydde from al his troubles, I wol defende hym, why ſo? it foloweth, he hath knowē my name, he ſeketh my glorye: and therfore wham ſo euer he calleth vpon me, I woll here hym. yea I am with hym in all his calamities, and wol delyuer hym from them, I woll ſet hym hygher in honour, ſende hym longe lyfe, and ſhewe hym his ſaluation.
            ¶ God maketh not this promyſe vnto kynge Dauyd alone, but vnto all kynges, that hartyly ſeke his glorye, for as god promyſed that, vnto hym, vpon conſideration, ſo fyndinge the cauſe, in any other prynce, for whiche he bounde hym ſelfe to be good vnto kynge Dauyd, he falleth not to performe now, that he than promiſed. We haue plentifull examples of this. God ſuffered the Moabites and Ammonites, to ſet vpon good kyng Ioſaphat, to trouble him with warre. This good kynge complayned, and made his mone. vnto whom I praye you? vnto the

lorde, from whens commeth all helpe, all ayde, and ſuccoure. What ſayde he? euen that that all prynces, troubled with to great a force, ought to ſay, he ſayd thus, The Moabites, the Ammonites, the inhabitantes of Seir, are come in batayle ayenſt vs, wolt not thou our god, ſe them iudged, ſe them puniſhed? We haue noo might ayenſt this gret nombre, that ſetteth vppon vs, we wote not what to doo, but our eyes, o lorde, be caſte vppon the. The lorde ſtraight harde his praier, puttynge in Iezaiels mouthe theſe wordes that folowe. Thus ſaythe the lorde vnto you, be not a frayde, or faynte harted, by reaſon of this greatte multytude: For the warre is not yours, but Goddes. On the morowe, kynge Ioſaphat, after his coming forth towarde his enemies, ſayde in this wyſe to his army: It is not your partes, at the leaſte it ſhall lyttell neade, that ye fyght in this quarell, come forthe, ſtand, and beholde the helpe of the lorde, which is with you, feare not, let not your hartes fayle you. Herken vnto me Iuda, and ye inhabitours of Hieruſalem. Truſte the

lorde our god, and ſoo ſhall ye continue, beleue his prophetes, and then ſhall ye proſper. Whan he had ſayd thus, he commaunded his ſyngynge men, with this ſonge to laude god. Prayſe ye the lord, for he is gratious, his mercy endureth for euer. Whyle they were thus gyuing laudes vnto god there roſe a ſedition amonge theyr ennemies, whiche ceaſed not, tyl they were al ſlayne, not one left alyue.
            ¶ Amaſias prepared a great hoſte, ſuppoſynge throughe the multytude and ſtrengthe of his army to vanquyſſhe his ennemyes. The man of god (as they called hym) came to Amaſias, and ſayde, ſir let not the armye of Iſrael goo with the, for the lorde is not with Iſraell, neyther with any of the houſe of Ephraim. If thou wylte neades haue them, make thy ſelfe as ſtronge to batteyl as thou canſte, thou ſhalt ſe, god wyl make the fal before thyne enemies. Here Amaſias commandynge them of Ephraim to retorne home agayn, went with his owne hoſt, a ſmall nombre, and ſlewe .x. M. of his enemies, and toke other .x. M. alyue, whome the

army of Iuda, caryed vp to the toppe of a rocke, and ſo hurled them downe.
            ¶ Kynge Ioſias, with all goodlye reuerence, toke vpon hym the defence of true religion, the maintenaunce of true worſhippynge of god, he beate downe the Idols, he cut downe theyr woodes, and diſtroyed theyr hyl aulters. All princes about hym feared hym, none ſo hardy as to offer hym battayle, princes, had lerned by longe experyence, howe lyttel greateſt power ſerueth ayenſte them, whom god defendeth.
            ¶ Ezechias a godly prynce, of feruente zeale, ſtyll occupyed in clenſynge his realme of idolatrye, was greuouſely aſſauted, by a puſant hoſt of Sennacherib the emperour of the Aſſirians, in ſoo moche that he was required by hym, to yelde vp Hieruſalem. Ezechias turned hym from the helpe of mē, to the ayde of god, whom he entierly beſought, that Sennacherib myght be an example to all empyres and kyngedomes, that the onelye god of the Hebrues, was the trewe god. he hadde ſtrayght comforte. God ſayde vnto hym,

Sennacherib ſhall not come into the citie of Hieruſalem, he ſhall caſte no darte into it. &c. The ſame nyght the aungelle of the lorde wente into the Aſſirians tentes, and ſlewe aboute an. C .lxxxviii. M. of them. Thus Sennacherib was fayne to retourne home ageyne, where prayeng to his Idolle, two of his owne ſonnes ſlewe hym.
            ¶ In theſe exaumples, who ſeeth not, how ſtedfaſtly god ſtandeth with kinges that ſtande with hym, howe he ſtylle helpeth, whan all mans helpe is paſte? Had not Mardocheus bē hanged, if god had not kepte the kyng wakyng? Who wold haue thoughte, Daniell coulde haue eſcaped? how vncredible is it to reſon, that Abram, hauynge but .iii. C. and .xviii. ſeruauntes, ſhuld vanquyſſhe .iiii. kynges, with all theyr force and power? how vnfaythfulle are they, on the other ſyde, that hearynge god ſaye vnto hym, feare not Abram, I am thy protectour, thy rewarde ſhalbe great out of meaſure, woll not thynke, he ſhulde haue conquered an hole worlde, if it hole had come ayenſte

hym? God ofte proueth his electe, ſendynge them many ſoore brontes, he leaueth none vndefended, that conſtantlye putte theyr affiaunce in hym. Howe ofte was that noble capitayn Moſes, in greteſt perylles, daungiers, and diſtreſſes? Myghte not reaſon haue broughte hym in fulle diſpayre, whan he caryenge the people of Iſraell from Aegypte, had at his backe a myghty, a cruell enemie, and before hym the magne ſee? Moſes douted nothing, but that the ſees wold make hym a drie pathe to conueye his hoſte by. They dydde ſo, of ragynge waters, they became quiete walles, ſtandynge ſtyll on bothe ſydes, gyuyng ſafe paſſage, to the Iſraelites, and abydynge prowde Pharaos commynge, whom with all his hoſt they ſwalowed vp, not leauynge one alyue. It is as Hieremie ſayth, Bleſſed is he, that putteth his truſt in the lord. God ſayth euen as moche by his prophete Eſaye, I am the lorde, ſaythe he, who ſoo putteth his truſte in me, ſhall neuer be confounded.
            ¶ What troubles ſuffered good Ioſue,

Moſes ſucceſſour? What battayles ſuſteined he, before he coulde dryue the .vii. wycked nations out of the lande of promiſſion? and yet he knewe, god coude not deceyue hym, whyche ſayde, As I was with Moſes, ſo wolle I be with the, neuer forſakynge ne leauynge the. Wherfore his ennemies vanquyſſhed, he conducted his people into the lande of Canaan, maugrey the malyce of all thoſe fierce nations.
            ¶ Certes, who ſoo is leadynge his ſubiectes to the knowlege of goddis worde, to the workynge of his wyll, may wel aſſure hym ſelfe, that god woll aſſyſte him, though that the tyrant of Rome, accompanied with a. M. legions of dyuels, beſtowe all their ſtrengthe and malyce, to the hynderaunce of ſoo godly a purpoſe. Dauid, beinge dryuen oute of Hieruſalem by his ſonne Abſolom, and ſuche as rebelled with hym, brake his griefe vnto god, not doubtynge, but he ſhulde come ayen to his right well ynough. If he nothynge myſtruſted, to recouer Hieruſalem; being loſt, and in the handes of his

ſonne, whom a great part of his realme, moche fauoured, ſhulde we thynke it an harde matter, to kepe ours from theym, that we all haue greatteſt cauſes to hate? If they truſte in a traytour, that can do nothynge, but vtter his owne malice and folyſhenes, vnto whom all examples of ſcripture, thretten a ſhamefull ende, ſhal we, hauyng a prince our capitayn, vnto whome god byndeth vs to owe all dewties, whom god alſo promiſeth to defend, not make this trayterouſe Cardynalles bloudy hat, couer a bloudy pate? Might not th examples of Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, preache to hym, and all that folowe hym, ſome ſtrange kynde of death? Abſaloms father moch deſyred, that his ſonne myght ſcape vnſlayne, commaundynge his capitayns and ſouldiors, in any caſe to ſaue him aliue: his father wold fayne haue had it ſo, but god wolde none of it. Dauid ſayde, Saue my ſonne Abſalom. Ioab, chiefe capytayne, harde his commandement, and yet whan he ſawe hym hange betwene the bowes, by the heare, he coulde not but runne hym throughe

with his launce? Kynge Dauid wepte and wyſhed to haue boughte his ſonnes lyfe, with the loſſe of his owne. But god that beareth noo ſuche blynde affection, woll alowe no ſuch chaunge. The father forgaue his parte, god wolde in no wyſe remytte his. If dedes maye ſpeake, doo not ſo many exaumples, as we haue had a late, preach ſhameful death to all traytours, to al rebels? Can any man thinke, but that Poole haſteneth a paſe, to that that goddis right iugement driueth hym vnto? Come not all they to theyr confuſion, that come to ayde a traytour againſt his countrey, agaynſt religion, agaynſte god? Whom I praye you, can he brynge with him, but ſuche as Englyſhe men in tyme paſte haue hadde fayre days vpon? If they were wonte to leaue theyr owne countreys, at the commynge of a ſmalle Englyſhe hoſt, ſhal we al paſſe of a fewe of them? I haue hitherto handeled the matter, as though we were euen as that gay ambaſſatour reported vs: But now I wolle a lyttell ſhewe, what they haue wonne at our handes in tyme paſte, and

how we are now as able as euer we haue ben, to withſtande them, they neuer weaker than nowe, neuer leſſe able to inuade vs then nowe. for as our cauſe is able to enſtrengthen al weaknes, ſo is their quarell able to make weapons faule oute of the handes of men ſtrongeſte. We maye ſaye, our guyde is not oone, that beinge not called, toke this power vpon hym, he is our kynge, our ruler, by the wyll and ordinance of god, he is goddis miniſter, vnto whoſe charge god hath commytted this realme, the gouernement is his, by goddis appoyntment, our dueties, to obey and ſerue him by goddes commaundement. What may our enemies ſay, to comforte them in theyr vyage? we haue taken this iourneye, by the aduyſe of an arrant traytour, we haue a rebell to our capitayne, we go where god hath appointed vs nothynge to doo. Howe many mo thynges maye combre them? howe fewe put theym in harte to entre amonge vs? what nation canne come hyther, but we maye take our ſelfes, god beinge but indyfferente, abler to defende our realme,

thenne they to inuade it? I woll take recorde of none of our owne cronicles. Let vs beleaue but our enemies, let it be true that they ſay? Maye we not haue better hartes to encounter with the proudeſt of them, than they to lande in our realme? Reade Froyſarte, a frenche wryter. who wolde almoſte thynke it poſſyble, that he wryteth of vs? It were ryghte expedient. that yonge Ientyll men dydde ofte reade theyr fathers noble actes, wherby vndoubtedlye they may bothe be encouraged, to the like, and alſo know the weakenes of their enemys. We can not be worſe matched, then we haue ben, and that at ſondry tymes. We that then dyd ſo well, our quarell often tymes beinge but for a money matter, can we thynke now to do amyſſe, fyghtynge for the defence of religion, the reſtorynge of goddes worde, the mayntenaunce of goddes honour? Who can rede the battayle of Creſſy, and not conceyue wonderful hope of victory, whan we be any thynge egally matched? If noble Edwarde the thyrd, coude vanquiſhe the frenche kynge, and almoſte al

the floure of Fraunce, they beinge, as theyr owne wryters teſtifie .viii. to oone of ours, what ſhal noble Henry the .viii. doo, whome god, by all wayes, ſeketh to enhaunce? Oughte not the battayle of Poyters to remaine freſhe in our memories, where an handfull of Engliſhe men ouerthrewe all the force of Fraunce? for as theyr ſtory ſayth, there durſt none tary from that fielde, but ſuche as neyther regarded honour ne ſhame. The frenche kynge was taken there, and well nere al the nobles of Fraunce ſlayne. The battayle of Alroye in Britayne, maye not be forgotten, our countreye wanne there no ſmall honour. For albeit the frenche men & Britons, ordered them ſelfe in theyr aray wonderful prudently, & in theyr fight verye manfully, yet were they all ſlayne, or dyſcomfyted. We haue alſo ſometyme ſoughte honour in Spayne, and founde it very fortunatly. Dyd not noble prynce Edwarde diſcomfet kynge Henriche, vſurper of the crowne of Spayne, vanquyſhe there, bothe the frenche men and Spaniardes, and ſettle kynge Peter in

his right and roume ageine? Where dyd the hardye hartes and manly couragies of the Englyſhe men better appere, than in the battayle on the ſee before Sluſe in Flaunders? the fight was fierce and terrible, and our men ſore matched, for there were .iiii. of them to one englyſſhe man, and they very experte men of warre vppon the ſee. There was no place to flee, none to recule to, without loſſe of all. Here the noble Englyſhemen bare them ſelfe ſo valyantly, that they got the vyctorie, vtterly diſcomfetynge and ſleinge all the frenche men and Normans. We may forget the battayle of Agingcourt, but they woll remember and are lyke neuer to forget, with howe ſmall an army, that moſt prudent and victorious kynge Henry the fyfte, vanquyſſhed that huge hoſt of french men. How moche to al our comfortes, may we reioyſe in the memory of the battayle, whiche moſt noble and vyctorious kynge Henry the eyghte, called the fielde Des eſprons, that is the fielde of ſpurres, bycauſe both the french men, as that daye, lefte all theyr defence, and

vſed nothynge but their ſpurres, fleinge one in an others necke, and we alſo compelled to vſe nothynge ſoo moche as our ſpurres, in purſuing them, that ſo ſwiftly fledde, in folowynge them, that in no caſe wolde abyde, in rydynge after them, that ſo faſt ran away? His hyghnes was than almoſt with al the nobilitie of Englande, yea with al the flowre and force of our nation in Fraunce: and yet the kyng of Scottes founde ynough at home, to defende lytel Englande. He came, whan our ſtrength was oute of the realme, he came vnloked for, with great prouiſyon, with a puiſant army. His chance might teache other pryncis, rather to gouerne well, that they haue, thanne to ſeke, that they can not come by. We that haue thus ben vſed to victories, ofte beaten our ennemies, of what nation ſoo euer they be, can we now loke for leſſe than great and hygh honour at theyr handes? haue not they as good cauſe, to be afrayde of vs, of whome they haue receyued ſoo manye damages? as we to go with all courage ayenſt them, whom we haue ſo oft put to

flyght, ſo ofte ſhamed, ſo ofte put to the worſe? had we then ſtomackes, & ſhal we lacke now? had we than cauſe to do valiantly, and fynde we none now? was there euer prince, that dyd, or coulde better rewarde the ſeruyce of his ſubiectes, than our moſte bountifull ſoueraygne? haue not all we, that be Sotherne men, good cauſe to ſhewe our ſelfe harty, courragious, valyaunte, ſeinge that we knowe, the Northen men, woll do what they can, to make a large mendes, for theyr laate faute? I doubt not, but they haue moche deſyred, ſome ſuche occaſyon, to teſtyfye their hartes and fydelytie, to the kynges hyghnes. They haue ſene, howe mercyfully his grace gaue theym theyr lyues, whiche the lawes chalenged as forfayte and loſte. We may all truſte, they wolle well declare to his hyghneſſe, that he rather lente them lyues, than gaue them any. And that they haue them in ſtore redy to render theym, whan ſo euer his honoure, his cauſe, his commandemente, ſhall require theym. They beinge thus ſet, can we Sothern men, come any fote

behynde them? Shall they be gladder to wype away ſuche blemyſhe, as tell vpon them, by the crafty ſeducemente of ſuche as are nowe worthyly deade, than we deſyrefull, to encreaſe his gracis beneuolence towarde vs? I truſt, as we be one realme, ſo our enemies ſhall fynde vs of one harte, one fydelitie, one allegiance. As god helpe me, euen in the tyme of the inſurrection, I halfe wyſhed, that ſome our enemies had ſet vpon vs. I dyd not alone lament, that whan bothe parties were ſo furnyſhed to battayle, there was ſo vnmete a matche, for men to ſhew thē ſelfe hardy. I had red, and ofte remembred the wyſe anſwere of Scorio to his ſouldiours. His hoſte harde that the Romains were at diſſention, and wolde nedes haue hadde hym, to ſet vpon theym, whyle they were ſoo at variance. Naye, not ſo, ſayth Scorio, this were euen the nexte waye to make theym agreed. And whan his ſouldiors, wolde make no ende of deſyrynge him to go towardes Rome, he cauſed a couple of maſtiues to be ſette to gether by the eares, and euen whanne

they were hardeſt at it, he in the ſyght of all his hoſte, ſhewed vnto the dogges a wolfe, whiche as ſoone as the dogges ſawe, they ſtraight way, were at one, and both folowed the wolfe. Men ofte tymes fayle of theyr purpoſe, and turne thinges quyte contrarye to that they intended. There was a good wyfe, for ſoo we call them that be maryed, whiche beinge very wery of her huſband, thoughte to diſpatche hym by poyſon. This woman a frayde, leſte one poyſon wolde not ſerue her torne, toke two, thynkynge ſhe therby ſhoulde quyckelye and ſpedelye haue wroughte her feate. She was deceyued, for where thone poyſon alone had ſlayne hym, the ſtryfe of the one with the other ſaued hym alyue. If her cruelty had ben leſſe, ſhe had ſurely broughte her purpoſe to effecte. Poyſon hath put me in minde, here to tell a ſtory done in our tyme, not longe ſythens, by a noble man of Rome. I ſhall lyttell digreſſe from my purpoſe, for ye maye alſo lerne by this ſtorye, that men ofte tymes haue great hurte, where they loke for great pleaſure. There is in

Italye a ientil man, whome for his vertue and noble qualities, the holy college of Cardinals, by intretie of Paule theyr byſſhoppe, haue made capyteyne of the churche: his name is Petrus Aloiſius, a braunche commen of a good ſtocke, as ye ſhal wel perceiue by his fruites. This great capitayne, by chaunce had to paſſe by the byſhoppe of Phanes houſe. The byſhoppe hearynge of this, and glad he had occaſion gyuen hym, to offer kyndenes vnto ſuche an eſtate, mette ſignior Petro Aloiſio, and offerid him his houſe. The capytayne of the Romyſhe churche, was lyghtly perſuaded, to lodge with the byſhop. the byſſhop interteyned hym, as hyghely as he coulde deuyſe. ſparynge neyther labour, in prouydynge all ſuche deynties as myghte make his chere the better, ne coſt in dreſſyng of them. Whan ſupper and bankets were done, the time of reſte well paſte forthe, the byſſhoppe brought his gueſt to his chambre, where he deſyred hym of pardon, that his chere was noo better, truſtynge thoughe there were nothynge mete for ſuche a perſonages

interteynment, that yet he wolde accepte his good harte and wylle, whiche fayne wold his fare had ben higher, and is moche ſory it was not ſo. And there he made hym the courteyſe offer of the Italyan, deſyrynge hym, if there were any thynge in all his houſe, that his phantaſie ſtode to, that he wolde thynke it his owne, and ſo to take it. And that he, his body, his harte, and all his, was at ſignior Aloiſius commandement. I knewe the byſſhoppe wonderfull well: he was vndoubted, as well lerned a yonge man, as fewe were in Italy. His ſtyle ſo pure, he in writynge ſo elegante and eloquent, that I dare ſaye, there were not .x. in all Italye, not two of his age, that coulde matche hym. The capytayne, after the byſſhop had bydden hym good nyghte, called .iii. or .iiii. of his men to hym, tellynge them all of the byſſhops offer, ſayinge, I lyke well this parte of the offer, that his body is at my commandemente, I intende to morowe in the mornynge to proue, whether he be a man of his worde or noo. If I canne not obteyne by fayre

meanes, I intende to vſe your helpe, and haue it by force. Wherfore be not farre of at his commynge hyther. The byſſhop came in the mornyng, to gyue hym good morowe, he dyd ſo. The capitayne thanked hym moche for all his kyndnes, and moſte of all, that he hadde made hym the nyghte before ſo ample an offer, ſaying, thoughe there be manye thynges here, which I fanſy wel, yet I purpoſe to take that parte of your offer, where ye ſayde your perſon is at my commaundemente. Certes I woll ſeaſe vpon that, and leaue all other thynges to you. The byſſhoppe ſore aſtonied, knew what his abomynable demaunde ment. and ſayde: Syr I knowe ye can lyttell fanſye, thynges ſoo fylthy, myne age maketh your wiſedome to attempte me, therby to haue a profe of myne honeſtie. No Sangue di dio, ſayth the capitayne, I meane erneſt, and I praye you ſo take it. The biſhop nowe no more aſtonyed, but euen hart angry, made him a ſharpe anſwere. Syr ſayth he, thoughe I haue not made you ſuche chere, as I wolde, yet haue I made you as good as

I coulde haue done, thoughe the emperour had ben in my howſe. for ſuche my good wyll, I lytel thought ye wold haue offered me ſo great vylanye, and in myne owne houſe. but ſet your harte at reſt, I woll be torne in peces, rather than you, or any lyuyng creature, ſhal make me willyngly to fall into ſo brute and vnnaturall a ſynne. What trowe ye the capitayn dyd here? lyke a capitayn of that churche I warrant you. His men were at hande, whiche enforced the byſhop, ſpite of all his ſtriuinge, to kepe his promyſe. How happy is Aloiſius, that hathe ſuche fautes, as none his aduerſarie dare charge hym withal? a thynge to be wondred at, men can not tel without ſhame, that they do nothynge aſhamed of. The byſſhop ſayd, Sodom & Gomorra ſunke for this ſynne, woll god ſe it euer vnpunyſhed in the? though god differ punyſhment, intendyng them peyne euerlaſting, whoſe offences are greatter than any punyſhemēt here may be thought mete for them, woll not the emperour one day ſe lawes made for ſuch ſyn executed? I truſte to ſe

his maieſtie, er it be longe, I truſte to be harde, and nothynge doubt, but he woll ſe this vltrage, this vylanye, that thou haſte done me, puniſhed. I woll make an ende of ſoo fylthye a matter, and trouble honeſt eares no lengar. This capitayne of the churche, prouyded ſo, that within iiii. or .v. days after, the byſhop was poiſoned. Wold ye not think this graffe cam of good ſyre? his mother was broughte a bed, longe er ſhe were maried, and his father is nowe byſhop of Rome. Trowe ye, the churche of Rome, wherof ſuche a father is the heade, ſuche a ſonne the capitain, is not a dere darling vnto Chriſt? Wolde he let her be gouerned of the one, defended of the other, if he loued her not excedyngely? Dothe not god rather admonyſhe all princis, howe lyttell he ſetteth by this ſtrompet of Babylon, whom he hath left in ſuche mens handes? Here I muſt nedes tell, that that I haue hard Reynolde Pole, the Cardinall ofte ſaye, and not I alone, but many mo, whom I can name, men of honeſte credyte. This Pole, than a perle of his contrey, nowe, a

foule pocke to it, wente to Rome at his fyrſt beynge in Italy, thynkynge to haue leyne there halfe a yere or more. God let me neuer ſpeake, ne wryte after this day, If he hath not ſayde, and that very ofte, where I haue ben in preſence, that whan he had ben there .iii. or .iiii. dayes, and ſeen the abhomynation of the cardinals, byſhops, and other theyr offycers, with the deteſtable vices of that citie, he could in no wyſe tary there any lēger. He could not than abyde .v. dayes in Rome. and now, Ambition be thanked, he hath this always in his mouthe, Roma mihi patria eſt, Rome is my natiue countreye. Hath not Rome a wōderfull vertue in it, that thus ſone can brynge men at one with vyce, in loue with ſynne and abhomynation? If he a traytour, forſaketh his countreye, changeth Englande for Rome, fyghting for them, ayenſte vs, ſhall we not ſtycke to our countrey, not fight ayenſt al men, in defence of Englande? They thynke to worke vs moche diſpleaſure. they maye chance to make the rodde for vs, and we to beate them. Aman ſet vppe a peyer of

gallowes, to hange Mardocheus vpon: Mardocheus euen by that occaſion was made nexte vnto the kynge in honour, and Aman truſte vppe. There is a prety greke Epigram, whiche ſaythe, A poore felawe, beinge in great neceſſitie, moche troubeled for lacke of pence, gat hym an halter, and thoughte therewith to haue made an ende of his myſery. by chaunce, as he ſought a tree, he founde an hourde of money. councell here he neaded none, to perſuade him to chaunge his purpoſe. No, he forthwith layde the halter where he founde the money. But he that hadde lodged his treaſure there, not longe after commynge thyther, and finding it gone, and an halter at hande, thoughte the vſe of his money paſte hym, and ſo vſed the halter. The byſſhop of Rome thynketh to haue a great pray here, The cardinall thynketh ſo to, they may chaunce to ſeke hurdes, and fynde halters. They truſte by this vyage, to wynne theyr ſpurres, perchance they may loſe theyr bootes to. At the beginnynge, who coulde thynke, but the laſle commotion wold haue done

excedynge moche hurt to England? God euer be thanked, we could ſcaſe haue wiſſhed it better. aſſuredly, we myght wonderous euyll haue lacked it. Mo exaumples myghte be broughte, but the commynge of this trayterouſe cardynall, the commodities that I truſte woll enſue of it, ſhall make vs myſtruſt fewe thynges hereafter, excepte we become chaungelynges, and for a tryfle leaue that we haue hitherto godly folowed. The diuell in an other worlde myght playe hym, He had men inough, that wrought for hym, he then was at reſt, but no we he ſeeth his kyngdome is aſſauted, and that he muſt either loſe a great portion of his dominion, or els in tyme beſturre hym. he hateth alwayes good princis and magiſtrates, neuer ceaſſynge to ſtyrre vp ſedition vppon them, to brynge in ennemies, to interrupte that they go aboute. It is verye tru, that ſaynt Cyprian ſaith, The deuyl, Chriſtis aduerſarie, beſiegeth no tentes ſo ſone, pitcheth battayle with none ſoo ſoone, as with the ſouldiours of Chriſt. Men in errours, men drowned in luſtes,

in noughtyneſſe, after he hath throwen them downe, and made them full his, he cōtemneth and paſſeth by them, nothyng a frayde leſte they ſtarte. But thoſe he ſekethe to hurle downe, whome he ſeeth ſtonde faſt. Wherfore, ſeinge no men are more troubled, none ofter aſſauted with greater perils, then they that intende to do truely the office of Chriſten magiſtrates, it is excedynge nedefull, that a kynges reaſon, power, harte, and mynde be well defended with the ſhielde of goddes worde, with affyaunce in his promyſes, that therby he may ſtande ſure, ayenſt all ſtormes of this world, ayenſte all ſurges of frownynge fortune, ayenſte al violent force, not onely of men, but of dyuelles. God be prayſed, we haue a prynce of inuincible courage, whoſe hart god hath ſo enuironed with his graces, ſo furniſſhed with his giftes, ſo ſtrengthened with the aſſured affyaunce of his promyſes, that he wol venture al thynge rather then the loſſe of his ſubiectes ſowles. He woll rather be at vtter enmitie with all prynces, thē ſuffer the knowlege of goddes word,

to be taken out of his realme. His highnes woll in no caſe, his ſubiectes commit any fornication hereafter with that abhominable hore, which hitherto theſe many yeres, hath ſouſed al kyngedomes in the dragges of Idolatry, of Hypocriſie, of al errours. His grace wol, their lowſy marchātes vtter no more of their brokē ware among vs. And as his highnes wol our ſoules be out of peryll, ſoo I praye you, what kynge, ſythens kynges ruled fyrſte this realme of Englād, hath made greater prouiſion for the ſaftie of our bodies? Is it poſſible, that any his gracis ſubiecte, can refuſe peyne, whan his hyghnes rydeth about from hauen to hauen, from caſtell to caſtell, dayes and nightes deuyſynge all the wayes, that wytte can inuent, for our aſſuraunce? What charges is his grace at, for the fortifienge of Caleys, Hammis, Guyſnes, for the repayring of Douer hauen, Douer caſtel, for building bulwarkes in the Downes, bulwarkes at Folkeſtone. What a Realme woll Englande be, whan his grace hath ſet walles, accordinge to the diches,

that runne rounde aboute vs? England wol than be moch liker a caſtel, than a realme. His grace hath deuiſed a bulwark in the Camber, a bulwark at Calſhottes poynte, a bulwarke at the Eaſte cowe, a bulwarke at the Weſt cow. His highnes fortifieth Portiſmouth, Southampton, Weymouth, Portland rode, Torre baye, Plymmouthe hauen, Dermouth hauen, Falmouth hauen. This ones done, what enemy, be he neuer ſo ſtrong, wol thinke, he can inuade England on thoſe parties of it? Now, that ye may know, his highneſſe careth for all, and not for ſome, he fortifyeth Barwycke, bothe towne and caſtelle, Carliel, towne and caſtel, ſetting men a worke for the repayring of Warke caſtell, Bambrough caſtell, Alnwicke caſtel, Scarborowe caſtell, Powmfret caſtell, fortifieng alſo Kyngſton vpon Hul, Grimiſbye vppon Humber. Lynne alſo ſhall be made ſtrong, Yermouth rode fortified, two bulwarkes ſet vp at Leſtoffe. Alborne Hoppe in Norfolke, Langers poynte, Orwell hauen, are to be fortifyed .ii. blocke houſes to be made at Tilbery.

iii. blockehouſes at Graues ende, whiche with many other fortreſſes and munitions, for this our countrey, his grace woll ſhortely with all ſpede, to be ſet forwarde. If his highnes thus diligentely watche, that we maye ſafely ſlepe, ſpend his treaſure thus largely, that we maye ſurely kepe our goodes, were it not our great ſhame, to ſuffer his highnes to trauaile alone? Is it not our partes, in this oone thynge, euen to contende with his grace, that is, to loue his honour, his proſperytie, more than he canne loue our welth & ſafetie? We might, yea we ought to ſtryue with his grace, and to deſire to ouercome hym, in louynge our contreye. and his highnes goinge before, to the defence of Englande, can we tary behinde? Where his highnes is contente to ſpende all his treaſure, content to venture hym ſelfe for our ſaftie, can we be ſo vnnaturall, as not to acknowlege ſuche goodnes of our ſoueraygne? can we acknowlege it, and not thynke our ſelues bound to ſpende bodyes, goodes, for his hyghnes preſeruation, thoughe we ſhulde receiue

therby none other commoditie? can we beinge in moſte ieoperdie our ſelues, not beſturre vs? Were it not our vtter rebuke, that his highnes ſhuld loue vs better thē we our ſelues? we muſt not think, that we fight with ennemies, which wol be content with victorie, if they gette the ouer hande of vs: they ſeke our bloude, they couet our deſtruction, & if they ſpare ſome, yet the ſacke, the ſpoyle ſhall touch all men. The turke ſuffereth men, taken in warre, to kepe theyr religion, to ſerue god, as his lawes woll. The byſſhop of Rome, moch crueller then Turke or Saraſē, thinketh his victory worth nothing, except he ouerthrowe goddes worde, except he driue out ryght religion, except he vtterly bannyſhe Chriſte. Honour is offered vs, and ſuche honour vndoubtedly as neuer came to our nation, if we luſt to take it. I woll ende with a propheſie, not lately commen out of wales, but founde in ſcripture, in the .iiii. boke of Eſdras. There is mentiō made of a proude Egle, that ſo moche toke vpon her, that al princes, all kyngdomes were troden vnder

her fete. What and whom this Egle figureth, we can not doubte, if we wol beleue goddes owne expoſycion. It ſygnyfieth ſayth he, the ſame kyngedome, that Daniel ſawe in his viſyon, whiche was the kyngdome of Antichriſte, the reigne vndoubtedly of the byſhoppe of Rome. All thynges ſpoken here of the Egle, agree with hym as iuſt as may be. This byrde. ſayth the texte, made al the erth afrayde, al men trembled, at her ſyght, all thynge became ſubiecte to it, no man, a long ſeaſon ſo hardy, as to gaine ſay her. But at the laſte ſaythe Eſdras, Ecce Leo, concitatus de ſylua rugiens, Loo, there came out of a woode a Lion a gret paſe, roring a lowd, and ſayde to this ſaucye and myſproude Egle, I woll ſpeake with the, the lorde hath to ſay to the, and woll ſay thus, Art not thou he, that haſt ouercome the other my creatures, whiche I wolde haue had reigned in my worlde? Arte not thou he, that haſt ruled the worlde in moche feare and tremblyng, holdinge it in naughtieſt labour, in workes moſte fonde, dwellyng in all partes of the erth, by deceyte crafte

and treachery? Art not thou he, that haſt iudged the erth, non in ueritate, in falſhode, not in truthe? Thou haſte troubled the mylde ſorte, and hurte theym that loued quietnes, peace, and reſt, mē that ſought and taught the eaſe of troubeled cōſciences. Thou haſt loued lyers, and deſtroyed the habitations of them, that brought forth good fruite, ſettynge idle and drane bees in theyr places. Thy ſpitefull handlynge of the worlde, the contumely thou diddeſte vnto all princes, is aſcended vp euen to the ſyghte of the hygheſte. Thy pryde is ſene. God hath loked vpon this proude tyme, and Lo, ſaythe this couragious Lion, his tyme is at an ende, the miſchefes of this Egle are almooſte at a poynte. Wherfore, ſaythe the Lion, appere thou noo more Egle, neyther thyne horrible winges, nor thy miſcheuous hedes, nor thy rauenyng clawes, ne thy body whiche is holly compacte of vanities, al vayne, the Lorde cryeth to the, Alway: the Lion, hauynge a mans voyce, as the texte ſayth, byddeth the trudge, and why? the cauſe ſtraight foloweth, That thou ones
               
               gone, the erthe may be refreſhed: that thy kyngedome ones fallen, men may turne ageyne to freedome, delyuered from thy vyolent power: that thy baggage caſte out of mens hartes, they maye hope, to receyue his iugement, his mercy, whiche made the erthe, and al the dwellers vpon it. While the luſty Lion ſpake theſe wordes, the heed of the Egle began to ſtand a wrye, the winges were no more ſene, her kyngedome waxed weake, feble, full of trauayle, tumulte, and buſyneſſe, moch a do to kepe it on fote, all the Egles bodye was ſet a fyre.
            ¶That prowde Rome is mente by this prowde Egle, the texte is playne, the circumſtaunces are ſuche, that thoughe it were in doubte, we myght eaſyly applye the Egle to the Romyſhe byſhop, and to none other. Nowe by the Lyon, who is ment, the texte ſayth nothynge. What if I contende, noble HENRY the. VIII. to be this Lyon? May I not haue many coniectures, to leade me this way? many thynges euen taken of the ſame place, to make other men thinke ſo to? Fyrſte, as

the Egle hath always ben the Romains badge, ſo hath kynges of Englande euer more gyuen the Lyon in their armes: ſo that it can ſo welle be applied to none other prince. The Venetians gyue the Lion, but their Lyon commeth not oute of the wodde, but oute of the water. They dwell in water, our Lyon fetcheth all his force nexte vnto god, out of the woddes, our bowes, our arrowes, are fetched oute of the woddes. Our Lyon, whan he rangeth towarde his enemies, wel declareth to them, that he cometh frome the wood. But to go ſomewhat nygher to our purpoſe: Who hathe tolde the rauenynge Egle, this terryble tydynges? Who but HENRY the VIII. our noble and couragious Lion? This Lion, ſaith the text, is a wynde, whyche the lorde hath kepte in ſtore, for theſe later days, bothe to toſſe the Egle and her byrdes, and alſo to refreſhe, refrigerate, and comfort our conſciences, that ſo longe a ſeaſon haue laboured, panted, and boyled in fynne, ſtyl in feare of hel. Hath not our noble king, with ſondry blaſtes of the ſpirite of god,

all to rent this popyſhe power? al to ſhaken his neſte? his ſeate? his high trone? this wynde hath hurled ſuche duſte into the Egles eyes, that her heed begynneth to waxe gyddy, her wynges to cary her, ſhe woteth not whither, her clawes, to let fall ſuche prayes, as ſhe thought to haue brought to her neſt. This wynde, our lordes prayſe be it, hath blowen vs oute of this cruell Egles reache, we fele no more her ſharpe talendes, whiche in time paſt, ſo griped our hartes, ſo ſeaſoned vppon our ſoules. Our countreye is refreſhed, our hope fyxed in the iudgemente of the lorde, our affiaunce ſette faſte in goddis mercy. Hath not our couragious Lyon, our pleaſant wynde, blowen vp a blaſt, that refreſhed vs all, whan he by his prechers, by his proclamations, brake the cheynes, that our ſoules laye tyed in, ſlaues and bond to Romiſhe tyranny? Cam there not a gay cole to our hartes, whan our Lyon ſayd, Hens proude Egle, appere no more here in Englande? Went there not ſondry great lumpes of heuynes from oure hartes, whā we that were wont to dreade

nothyng ſo moche, as the myſprowde iugemente of the Egle, begunne to refuſe mercy and forgyuenes at his hande, and to ſeke it of hym, whiche made vs, and is mercy it ſelfe, and the onely forgyuer of ſynnes? Is not this a ſwete breathe, that our Wynde powreth vppon vs all? Be not theſe pleaſant blaſtes? This wynde is cited to aryſe, cyted by hym, that ruleth all wyndes, in the .iiii. chapyter of Cantica canticorum, by theſe wordes, Vppe thou north wynde, blowe vpon my gardeyn, that the ſmell therof may be caried on all ſydes, that my derely beloued may come thither, and eate of the fruites, that growe therin. Is not our wynde vp, accordynge to his call, hath not he wel blaſted his commiſſion abrode? hath not he tolde the Egle of her rauenynge? of her ſpoyle, and ſlaughter? If he hathe done thus, and no prynce but he, why may not we thinke, that noble HENRY the VIII is the Lyon, the wynde ordeyned & ſente by god, to toſſe this wycked tyraunte of Rome, to blowe him out of al chriſten regions? Se ye not, to what honour god

calleth our nation? may not we reioyce, that god hath choſen our kyng, to worke ſo noble a feate? God ſayth, a Lion ſhall teare this tirātes auctorite in peces. God ſayth, a wynde ſhal ſhake hym out of his cheyer: ſhall we not thynke, this Lyon, this wynde, to be our ſoueraygne, our kynge, Whiche firſte of all princes, durſt take hym by the boſome? Let this yelling Egle approche towarde vs, let her come with all her byrdes about her, let a traytour cary her ſtandard: doth not god ſay, her wynges ſhall be cut, her kyngedome waxe feble, the Lyon waxe ſtronge, and ſaue the reſidue of goddes people, filling them full of ioye and comfort, euen while the worlde endureth. Let vs, let vs therfore worke luſtely nowe, we ſhall play for euer hereafter. Let vs fight this one fielde with englyſſhe handes, and englyſſhe hartes, perpetuall quietnes, reſt, peace, victorie, honour, welthe, all is owers. ❧
            
         
      
   